Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim .
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, sons, as you will have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its fulfillment in it, and by its expositions and by its declarations, to me it seems that you complete that for yourselves with this treatise, which is a part of the operation by hand, and is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation by hand is spread out in our land and in our times of all deprived, while greatly fearing the science of it, its practices are obstructed; and nothing remains of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which altered the most and led to those errors and misunderstandings among those whose understanding of it was closed and its force and art prolonged.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you vivify that by the arrangement of this treatise in accordance with the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and so that it comes through the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as though it were a preparation of the declaration, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause for which no good artist is found by hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that its practitioner before anything be exercised in the science of anatomy, which knows the joints of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and have knowledge of the bones, of the nerves and of the ligaments, and the number of those, and their discharge; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the locations of their exit from them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And so says Hippocrates that by name is great, yet in work small, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said of that in the introduction to this book; for who is not learned that which we have said of anatomy, it is not vacated that he does not fall into error by which men will die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from it without science or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and experienced doctor who pricked an abscess scrofulous on the neck of a woman, and pierced some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died in his arms.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who before he swallowed a stone from a man who had a process in his state, and the stone was large, and it came to him and drew that stone with a piece of the vesica, so that the man on the third day died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called out to extract that, and saw that by the size of the stone and by the disposition of the patient over him that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received stipends from a duke of our land for surgery, and indeed gave to a black slave whose leg was broken by a fall; and prepared the doctor with his ignorance, extracted the fracture above the plague, with powders and splints with great tightness, and did not leave the plague to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he released him according to his desires, and then he layed, and then he released it for several days and commanded that we unbind the bandage; and so it stayed as though the leg and thigh had apostematized, and came to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to unbind the bandage, and obtained tranquillity and ceased from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and the corruption did not cease to wander in the member until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated an apostematoid ulcer, and was open for several days, while the wickedness of it magnified with its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of which is that the ulcerative humor is pure of melancholic humor, then it does not come to him by iron from all over, but that there be some member in which he suffers that from all over he is hostile.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And so, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation by hand be divided into two divisions: one in operation to him who is associated with health, and in work with which there is peril in the greater dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already excused that in all places of this book in which it occurs in operation in which there is error and fear; so that it is necessary for you that you guard that and leave that, so that fools do not obstruct the way to speak and to you discredit.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take your arms with solicitude and with protection of God, and your patients with gentleness and with firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the better way by the grace of God to health and to laudable success, and lay the terrible diseases of difficult cure, and place your arms from that which causes you to fear, so that solicitude in your faith and in your name does not evade you: for it remains to your glory, and more in the world and lastly to your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gaulish already said in some of his maxims:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not heal bad diseases, so that bad doctors do not be named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter arranged of the head into feet, in the forms of the tools and in the iron of the cauteries, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of lancing and piercing, and of leeches, and of plasters, and of extraction of thorns and similar to those, all headed and arranged in the forms of the tools.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and of dislocation, and of cure of torture and similar to those; a chapter arranged of the head into feet, and of the forms of the tools.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery with fire and with acute medicine and remembrance of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will say the quality of the humors of that cautery and of the pains of it, and in what disposition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Then I say the word of the quality of the humor of cautery and of the pain of it is long and prolix and subtle by science, and secret hidden; and already of it many wise have spoken, and from it are disagreed, and to me suffices a little of the words of them, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so I say that cautery confers with all universal disposition, which is by matter or without matter, excepting two dispositions, which are cold dispositions without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the cold and dry disposition with matter they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial to it, and others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in disease which is by quality and by dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and convenient is that disease cold and dry be healed by that which is cauted and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he said the contrary of that, that by cautery there is made humor in all disease cold and dry that one sees in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its humors to the disposition of fire, you rub the body of man dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the word of that, that experiment that already to me many times have discovered.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not advisable to venture into this field unless one is already experienced and practiced in the chapter on cauterization, and has knowledge of the variety of human complexions and the disposition of illnesses in their bodies, as well as the causes of these illnesses and their accidental effects, and the span of time during which they occur.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However, in other complexions there is no cause for fear, especially in moist and humid illnesses; indeed all doctors agree that cauterization is beneficial in these cases, and they disagree about the use of cauterization only in certain cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing with fire cauterization and the goodness of it is that the fire is simple, its action affecting only the part being cauterized and causing little damage to other parts.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of a burning medicine extends to other parts, and it strongly brings on an illness difficult to cure in those parts; it also causes great pain.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, but rather exceeds the limits of what is permissible; and it has been proven to us through experience and long study of the art that it is true in all cases, except for those who have not yet understood the secret of using fire, and the quality of its action in the body, and its expulsion of illnesses by philosophical reasoning. If this had not been so, I would not have spoken to you freely about the secret use of fire; nor would I have explained in detail the nature of its action in the body and the method of its use for removing illnesses through philosophical argument.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the best time to perform cauterization; and they pause during the springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the accidental harm caused by the delay in treatment would be greater than the minor harm caused by performing it too soon; and especially if the cauterization is for painful or necessary illnesses, strong and violent ones, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that they will become worse.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And fear not, children; only the common people and foolish doctors believe that for every illness treated with cauterization there is a specific time of year when it should be done; they pause and wait for that time to come around.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason for their belief is not as they think, because cauterization is not a medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the humors which cause pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, cauterization is superior to medicine because of the swiftness of its action and the strength of its effect, and the grandeur of its Lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the illness will return at some time, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness, and the nature of the cauterization, and what has been prepared in the body through an excess of humors, and what has been acquired through food and similar causes; but if the illness for which the cauterization was performed was a subtle one in a part of the body with few excess humors and moisture, as in a toothache and similar cases, then it is possible that the pain will not return, although this may happen in a small way.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common people say that cauterization is the last resort of medicine; and they are right to say so, not because they understand it, but because they believe that there is no cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause except cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason for this is the opposite; and the belief that cauterization is the last resort of medicine arises when people administer treatments for certain illnesses, but the medicines they use do not work, and so at the end they administer cauterization, which benefits the patient.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And so it comes about that cauterization is regarded as the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron; and they did not say this because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the material used for cauterization makes no difference, which is not absolutely true, for I have seen that it does make a difference in some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better than with iron as they say; but when you perform cauterization with fire using gold, it is not declared to you because the strength of the fire depends on the amount of gold used, and because the gold prepares itself to receive the heat; and if the fire is applied to the gold, some laminae are formed which the artisan can see.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And so cauterization with iron must be done more gently and more carefully to maintain the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered that the feet be treated first, so listen now to what I will say about it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cauterization for headache pain caused by cold and moisture:
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter:
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers moisture and coldness to the nervous system, of which there are two causes; it is a cause of swelling and many rheumatic pains, called "corissa", in the parts of the head and around the ears, and many other pains, including toothache and jaw pain, and generally any illness caused by cold, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The procedure for this cauterization is as follows: first, the patient's head should be cleansed with a laxative head poultice for three or four days, depending on the strength of the patient and their age and condition.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Then he should have his head shaved with a razor, and then he should lie down on his back on a warm bed with his feet raised above his head.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then pause the palm of your hand over the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the place where your finger points has become affected, mark that place with a tent and then ignite the cauterization olive; this is its form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Then hold that over the marked place in such a way that it descends, and your hand should be pressed gently against it little by little as you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then lift your hand gently and examine the place; if you see some of the head has been exposed, as much as the amount of bone that was discovered, then lift your hand again, and if it does not return to you with the iron, but with another one, if it is cold, between the time it was exposed to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a little salt and dissolve it over the place for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then hold a cloth soaked in vinegar over it, and let that remain on it until the scale formed by the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the place with the four-part salve after it has healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And so they say that when Roman plaster is applied wet, it is better and more effective.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the bone should be cauterized within the ear, and the cauterization should be applied where some part of the skull has been removed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then it is to be washed with vinegar until the blood stops flowing, and then healed.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cauterization should come to the end, where the bone is broken, and that it should pierce the skull until it hits the bone; this is the form of cauterization when there is a small wound:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place vapors are exhaled towards the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	If the wound is open for a long time, it should be healed by cauterization until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two species of cautery at all, except in some men according to a way of fear; and leaving that aside, it is better for health, as it is, because the head is devitalized due to the solution of continuity of it as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a phlegmatic nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the species of cautery is more safe and better for me, and from that use and by that action health is achieved.
Capitol segon.	Chapter According.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses garlic and onions and caputalgar and poultices and plasters and bandages and hot stones and woolen pads and similar things, and especially if he has already been cauterized with a cautery which we have recounted and does not benefit from any of those causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature and is phlegmatic and finds great heat, then cauterize him with another cautery beneath that one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that on the horn of his head so that the membrane is cut.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	The membrane being cut and the quantity which we have recounted having been discovered and cauterized with a cautery in the part behind the head in the place which is called a foramen — and that is the place in which the windpipe is paused —
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And move your hand on it and do not uncover the bone because the patient will feel great pain from that unlike the pain of all the other cauterizations of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will tell you about this cautery in its place because the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occipital are cauterized is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the way to do it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization for new non-ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a sudden pain occurs in the front of the head or a spreading pain enters the eye, evacuate the head with purging medicines and administer the other cure which I have described in the reasons for diseases; and if all does not help then cauterization should be done in two ways: either cauterization with an acute burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But cauterization with a burning medicine is that you take an alder twig and scorch it and smear the ends of it on both sides of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut the place of pain in the temple with a pointed lance so that it penetrates into the hole beneath the membrane and is concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then press tightly on it with a bandage and leave that for three hours; then remove the alder and treat it with water and let the wound heal in two or three days, and place your hand over it while immersing it in hot water so that the spot makes blisters.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want to do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cauterization with iron should be done according to this manner: heat up an iron cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a closed nail because its head is shaped like a nail with some curve and in the middle part of it there is a small protuberance.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place it on the site of pain and hold your hand there — so that the cautery underneath is not burned  — and move the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of it that is burned by the thickness of the membrane just like its size and raise your hand so that the artery underneath is not burned so that there is no blood flow.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then soak a cloth in salty water and place that on the spot and let it be for three days; then place a damp cloth with hot water on it and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you want, cauterize with the point of the scalpel according to cautery, and beware of incision into the artery in this new non-ancient hemorrhoid.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization for ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure hemorrhoids with what we have said about the preceding cure and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the cure does not help, and you see by the disease that it is insufficient for it what we have said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then if you ignite the cutellar cautery so that it turns white, mark on the site of pain with a line whose length is equal to its size or almost, and place your hand on one side and press tightly while you pierce the artery and let it flow into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However it is necessary for you to guard against the continuance of the mandible which is gnawed due to chewing and that the ligament not be burned and the nerve which moves that, and that no spasm occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and care of flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for there is danger in cutting it and especially to one who ignores what he does and is unskilled and inexperienced; let the operation be done at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will remind you of the regimen for flow of blood accidentally from the artery according to its way in your own book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not yield to this cautery and the patient's body tolerates it, cauterize him in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound so that it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you want to administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter about stretching of the artery with cautery having two points, and this cautery is better and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Fifth.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization for pains in the ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to heat and it is cured by lacractive causes and by the other cure which I have said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery and this is the one that has a point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then pierce it and ignite it and let it be borne around the whole ear as a wheel is turned or in the circle of either one if the pain is in one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen it with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little so that you do not burn the spot with a touch.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery is of ten points in the whole ear, and that one, then cure the places so that they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Sixth.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization for torpor.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torpor which is cured and by cauterization it is not but of the spices that come through phlegm according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species which occurs through dryness or by spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of torpor with herbs and head-purgatives and your cure does not succeed then when you cauterize the patient in three cauteries: the first should be of the root of the ear, the second a little below his temple, and the third should be the junction of two gums.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply your cautery to the contrary side of the sick person, because softening only occurs on the side that is healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize the patient with the cautery on the right side of the highest part of the ear, and on the temple another one, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger nail, and place your hand with the cautery until half of the amount of the size of a bean is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of cauterization, and it is specific to the knife-maker, the shape of which is described in front of the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But indeed more subtle is that one a little so that you see it, and that it cuts through excessive thickness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with what has been described in front so that it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we have said and your treatment does not work and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the horns of his head; and with cautery and the middle part of the head, so as we have said; and with cautery in the groin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what is written above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and it should be cured with what has been described.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization of oblivion caused by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give the patient at the beginning large jars and pills of the servant purgative.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the whole head of the patient, and place over his groin an ointment of cedar described in the treatise on ointments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply it several times, for that is the manner of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do that according to the order which we have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if he heals well from that, then it is good; and if not, then do to him three cauteries on the back of his head, which descend from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger nail, and then cure the cautery with what has been described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you think it is tolerable and the patient can take it, then do to him cautery on the middle part; and if you see greater tolerance, then cauterize that on both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-colored according to the form described above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of parasites and softening of all the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Give the patient purgatives for cleansing of the head as we have said; and then shave his head, and then cauterize that with cautery on the middle part of the head, and with cautery on all the horns of the head, and with cautery on the back of the neck, and with three cauteries on the spines of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body for parasites and the patient tolerates it and the sickness is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the spines of the back, and lastly with cautery until half the size of a bean is burned, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then cure that until it is healed, and let this be the cautery olive-colored.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized except for that epilepsy caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so, cleanse the brain of him at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure which we have described in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not endure the medicines, then administer warming and chewing remedies by the servant cleansing, before that for several days, with benefit of foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with one cautery on the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back of his neck, and cauterize each horn of his head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that with cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the spines of the neck and the spines of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the cautery be olive-colored according to what has preceded it.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply the cautery gently according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and gross phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess phlegm declining to melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink what cleanses his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and then make a decently twisted tallow over the circle, and then place it in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated, and let him be held by all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply liniment; and it is more worthy of being boiled of old sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And boil that on the fire with moderate heat by measure, which he endures when he is in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then pour that into the middle part of his head on the circle, and let him remain until it is cool.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do that with the patient in a week once a day, and let him have the other regime of him until he is healed; or if you want, cauterize that making small points according to his age, unless you have your hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a special cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then let that be wrapped in cotton wool in a bandage or in gray flannel.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization of water descending into the throat.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared that the beginning of water in the throat through the holes which you have said in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink what cleanses his brain, and guard him from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that boil in a bath for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command him to wash his head, and cauterize that with cautery on the middle part of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of moisture in two holes, or of one side if it is the beginning of moisture in one hole.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Pierce with cautery all the veins and arterioles which are under the skin; and let the cauteries be long in that length of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Guard against bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see from him bleeding, stop it with some medicine, which is to you possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come with wisdom which is in extraction of arterioles and with pruning of those and cauterization of bleeding of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some bones are cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries directly produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are old and have spread through the veins and arteries to a visible location on the head, and it is clear that this is caused by an excess of phlegmatic fluids, then cauterize with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on water-fever. Cauterize in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries below the temples, and with two cauteries below the bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is a need for an additional cautery, then cauterize on all sides of the eye socket at the top of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cauterization for a nose fetor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you have treated the patient as we have said in the previous chapter and your treatment does not work, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights. Then shave the patient's head and cauterize the middle of the nose with a cautery made from olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize the nose bridge with two cauteries below the eyebrows, just under the hairline.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn the skin.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the form of the cautery, or nail cautery:
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauteries for softening eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cautery. This is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you are cauterizing above the two eyebrows, then do so with small cauteries in a straight line, and have them extend from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery depend on the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too hard with the cautery, but according to how much the upper part of the eyelid is swollen.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of cauteries for the eyelid when hairs are converted to thorns and punctures the inside of the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When hairs on the eyelid become thorns that puncture the inside of the eye, there are two ways to cauterize them: with a cautery iron or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize it with fire, tell the patient to look down so that his eyelashes lie flat, and then trim them, pulling them out from their roots while they are being cauterized. If the punctures hurt him, then strengthen his eyes with a bandage so that he does not blink while the hairs are growing back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then, when they grow back and curl, place the patient's head in your lap and draw the eyelid of his eyes with a tent, marking its shape according to the pattern of a dead leaf, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place cotton dipped in white vinegar or in a mullein tea over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then heat the cautery, of which this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize over the shape you have drawn, bit by bit, until the surface of the eyelid is burnt and appears like a dead leaf, all appearing healthy and proper.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of your work' s success is when you see the eyelid drawn up and the hairs raised above the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it alone for three days, and then place a poultice over the area until the scab is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hairs return for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then repeat the cautery over that area again just as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are inside the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and curled back so that the hairs do not puncture the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the burning medicine cautery is done by telling the patient to look down so that his eyelashes are flat and then trim them, pulling them out from their roots while they are being cauterized. Then the shape of a dead leaf is drawn on it.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take one part powdered sage and one part live coals. I.e.: Take this mixture and make it into a paste so that it is not too dry; then spread this over the paper which was drawn in the shape of a dead leaf, and place it on one or both eyes. Place cotton dipped in white vinegar over the eye, and let the patient' s head be in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then hold the eye over the medicine and press it gently without hurting him until he feels the burning of the medicine, for the burning is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when he feels the burning, then he should let go of the medicine and press it with his finger; then when the burning stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. Then consider if you see the eyelid lifted as it is washed or cut, for then it is good. And if it does not return to being washed or cut, then do not put the medicine over that area again where the medicine did not take effect and there is no blackness, but wait until your operation has healed and the eye is drawn up.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then place a poultice over it until the scab of the burning is healed, and then treat that with ointment made from defynikon or another one so that it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, due to your operation, to be very vigilant and careful that the medicine does not drop into the eye. And if the eyelid becomes soft after a few days and for some reason the hairs puncture the eye, then repeat your medicine over that area just as you did at first, and treat him until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the shape of a dead leaf:
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that men' s eyelids are diverse in size and smallness, and therefore your operation should be done according to that.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not take the way of certainty with one who is ignorant of this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not work, then do this: tell the patient to place his head in your lap and let one of his servants hold his head so that it is not moved or shaken by him.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place cotton dipped in white vinegar or in a mullein tea over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then heat the cautery, of which this is its form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which is hollow, thus in the shape of a straw or a bird' s feather, from one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see that it penetrates into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish that it come out like a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But what is hollow is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it pus and dried blood.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract its hardness.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the cautery which is well ignited over the fistula, and press it with your finger over the cautery in the nostril, so that your hand does not move or the patient be disturbed, and then place the cautery on the edge of the eye and bend it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place a poultice on that spot and bind it with a dry bandage until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if ten days have passed and it has not healed, then place a sharp corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what is appropriate in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cautery for a fistula, which some call the first: enter at the site of the fistula and plug it up, and then place in that crack a fine powder of which its formula is given in its chapter; and melt into that the quantity of half an ounce of lead; and hold your hand with the powder with good retention so that the molten lead does not reach the throat of the patient; and cover what you have placed over the throat of the patient with a poultice of yolk of egg or water, for the lead will close up the site of the fistula and heal it in a wonderful manner.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a nasal speculum and reduce the fistula into the cavity of the nose according to what will be given in its place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cautery for a wound in the anus.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times fissures occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of infants.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So when you treat these fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not help, then light the cautery with a small knife in this way that it is wrapped:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the thinness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that gently in those fissures until the cautery reaches the root of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cautery for a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth where there is an abscess and then it becomes inflamed, and then it breaks, and then it becomes old, and becomes inflamed and a fistula is made, and you treat that and your treatment does not help, then when you light cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, then place that fire into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron reaches the root of it, and make that one or two times; and then treat that with what we have said about treatment until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the pus is discharged and it heals, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the site and remove the corrupted bone according to what is given in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cautery of the teeth and of softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are painful, and you treat those with medicines and they do not help, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and light the cautery whose form will be given below, in such a way that you place the probe over the tooth and insert the cautery quickly, and hold your hand gently so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift up your hand and repeat the cautery a few times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should hold his mouth open with salt water for an hour, and then spit it out, for the painful tooth is firmly closed and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or there is pain in it, or the cure with medicine does not help, then cautery for that is according to two methods: either cautery with a cow's udder, or cautery with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with an udder is that you take a cow's udder and boil it in iron, and then take the tip and wrap it around the end of a needle, and then immerse that in the boiled udder and place it quickly over the painful tooth so that it becomes cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that a few times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the udder above, and place that over the painful tooth, and place a hot iron on it so that the iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But cautery with fire is that you take a needle of iron or of steel and let it be in the heart of the fire until it becomes red-hot, and there is no thickness of fire that does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then light the cautery whose form will be given, and place that over the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery becomes cold; and do that a few times because the pain is increased or in that day or in another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And let the patient fill his mouth with good water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize in whatever way you want according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the probe:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cautery for hernia.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernia is of phlegm and cold humors and they are not reduced by digestion with medicines and you see the digestion of those slightly, then you light the cautery in such a way that its form follows, having two ends so that the smoke from one end comes to the other end, and place that fire on the hernia once, and if it does not help, then do that again until it reaches the root of the hernia.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia, and let it be for three days and hold your hand over it with a poultice so that what has been burnt by fire is softened.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment and bandages until it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the probe or needle for cautery is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cautery for cough and constriction of throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes over the throat of the lung, and especially when that is due to coldness of constitution, then let the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that after the root of the gullet in the place of spitting.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that the cautery does not reach the gullet or burn its membrane but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery after the joint of the throat at its last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery of that be in the manner preceding.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with what precedes until it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cautery for illness of the lung and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and illness of the lung are due to cold humors and the patient does not have fever or feverishness, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the furcula at the places of spitting blood vessels; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be inserted according to the form preceding.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, use the pointed cautery called the puncta for your cauterization; its form is described in the section on ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points within those; and then treat that with water which has been previously mixed with something else so that it is therapeutic.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now take the cautery and perform three cauterizations on it according to this method: with one application you can perform three cauterizations as follows:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of temblices, which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the helper's head is displaced due to humid lubricous causes and does not return to its proper position when attempted, and it is displaced by a slight movement as we have testified, you must first reduce the displacement, then have the patient lie on his back or side; then lift the nape which is at the front of the temblice up to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand if the joint is displaced towards the inside.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And take the cautery which has two heads, and this is how it should be used:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Then cauterize the nape so that it penetrates to the other side; then make the cauterization figure from four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And do this gently according to the amount of pain; and this is how it should be done:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes they are used depending on the account, because there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then put salt on the cautery and have the patient lie still, and not move for any length of time until he is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the displacement is to the upper parts and it is done in this way, then cauterize the muscle with a nail-like cautery or with pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is driven out and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is pain in the stomach and moisture gathers within it and causes inflammation, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not use cauterization, then have the patient lie on his back with his legs extended, and stretch out his arms and legs, and cauterize him with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet for the amount of a finger using a nail-like cautery, and two cauteries below the ribs on either side so that they form a triangular figure; lengthen them so that they do not touch and cause burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the amount of two thirds of the thickness of the nape,
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be according to this shape with an addition, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach as follows: and let this be a cautery according to the shape of a circle as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized with a pointed cautery on that which is frightened by this cautery: and feel for the point in the stomach according to the amount you want with pain, then cauterize it with a cautery at these points; then treat that with the cure that is preceded so that he is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of a fretting wound.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the liver due to chafing or moisture or grossness and it is treated with what we have said and does not improve, then have the patient lie on his back with his head raised and feel for pain with three cauteries as follows and make this amount of pressure on the liver below the hypocondrium where a man lies on his side.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body sideways.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not move your hand with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of that which is burnt is equal to the thickness of the tip of the nape, and it does not feel tight; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then let him lie, who has already stretched out his arms and legs and raised his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is how the cautery should be:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is up to you to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel when you are skilled and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful that you do not overdo it in the cauterization and let the tip of all the nape be cauterized so that all of the body is cauterized and it penetrates into the intestines, because the nape here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the puncturing of an abscess in the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is a wound or abscess in the liver and you want to know whether the abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will feel a heavy pressure and pain will be acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the liver, with great pain and many times the doctors have wearied themselves over him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore let the patient be turned on his back; then feel for the location of the abscess with pain; then take the cautery which is like a needle in appearance, the form of which has been described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery so that all of the nape is burnt, so that it penetrates into the diaphragm where there is inflammation.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat him for the cure of other abscesses until he is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery unless he who studies the art of medicine has prolonged it, and in whose hand many diseases have been known; but rather let him practice this operation, but know that you should not use it unless it is absolutely necessary.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of a hernia.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	I will now describe the old cauteries of the roots of aristology for a hernia caused by cold according to this method, and it is that you take from the roots of aristology a long, dry root which is found, and let it be as thick as a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and heat it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the collar bone with the chest; and with two small cauteries below the guider, one slightly inclined towards the part from where the beard grows, and two cauteries on that which is inclined towards the parts behind; and with a cautery in the middle of the feet; and with another cautery on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back; and with a cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on either side of the leg, from where there is the decline towards the armpit.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not move your hand with the cautery, but let it be in the appearance of the nape in its form.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And now they have discovered that some men use cauteries of iron which are like a needle and heat it, and put it in that place which is between the ribs so that they penetrate to the hernia and there is suppuration; therefore as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this piercing with cautery there is no fear, for as soon as humor occurs in the place of a fistula to which there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the vulva.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the disease of the vulva by what we have said about healing in division and do not trust your cure, then cautery on it is according to three ways, all of which are true, one of which is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the vulva according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the manner which we have said in the cautery of the liver equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press your hand with the cautery; and let the patient be lying on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery having two remedies, the cause of which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the tendon which is in the side of the vulva through which passes the vein of the left leg of the patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation by which you raise the tendon be according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert both remedies, ignite them, into that opening through which you penetrate the tendon from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then withdraw the cautery; and thus are made four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three remedies.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery once it has stopped burning for several days, for it is better than the other causes which have preceded in the healing.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cauterization of hydrops.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery does not cauterize in hydrops but properly in the rectum.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you heal hydrops by the ways of healing which we have said in division and do not trust your healing, then let it be that you cauterize with four cauteries around the anus and with one cautery on the stomach, and with another cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the vulva, and with two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and with one cautery in the right leg, and with another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportional to the thickness of the tendon.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then withdraw the cautery so that it burns for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from healing after cautery with that which causes it to be added to him two tendencies and heal him with help of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be claw-shaped according to that which is above it previously, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to that which is above it previously.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with hydrops and filled with yellow water, let it be that you cauterize the feet on the instep of the foot in the nerve which is between the auricular and the annular, and raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then raise your hand, and do not return it at all, for the yellow water will flow out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this form: And then make two cauteries over both thighs, and in each thigh let there be made a cautery with the end of the cautery-knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one from below the groin and the other just above the middle part of the thigh; and over each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And withdraw the plague open without healing for a long time so that some water flows from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then heal them with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cauterization of body of belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body of the belly is from rubbing and from moisture within which weakens the vessels, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is healed with those ways of healing which we do not trust, and sometimes the patient suffers cautery from excessive heat, then cauterize that with a large cautery over his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries around the anus subtly, with a subtle claw-shaped cautery; and with cautery on the rectum over Aloes, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you see excessive moisture and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that on the penis and intestines, and tightly around two cauteries over the stomach and near the groins, for it is a perfect cure of generation from which there is no error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there is in nature a posterior ancient hemorrhoid or of thick humors rubbed or of corrupted moisture, and it is healed with that which we have said in division and do not trust your healing, then cauterize with three cauteries over the most lower vertebra of the back small and triangular, and cauterize above the navel with two needles.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if his stomach is swollen and his food is not digested, and his face is sometimes swollen, then cauterize that on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the vulva with a claw-shaped cautery, and withdraw the cautery for some time open, and then heal it when it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of the eye near its incision.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incision the eye, then heat the cautery which is assembled to light.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that ignited into that eye which is incisioned, and close your hand over it so that the cautery reaches the hole of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do it once or twice, for if they are many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then heal those with that which you trust in them when the gum is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize on Aloe, it is better for generation.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of fistulas which are made in nature coming out from him.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have commanded in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then let him be healed by cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Then when you see a fistula in nature coming out, and it is old, draw its moisture from him and corrupted humidity, and therefore what is best to do is to probe it with a subtle probe, and then know the quantity of its depth with that which has been said previously.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery which is like light.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then put that cautery ignited into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it pierces the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat over that cautery until those corrupted bodies are burnt one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if a fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the intestines, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the area inside that has been healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and the materials are cut off from it, and it remains like this for a long time, then you should know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then you should know that they are penetrating into the bone or causing corruption there, or that this happens for one of the reasons that will be mentioned later in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On cauterization of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in warts because of friction or because of a strong wind, and because of this the patient's skin is damaged, then you should cauterize that place on the warts with a cautery nail, for which I will give you instructions.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And then quickly cauterize it with a second small one, so that three cauteries will come out like threads, and then the back ones will go up in smoke.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is weakness and softening in the bladder because of friction and humidity, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that place below the bladder, where the hairs of the penis begin, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side of it, and with another on its left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the amount of hair; and cauterize that place with a cautery below the anus, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery nail be according to how it proceeds.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the hernia.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is friction and humidity in the hernia, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, and its menstruation is corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs because of their retention, then you should cauterize that place with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the anus, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery nail be.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors are secreted at the part of the elbow, and these are caused by the movement of its joint, and a sign of this is that the bone is prolonged beyond the other when they are compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is blocked in where it bends.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	So you should cauterize the patient on the part of the elbow with a cautery in a ring-like shape, because you have marked it with a tent around the part as it is turned, and because the part falls the middle place of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery be of the shape which was preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that place with three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the thickness of all the tendons; and then heal that place inside which has been healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes in the part of the elbow, and its cause is friction and humidity, and the patient is cured by what we have said and does not confer with it, and this is old, then you should loosen the patient's humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that place.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in this is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	They go according to two known manners, the first of which is that you cauterize that place on the part of the hip with three triangular cauteries according to this shape; and make good depth with them.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the cautery is olive-shaped or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes let the cautery be on the middle place on the head of the elbow, so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which the shape is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow, so that it is a containing circle and burns the thickness of all the tendons.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when pain is adherent to the elbow and it is not extended within the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended within the thigh, then cauterize that place with two cauteries on the thigh over the place towards which the pain goes; and with one cautery over the ankle, four inches away from the hairy part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery cuts, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain goes that the pain is extended within the place towards the toes, then cauterize that place where it goes with a cautery through three points or four or more if you need to.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain goes from below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize that place there with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not go too far with the cautery so as to burn nerve or large artery, and because of this to you is harm or contraction on the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And now you have seen one of those who cauterized on the ankle and finished in the cauterization, and the fire inflamed within that the tumor was conquered to the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then strong solution of the belly occurred, and then that death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together cauterize each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise say in the cauterization of the elbow that this is the manner of cautery: make a ring-like iron, of which the circuit be the measure of a palm; and let its orifices be according to the thickness of an almond or more than a little.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle let there be another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of the finger; and may those circles be bent at two parts; and let the length of those be an inch or two, and make in those edges of iron decently bent in the circles; and this is its shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be ignited in the fire so that it bends and gives off sparks, and then let it be laid upon the part of the elbow, the patient lying on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that place with three cauteries around in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be laid for three days; and then dress that place with plaster and let the wound heal for several days; and then heal that place as it has been healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh son, we have used this kind of cautery for the sake of guarding him, and because of this we have found few which guard over him.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But from those cauteries to him who suffers them, and he is bitten by that place of his.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cautery with medicines burning is that you make two circles having perforated armor in which the jaw of the iron door; let the length of the parties in their nature are two nuts or ways those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each the amount of the thickness of the finger; and are open below and above, and are that contain themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then pause over the part of the hip the patient is on his side, and press your hand over the part of the hip; and take a water tail and put it between two circles, and the quality of that be with fire gradually, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the compression of him — for that throb biting so with fire — until the biting cease.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wash away the water tail from all of the hip with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let that be for three days and put the poultice over the wound until the blackness of the compression is gone, and let it be for a few days, and run from him pus; this is last in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with ointment until it is whole.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended within the thigh or leg, make him lie in that which contains water according to what is done in the hip.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of water tail, and I have already written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take of alkali and of non-extinguished ashes of both ends a part, and grind them and put in a new pot whose bottom is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that goes into him.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And put below the bottom of the other pot an inverted pot, and pour over that alkali and live ashes with warm water which covers those by a finger, and after you compress those with your hand with good compression, and let the hot water that descends from him into the pot below.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then gather all that water, and pour it over the other live ashes and renewed alkali, for that time will go of very strong acridity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for that operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines are cauterized broadly, as with theriac and honey of anacreon and ashes with soap that are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia reports from a man of the ancients the operation and the cure by which is cured pain of hip and sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that it does not need another cure, and which is healed by one bleeding as well as cauterization, for that quickly goes into bath and sweat he already knows of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And let it be pressed with a certain rag wrung out, and if not squeezed out, let it be used fig juice; and let it be ground with a little grease and be put on the hip where there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and let it be bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient tolerates biting of the compression.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in a bath and when his body is heated, immerse him in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that there is not who uses cauterization with these medicines but the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Escorides say that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with kid-leather, it would be better; and let the cautery be with him according to this manner: take wool and be dipped in old oil, and be put between the foot of the leg and between the bone.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry kid-leather and inflame that with fire until it is made charcoal; and then put that over the wool and let it be until it is extinguished.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat that, and do not cease doing that until the biting sensation of the compression comes into the hip and rests the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this manner of cautery is called cauterization of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterization of pain of two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some times pain is in the back for many causes, as by chafing or by piercing or by superfluous evacuation, and for those similar causes, by infusion of matter rubbed and moist.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not work except in this only species which is made by effusion of matter rubbed.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, let the patient, appropriate evacuation of the patient with pilled pills and similar to them, that are made over the back in which there is pain three lines according to the width of him, since marks with a tent in each line cauterize or more, according to the amount that comes from the tolerance of the patient and his strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let cauterization be made with pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a middle nail cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization at the beginning of goutiness.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this ill happens to little children; and sign of the beginning in children is that they cry over their stiffness in the back by lifting up and moving.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will feel it in the last vertebra of the back and of the bones of him that already begins to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see that and want to prevent it, then cauterize that with cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that the cautery be put over all part of the vertebra evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with pointed cautery two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be near to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal the place until it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May beware that cautery not be administered in goutiness that is made by spasm of nerve.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization of podagra and of joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when podagra of cause rubbed is healed with manner of cure and the pains are not gone, then let it be cauterized.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And let you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the leg with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let cautery be olive oil of which this is the form of it:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary that points be made on the surface of the leg, then do with pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains spread into the tendons or other joints, and that many times it comes from there, then cauterize that over each tendon with three cauteries or four of all part with this olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you are necessary that these cauteries be to you, then cauterize that and do not press too much your hand on the cautery before, let it only surround the edge of the nail.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains spread into the tendon and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the hands, and it is called sciatica, then point on the circumference of the eyes as they turn, point on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there is remaining pain in the fingers, then point on the circumference of the eyes at every knuckle and on the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain can go towards the joints or the muscles, then cauterize each of them in every part of the affected area.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient if there is good digestion and reception of medicine, for if there is good digestion and the heat is evacuated by this cautery, they will be healed, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of broken bones.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a broken bone in the joints and hernia protrudes through the tissue into the abdomen, and this is where it starts, then you should order the patient to stop eating for that day and to use mild laxatives so that the hernia will descend from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient between your hands on his back, and order him to hold his breath until the hernia is pushed in or the intestine appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return that with your fingers and signal the broken bone over the bone of the elbow by indicating the extremity which is similar to half of a circle at the ascending parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it moves in a circle and sends out sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that signal with your hand holding the cautery straight, and aim it towards the bone of the elbow between the muscle and the tendon; and repeat with another application if you haven't achieved it in the first application to the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the movement of the hernia during the cauterization, so that you do not burn it to the point that it brings death or another great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bone, your operation is not complete.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And know that the cautery for children should be subtile according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then treat the place of the cauterization with ointment for three days until the scar of the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with other remedies until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on his back for 40 days while the place and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And know that you should regulate his diet according to the length of time of his cure which the bandages around his belly will tell you, and let the hernia not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer to him a decently made ointment and have that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him be tired from work and from filling himself with food and drink, and from violent movement, for when he uses this cure of healing entirely, he will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will tell of the cure for hernia in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you should not be impatient, then cauterize the hernia with a round cautery according to its quantity, and it is that which comes from the coccyx like the third part of him; and then treat that as we have said, and if it is not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And now I will say some first things that hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, for it is probed with a probe:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and is marked by a line that goes through the breadth on the lower side of the hernia, and another line above it; and place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is easier and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterization of torque.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in any part due to inflammation or impact and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to any cure with medicine, then you should cauterize it with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be of any member according to its size and smallness, and its straightness and crookedness, and the location of torque and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if he is healed by the first cautery, then it is good; and if not, then do it again on him the cautery, for usually those pains are punctured at a member near to which member it hurts most, so that you find them with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The lepers some times are cauterized for great healing, and especially if the kind of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of heat and melancholic humour.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is consumptive and as that cured by what we said in the division and do not use it, nor that, and fear about the patient that the corruption spreads through all his body and all its complecion, then cauterize him on the head with v cauteries: one in the middle place of the head, and the second lower on him, moving from the forehead to the end of the hair; and both on the horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand with the cautery a little on the bone to make a small impression, and from him are displaced the scars, so that the expiration of thick vapours is relieved from him; and cauterize over the melons according to what it prescribes.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize it with those cauteries which we said to do on the head; and cauterize on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on the two nostrils, and two cauteries on the two collarbones of the neck, and six cauteries over the collarbones of the chest, and one large cautery over the collarbone near the armpit, and one cautery over the breastbone, and two cauteries over the ribs, and one over each rib, and two cauteries over the elbows, and one over each elbow, and two cauteries over the hips, and one over each hip, and two cauteries over the knees, and one over each knee, and two cauteries over the shins, and one over each shin, and two cauteries over the heels, and one over each heel, and two cauteries over the big toes, and one over each toe, and two cauteries over the small toes, and one over each toe.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves which are over the talus that you do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some times it is cauterized with one cautery over the bone of the elbow and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the jawbone.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that how much you adjust cauteries, as much is more beneficial and more effective; and know that the patient has no pain in the cautery, thus as they have it in the spots, because the body of him is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints according to which they are preceded by the humour of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery wound with flour mixed with honey and the other ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cauterization for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils, and plasters, then you should cauterize the numb limb with a cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the thickness of the skin a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a stupor is cauterized where the nerve endings are in the hands and feet, and in the spine, and feels the movement of the nerves which move that limb, and the stupor is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this unless he is skilled in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the body moving.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cauterization for white spots that are morphea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When white spots are old and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize them with a cautery lightly according to the thickness of the skin so that the whiteness and color is relieved, and the color changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with flour of err and lentils, and roasted oil and leaves of wild rosemary, and pigeon's blood or turtle dove's blood, let each be one part and all mixed together, then line a cloth and over the spot it is placed until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cauterization for warts.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its edge as it rotates.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in its middle; but I have not seen this, because I am afraid it will become ulcerated, and I have seen it happen sometimes.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more proper that it be cauterized around its edge with a circular cautery as we have said, or with pointed cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cauterization for discolored spots.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When discoloration is delayed in ripening, and that is because of the surplus making it, or because of the state of the patient, whether he is old and decrepit, or poor of blood, or because of the season, and you want to hasten its ripening; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and then let it ripen.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape of it: and place that in the middle of the discolored spot so that it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is in that place which is lower, because the body of the arm is drawn away; then cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization for corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a moving corruption in the limb, which corrodes like fire eating dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	So if you see that corrosion in a place which suffers cautery by fire, then heat small pin-point cauteries, and larger ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterize all of it evenly so that you eradicate all the corrosion and do not leave any cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then let it be for three days, and place over the cauterized spots a poultice of soft linen dipped in mixed oil so that the scars are all eradicated and all the corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then cure that with ointments that generate flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy in that place where there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, repeat the cautery over it where it is rotten in the discolored spots.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is sometimes treated with a sharp medicine because that is midway between cautery and medicine.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But however, cautery by fire is the quickest remedy.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said of its cure with sharp medicine in the division, and so take that when you will have indigence.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization for warts and of others alike.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Sometimes there are bumps under the skin of the foot caused by an ulcer, and is a great cause, deep, which penetrates the foot; and cautery on them is according to two manners, that is cautery by fire and cautery by water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cautery by fire is that you ignite the cautery iron like a pencil of a quill pen, which is made of steel according to the thickness containing the wart all around, and it has fine points.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that ignited over the wart, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the edge of the wart so that the cautery reaches to the depth of the wart.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Then let it be for three days until the arm starts swelling.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then poultice that with wild mallows bruised with salt, and let the poultice be over that for one night, for that will eradicate it from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that place with a generative flesh ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and sometimes it penetrates the surface of the body, mostly in the hands and feet, then know that you should administer on them cautery by water, and it is that you take a cannula made of horn or of steel or of quill pen, and place that over the wart; then drop a little quantity of water into the cannula, and rotate your hand, and you press all around with the pressure of your hand, and let the cannula be inserted to the depth of the root of the wart, and wait for the patient one hour with the biting of the water, then remove that, for the wart with its roots is eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And so do to them all the others likewise that are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then cure those also whose roots of warts are eradicated with those ointments which generate flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 54.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cauterization for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor caused by rubbing the nerve or by fever from a rub or by some other like cause, then know that you cauterize that with four cauteries or with V-shaped cauteries over the spine, between each pair of vertebrae with one cautery; and cauterize on the feet, and over the stomach with a cautery made of olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And if his tremor rests and hastens the sickness of the rubbed disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cauterization for accidental wounds to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are blisters in the body that are broken and pustules that are made of corrupt thick matter; therefore cover at the beginning when it appears, let it be cauterized over all the top of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of mirt wood, the end of which is extended by fire; or with long razors; or with a cautery drawn out slowly.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a stone chisel at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and not being split, the surplus is broken and makes them heal from that.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, make sure that this is done by means of phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 66.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery for the flow of blood accidentally through an incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops seen there flow of artery which is cut below the wound, or below the incision of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and similar things, and it is difficult to cure that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when it happens to someone, then you put your hand on the opening of the artery and hold there with your finger until that spot becomes narrow so that the flow of blood is stopped below your finger and does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place over the wound a few large olive cauteries, by many numbers, and breathe into them until they are many small fires.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those one small or large according to the spot and the wound where the artery is broken, over that vein quickly while you have held your finger, and put the cautery on it until it is bound and restricted that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you hold your finger and squeeze the cautery, then take another cautery prepared in the fire and therefore do not cease doing this one after another until the blood is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And guard yourself that you may not burn the nerve which is here, and that it comes upon the patient some other evil.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible in those to restrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large if not by one of four manners: or by cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted for when it is extracted its ends are burnt and the blood is restricted, or that it be bound with a ligature or with a bandage through strong constriction, or that medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood be placed on it; and it be pressed by a poultice with decent constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers decent restriction of it by bandage and constriction with cloth or through position of burning causes and of similar things does not confer but tarry.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present or there is no medicine, then open with your finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand it in great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the main part of the wound; and on the artery let your finger not be held, and over the artery let it be sprinkled with water rubbed with much coolness so that the blood may congeal and thicken; and indeed if there is need of cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing and fenestration and phlebotomy and of wounds and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which it is convenient to use cautery with fire and medicine, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and we have ordered the chapters from the superior part of the head until the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I shall proceed in this chapter through that medical manner, so that it may be alleviated to the seeker; then concerning that which he has demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin that, know, brothers, that in this chapter is for terror that which is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that know that it should be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is an evacuation by blood from which life is taken away by the sprinkling of the vein or incision upon the abscess or opening of the wound or purification of the wound or extraction of arrow or incision of stone and their likes.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And from all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their hands death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I admonish you that upon you does not fall that in which there is a situation, for some times chance due to the methods of men with many illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them is he who is carried away by his illness and is easier due to him the death, and so because of the vehemence of that which finds of his illness, and because of the length of his illness, and by the illness there is fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And from those is he who gives to you his word and advice, you expecting with that health, and his illness is perilous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore know that you consent to him who comes to you of whom there is this manner; and your caution be greater than confidence and your greediness, and do not presume any cause over it unless by certain science which verifies it over you, and to which good success follows.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the curing of all your illnesses from prognosis and indication of him to whom health is converted; for in him are you aided over acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O children, God give to you his understanding and not hide from you direction and protection, for he is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according as it precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head until the feet, so that it may be alleviated to you what you demanded of that and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness many times happens to infants because of childbirth and when the mother stretches the head of the infant it feels light.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some times because of hidden cause which is not discovered.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness except in infants, and to all those whom I have seen it is brought the death, and by such it is revealed action in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that an infant whose head was full of water and the head of him was always magnified until a nurse could not bear on him because of the greatness of his head, and but the humidity was augmented so that it died with fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is added between the membrane and the bone, or is added below the bone upon the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in that if the humidity is between the membrane and the bone and the abscess is slight, then know that you cut in the middle place of the head with a slit in its breadth, and let the length of the slit be two notches so that the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is more augmented and the abscess is greater, then are here two slits according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, sign of it is that you see the edges of the head swollen all around and the water is oozing when you compress it with your hand at the edges in between your fingers and it is not hidden to you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Know that you cut in the middle place of the head with three slits according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the humidity; and then strengthen the slits with cloth and plasters; and then put on it vinegar and oil on the fifth day, and then loosen the bandage and cure the wound with tentas and unguents, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity so that the limb is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	There is another method of incision which considers the size of the abscess and the collection of pus, as sometimes it is larger at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right or left side; therefore, make the incision where the abscess appears and the pus collects, and finish it in the best way possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be aware not to cut any artery and cause a flow of blood, which might result in the patient's death due to that blood loss along with the discharge of fluids.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incisions on the arteries which are near the ears, called aural arteries.
Capitol segon.	Chapter 2.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is a wound or an ulcer on the legs or feet, and it becomes old, and medicine doesn't help, then the best cure in this case is to make an incision on those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus, when you want to cut the arteries which are near the ears, first clean the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then press it tightly with some cloth; also, look for the pulse, and the places above and below the ears, because they sometimes hide in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then feel the artery with your fingers, and cut each one with a sharp knife, entering into the bone, and let it be according to the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the knife under the artery and cut through it to the bone above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be about two digits apart, because when a vein is cut, blood emerges with a pulsating discharge, which shoots out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery doesn't appear by feeling around, then measure three digits from the ear and feel with your fingers, and insert into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what comes out of the blood is the quantity of wine unces., And the blood flows out very slowly or quickly, and all that is according to the amount that appears from the strength of the patient and the flow of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the skull, and if something remains on the bone that causes headache, then cut it so that it doesn't cause an abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the skull with plasters and bandages, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there is a headache or ulcers caused by cold and dampness, and it becomes chronic, and medicine doesn't help, then we have experienced in these illnesses extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those veins as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the way of operating and extracting them is that the patient raises his hair which are in the temples; and understand the artery appears in the temple because it is shown to you by the pulse, and it is hidden except in a few people due to the strength of the pulse.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then press the patient's neck with some cloth; and clean the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until you see the artery clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the knife, which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And press some cloth against the patient's neck, and approach from each side of the ears so that a nerve or vein appears; and bring the knife closer between those parts. And then cut it easily until you reach the artery; and draw out from there, and extract it from the upper parts until you have pulled it out from the vein, and discovered it from under the tunics.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a thread, and cut from one part according to the amount by which they are lengthened and shortened, and there will be no blood flow. Because if they are not cut, the blood won't come out at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And let the blood flow out for wine unces. For three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then tie it in two places with strong threads made of cotton or cords long, and don't allow putrefaction before the consolidation of the skull and blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And cut the superfluous part which is between two bandages; and do it in that hour or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone at the place where the ends of it are cut, and it will remain in place of that work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better that the patient has no fever or is of hot constitution; because cauterization is of those causes that help to dry up moist humors, and therefore it is better in youthfulness.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And let the extraction of the arteries that affect the ancient wound, and they are placed over it with decently made powders, and let it be cured with dry medicines making the flesh and bones heal.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are operating another vein appears causing blood flow from the artery, then tie that blood with a thread or cauterize it, or press the wound, and strengthen your hand over it until the blood is restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of those causes is not present to you, then place your finger over the vein where the blood is coagulated, and wet the area with warm water of strong heat until the sharpness is relieved, and strengthen it according to how you can.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is easier in extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery which has two edges, because you have felt the two places with your fingers, and put them down, ignite them, until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two places, so that it is lengthened by what is between its ends, because it is not consolidated at all by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of the two edges be sharp.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the sharpness of two edges is better, because if they are sharp with two edges approaching each other and not cutting into the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut more gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and more gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between the two edges be the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter 4.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure of acute and sour wounds in the throat.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When they are acute and sour, and it is the veins of those which are on top of the head, and there doesn't help any cause of the cure by medicine, and sometimes the face of that person turns yellow and he feels in his front as if it was a walking of ants, and the ears of him are exhausted, moist heat which is applied to them as if the hairs were known, and the eyelids are swollen by the sharpness of tears, the old ones who are experienced in the cure of those, and they call that cure with sponge.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to shave the hairs on his forehead, and then make three evenly spaced incisions in his forehead according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision falls into two parts: the first incision should be evenly spaced according to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the tears that are in the tear gland, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the arteries which are on both sides; lengthen your hand in the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers, adjust it.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dry rags with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And insert the spatula from two acute ends, of which this is the shape of its incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the top of the temple to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excorse with that all the gum which is between two incisions with the scalpel which is over the bone, and then do the same thing with the midline incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And place the spatula there and insert into the first incision again another instrument which is called a curette, sharp on one side and dull on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the side of that sharp against the flesh next to the gum, and the other side against the bone, and push it in as far as it will go towards the midline incision, and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the arms.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Let the incision be continued towards the gum, and then do the same thing in the midline incision into the other incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And after blood comes out in equal quantity from both sides, squeeze the places where the clotted blood is.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each incision a piece of dry cotton wool, and apply over that powders mixed with vinegar and oil and sweet wine, so that an ulcer may not form there.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the bandage and give a large poultice of warm water or tea, and then treat that with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other things so that the wounds may heal.
Capitol .v.	CHAPTER 5.V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	OF THE CURE OF SORES BY CAUTERIZATION AND THE ARTERIES DESCENDING FROM THE TOP OF THE HEAD.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When to someone come cauteries which are drawn and continued, and you see the veins of the patient emaciated little, and already the guarding of them is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from there hair falls out, and in the top of the head there is acute pain and consequent tension, then know through these accidents that the matter and cauteries do not come except from few veins of the parts within.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for them is this: command the patient to shave his forehead, and then make an incision in that place in the middle of the forehead, a little according to its width (and begin with the incision of the left temple into the right temple; and may the incision be into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the tears of the temples which are hurt because of chewing), while the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Absorb all the blood with sponge or dry cloth, and then fill up between the two lips of the incision with dry cotton wool or with linen.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then tighten it over that with powders mixed with vinegar and oil so that an ulcer may not form there.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen that and see that the ulcer is diminished, then know that it rubs the bone where the flesh begins to grow again, and then treat that with an astringent poultice which dries up the flesh, as if you take of wheat flour two parts and of rosin four parts and mix them together, and from that make a plaster and apply it to these wounds from the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	CHAPTER 5.VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	OF THE CURE OF THAT WHICH CAUSES SORES IN THE EARS.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause which causes sores in the ears is one of four kinds: either it is mineral stone or similar to stone, as iron and glass; or from plant, as celery or bean; or fluidic, as water and sweet wine and their likenesses, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when stone causes a sore in the ear or some other cause similar to those which do not increase it in the ear, and the ear is turned towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then distil into that some cause of oil of violets or sizami, and then administer its extraction, and make him sneeze with a sniffing motion, and stop up the nostrils because of the sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place in the circle of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear towards its ends, because many times it is pierced by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not pierced, then administer its extraction with the instrument called a subtle hook for which this is the shape:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is pierced by the hook, well and good; but if not, then administer its extraction with a subtle needle of few folds.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not pierced by that, then make a tube of brass and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear, and close around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing else may be open except the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract by your mouth with a strong吸引, because many times things are carried along with that which we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not pierced in that manner, then take a piece of hollow reed or of a hollow vessel with which are pressed the ears, one finger's length, and place that in the end of the ear, and then wrap around that decently placed gauze.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear from its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if it is not pierced by all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut away that in front so that it may not form an ulcer or a spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting away that is that you first cut off the blood vessels of the sephasic vein and extract the blood according to the nature of it, and then do that cutting between your fingers and turn the ear towards its ends, and make a little incision in the edge of the ear because of the greys of it in the place which was pressed by it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent so that it may come to the stone; and if the stone is hard, stop it with appropriate instruments; then close up the incision at that time with speed, and treat that so that it may heal.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause is in the ear from one of the graces which grow and are inflated, then administer its cure and extraction; but if it does not obey your command, then take a slender spatula according to this shape:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the incision of that grace which is fallen in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think it is already wetted by the vapor of the ear; place that in several pieces, and then extract from those with pincers or with a slender hook, or cut it away as we have said before, because the extraction from it is eased.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But if the water which has entered the ear, due to the yawning of the patient, is not expelled at the beginning and fills his ear with some old cloth, and he spits on that ear in which there is water; and if it is expelled, well; but if not, take small stones according to the length of the finger, and warm them in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear, and suck on it with his own mouth from that side, and strike with another stone on the stone which is in the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do this until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And if the water is expelled in such a way that you take paper or linen, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle is burnt.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put in another piece of linen and do this as many times until all the water is expelled; and put on that a cannula as it has been said about the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of an insect entering that ear, if it is a small thing, pierce and treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing which causes apoplexy, then administer its extraction with tweezers and nails, and the cause of it is farther away from all other causes that enter the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a worm engendered in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the tract on distillation and you do not achieve a cure, then you should look at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if some cause of the worm appears, then extract it with tweezers or with fine nails; but if nothing appears, then take a cannula, tightly bound below and ample above, of which this is the shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount which the patient can endure; and then suck strongly with it, doing this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if he does not obey you in this, then stop up and seal the opening of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been tried by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find them in the tract on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion with which you pour the medical oils into the ear be through this instrument of which this is the shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or brass, tightly bound below and flat above, with a small hole in it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore it must be as if it were plastered to that which is in the cavity of the cannula of containing.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wind the end of it with a cloth decently; then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or sap of some herb, or whatever you wish of these medicines into the cannula — and that is in the ear — then insert the rod with cloth above it and squeeze with your hand that cloth tightly until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument so that the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what has been poured into the ear must already be warmed by fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you distill in the ear is not too strong, for the medicines of the ear do not endure that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the cure of inflammation of the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children are born from the bellies of their mothers not-perforated, and this happens in some men, inflammation in the middle of the ear due to pus or due to meat stuck in that; and this inflammation sometimes occurs in the hole of the eardrum which does not affect the brain, and sometimes it is in the external parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the middle of it, which does not affect the brain, is in the major dispositions of difficult cure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that in which you achieve the brain, you should hold the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if inflammation is apparent, open that with subtle spatula of which this is the shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which there is a small breadth, of which one party be acute and the other not; and let the spatula be of two edges smooth so that it does not harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the inflammation is due to flesh born in the ear or in the middle of it, then open that with subtle nails and pierce it energetically until all the flesh is torn.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the inflammation is in the eardrum, then take a slender rod of brass and warm it in the fire a little, and then insert that in the middle of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you have sensed inflammation with that which the patient feels with ease due to the gravity of hearing, relieve the pressure of it with ease; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then hold to the ear cloth of linen according to the quantity of the breadth of the hole which you have wound in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are certain of the hardening of the plaster, or take some and soak that in water and sprinkle it over that after it has been ground and use it; and if you see the ear already pustulated, then beware that you remove that which you have wound in cloth and replace that with another cloth which you have wound around cerot that is made of rose oil, until the pustule scabs away; and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if blood flow occurs, then soak sponge or cloth in cold water and hold it to the ear; and use the other cure which constricts the flow of blood, which is said in the tract on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the cure of athecal which causes dimness to the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athecal which causes dimness to the eyelids of men sometimes moist, and sometimes dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore hold those with tongs or with nails, and cut those with spatulas of their roots, and then hold it to the places ground.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain with flow of blood comes, then cauterize those with a small slender cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is then to cut off and to return the incisions several times when any cause of them remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	On the cure of grandeyssa which comes to the eyelids of men.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it occurs in the eyelids of men some cause which is similar to grandeyssa in its strength and hardness, and therefore grandeyssa is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of dense humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And the appearance in them is that you should consider if the grandeyssa comes from that which appears of the eyelid and is swollen in all parts; and the cause of it is distant.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore open that with a slit through the breadth, and then dig that in all parts with ease until it drains, and then hold that with tongs and cut off that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared for the beginning of it except that you penetrate the eyelid with the incision little by little, then this is not noted in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you stitch it up, and cure that within which is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you shall not be harmed through it because the blood of it heals itself and becomes flesh again.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the growth is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid from within, then cut off the eyelid and suspend the growth with a thread; another option is that you make an incision, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is elongated by incision, then this is not noted in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with salt water, and cure the site so that it heals within.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the cure of an ulcer in the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Ulcers are grey in color and are engendered in the membranes of the eyelid from above, and mostly affect infants, aggravate the eyes of those and cause pain to their sight because of it; and they cannot bear to look at the brightness of the sun because of this.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because of this they always squint their eyes, and sleep with their eyes closed; and so the eyelids are humid beneath the eyebrows, which have already been covered in inflammation, and the imminence of growth is apparent in the eye; and when you press on the location with your fingers, you feel growth within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some type of operation is performed on the patient who rests his head in your lap, and you prepare a cloth and make him take a hot bath, and make a circle according to the quantity that contains arternach from all sides, and then place that over it and press with your fingers all around so that growth may be brought together within the circle; then pierce in the middle of that humid area with a spatula through the incision made in flabotomy, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in flabotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the anterior cowl, you must split the membrane all the way through so that you arrive at the growth, for in the most disposed processes, the growth comes through the incision according to the form of whiteness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then pull it out with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the outer edges and revolve between the right and left hand until it is released.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful that you do not pierce into the wound with the spatula so that with the spatula you may not come to the wound and loosen it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not encounter arternach at the beginning of the incision, but you pierce into the incision a little with ease so that arternach may process; then pull it out as we have said; and then moisten the cloths in water and wine and place them over the site and tighten those with poweder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so that salt is scattered and placed in the cavity of the incision so that what remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an ulcer occurs in the site, then cure that with soft bandages until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of manners of touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When within the eyelids of wounds are born beneath the natural hairs and are drawn out, then these touch our eye and make manners of illnesses thus with constant tears and softening of eyelids and membrane so that this is cause of destruction of the eye which is called tactinir of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: or by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine according to what was said before in the chapter on cautery; or tactinir is made through incision and suturing; or with reeds according to how he will direct.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then place the patient's head in your lap; then lift up the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is lifted, all is well; if not, insert a needle into that from which pus flows beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate above with the eyelid, and this must be close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow — close to the hairs — and pull the needle towards the upper part of the eyelid, and lift up that with the eyelid, and convert it towards the nose.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then pierce into the inner part of the eyelid from beneath the hairs with a spatula of the major tear duct into the minor tear duct; then pull out the fiel and place beneath the eyelid small balls of cotton or cloth, and then mark over the eyelid with tenting, and let it be thus with the form of a leaf of mirt.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But however, let the form be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for that is diverse in men, for from those it is required that there be a great quantity inscribed on the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then pierce with the spatula over the two lines which you have marked, and commence from the major tear duct into the minor tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairs thus with the thickness of a hair.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the thread in one of the two angles of the membrane, and then excoriate it all, and then tie with the suture the two lips with a gum or fine woolen thread, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what superfluous of the membranes above two eyebrows with some causes viscous, if you wish to do so, and if not, you will not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then let the suture of the membranes be three or four days, and then cure it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, remove the plaster after its suture, and cure that with what dries and tightens, for the eyelid is raised because of the sealing of the plaster and the gathering of it; but the suture is better. And therefore we say thus to the ancients of tactinir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But however, there be solicitude over the patient and it is good operation, and there is not fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way in tactmyr, and it is that you mark over the eyelid the form thus with a leaf of mirt, and then lift up the eyelid with three segregated and gathered hooks according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible with the hooks, and that is not gnatched, then take a needle in which there is thread, and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other fiel close to the major tear duct, and the fiel according to the minor tear duct, and tie between your fingers the membranes with equality, and then with those raise up your hand with equal elevation, raise all the membrane over which has been marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then tie the two lips of the plaster with a suture and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an ulcer occurs because of your incision or your piercing, treat that ulcer with cerate and its similars, and with unguents.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some times the eyelids are drawn towards their hairs, therefore use in that what we have said of incision; but the suture in each is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Tactmyr with reeds is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you lift up the eyelid and split the figure which is within according to what is recounted; then with art make two reeds or two astles of which the length be according to the length of the eyelid, and the width of those be smaller than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into the ends of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each one with subtlety below what is superfluous on the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canals of each part with a strong constriction, and leave it for several days, because the vein will die by constriction, turn black and rot within while it falls out on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break the vein at the temples, and apply a poultice over the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Thus when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of the pustules that come from the head and of their remedy.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are non-natural hairs, tough, rough and stinging the eyes, then the operation on them is that you take a thin needle and place it in that vein of fine thread and lion, and then tie the ends of it very finely.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the hairs be a palm's quantity.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you twist another fine thread beneath it quickly, and tie the ends of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair which needs skill, and make it penetrate the eyelid hurriedly while pulling that one out above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair out from above and insert that one into the lye, and let there be only one or two or three hairs and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand away so that the hair is pulled out by the lye in the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled out by the lye and not pushed out, then pull the lye to the sides below with the thread which you have tied so that in being pushed out, the lye of the trave is above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And wash that with the vision of the eye, for then you will pull out the lye and the thread, and cut each and close the eye, and leave the cuts for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows good flesh over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is longer, then tie a long one of the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that one, or the thread which you have tied so that in being pulled out, it is elevated to some space, and then you elevate that one.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter .xiii.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the elevation of stinging hairs in the eye when the hair is very fine and delicate.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there comes in the eye a pustule and there is contraction of the eyelid when it is drawn to one side or the other, by bad consolidation of flesh or by sectioning or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this pustule or it is natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of flesh or of sections or cauterizations, or by similar ones to them badly cured.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation on it is that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in it what is between those a piece of linen thread, and tie those so that they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not forget to use in its cure of the causes which dry out, constriction; for if you do that, it will return pustule worse than at any time before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that one causes which soften, like fenugreek, and cook with the water in which there are seeds of hemp, or unguent of diaquinon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and soak in it the piece, and cure with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the secret of your cure is that you pierce with great skill so that it is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said is not anything other than a rectification of ehacratir that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .xiiii.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the pustules that come from the head and of their remedy.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ehacratir which is made in the eyelid below, which is properly named ehacratir; and it is of one natural, another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is made by flesh or by sectioning or cauterization, or by other likenesses.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation on it is that you take a needle in which there are two threads, and put that in the flesh, and make it pass from the tear duct of the left into the tear duct of the right, until the thread comes to both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh to the sides above with the needle and cut that with the needle, and insert it with spatulum ample.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if the shape of the eyelid returns according to how it should be, it is good; and if not, take the needle and place that in the split figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and split the two fissures on the side of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two fissures be two angles of the incision which you have made so that they meet, and let an angle be made between them when they come together and a figure is made from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter: the delta.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then push that flesh in by the quantity that it is the side of it beneath it, which cuts the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the separated parts and sew those with the thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said of the softening medicines and of the poultices until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if ehacratir comes through sectioning or cauterization, then split it with a flat incision over the hairs of the eyelid according to how it precedes.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the poultice between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the cure of ehacratir when it is above or below, let the operation run in it according to how it is prepared of the form of ehacratir, and that one is in form of many diverse shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans prepare skill in every way which is possible to it so that it makes the figure return to its natural form, or near to that one, and the patient according to how it agrees with the operation and the instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the pestilences that come from the head and of their remedy.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many men who are so young that the eyelid is very solid above the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, then insert the end of the needle below the eyelid, and elevate it on that one, or extend that one with the unguent.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then insert the adhesion with spatulum subtle, which is not at all acute from the incisions, and let the patient not be worried after the operation, and remove the spatulum which does not irritate the eye by its acuity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And it should be your intention to cut away that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid may return to its natural shape and all the adhesion healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you should put in the eye a saline wash, or distil on it a solution of vitriol dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the eyeball with tweezers and place over the eyeball wool soaked in white of egg, and on the third day use solidifying remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incisions around the nail and the fleshy protuberance of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that there are two kinds of nail: one is nervous and resembles a thin hard cipolla; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white congelated humidity which, when pierced by an iron, either takes on a red color and is not removed from it, or is cut out and the iron is not left in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both these conditions do not improve except by means of the larger tear duct, as it gradually covers the sight and blocks out the light and movement of the eyeball.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of making the incision is for the patient to rest his head in your lap, opening his eyes and raising the eyelid with your hand, then taking up the nail with a pair of tweezers, pulling it gently upwards from above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and thread it with a hair of horse or ox or cow or similar, or a strong gut, doubling over the tip of the needle several times, and pierce the nail with the needle, binding the nail with the thread; pull the hair upwards from above and cut off the hair at the tip of the nail, which is causing the pupil to be affected.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way you should draw it through to the back of the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should incise the remaining part in the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and cut away the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that it does not produce continuous tears as a result of the incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is extended only with the iron or with thread, as we have said; and then it is cut away with an iron spatula of which this is its form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And take care not to touch the cornea with the spatula and cause rupture, and that the pupil be perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then pour into the eye a little ground salt or vinegar made from wine lees, and let it run out the next day; then wash the eye with water until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the iron or thread it, then this kind of nail is cured with remedies, and it is healed in the same way as an eye that has been cut, as will be described below.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to incise it, then open the patient's eye and take a fine iron spatula sharpened according to this shape:
am subtilitat.	with thinness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it is enlarged and has retreated into the root, then distill wine lees or vinegar made from wine or rose water or salt dissolved in water into the eye, letting it run out the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything that is of it has been discharged, unless an ulcerated pustule appears in the eye, for then you should let it discharge and heal at the beginning by applying the remedy until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on it with caution until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The fleshy protuberance of the tear duct, if noticed in the eye causing great harm, should be suspended with an iron; then incise it from one side, not finishing the incision so that tears do not flow out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill wine made from grape must into it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of the white of the eye and what is born of flesh compressed in the eyeball.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of some is born red flesh which covers the pupil, or it approaches or presses upon the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids against the edges outside and is attached like a warts.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation on it is for the patient to rest his head in your lap, opening his eyes and taking up all the flesh with convenient tweezers or forceps; then incising the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished by means of the incision tool, take care not to injure the eye by your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be by which you incised the nail or by spatula as we recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is collected like an onion according to its form, refer to that chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is finished and all the flesh has been discharged, then fill the eye with ground salt or vinegar made from wine, or sprinkle in it red powder resembling that of corrosive medicines, and place over the eyeball a bandage soaked in white of egg until it is secured against an ulcerated pustule.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of the white of the eye becomes inflamed and there is a pustule, then let the eye discharge and cure that pustule with what reduces it; then repeat your operation on it until it is healed, and similarly do in the compressed flesh which occurs in this kind of eye.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you should know that you prevent all cure of the eye by natural or accidental way, done with an iron, and not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the gathering of pus in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Red veins which are swollen over the eye and prevent its operation, and open the eye for a length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which there is pus is strong and there is not another illness, then collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to rest his head in your lap, then suspend those veins with an iron or two according to your prudence; and let the iron be of fine double wire according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two irons sloping into one body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then let those veins be bound with fine cords, with thinness, and wash the blood now and then, until you see those veins become discharged from the eye and are reduced.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And take care not to injure the eye with the tip of the spatula; and if your operation is on the evening side in front of the sun, and keep it steady in your operation that you do not incise except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then distill into the eye wine made from grape must or vinegar so that it has an astringent action on what has been discharged from the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect everything in that hour, then apply a poultice over everything which relieves the pain of it, and let it remain for several days until the pain of it is appeased and secured against an ulcerated pustule.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat on it according to the mother method until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of the reduction of hernia to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure arisati with cautery or with sharp medicine burning according as it is preceded by its description and is not healed, then do not enter into it but split the pustule after the maturity of it has been discovered and all the humidity which is in it and the puss has been extracted so that the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you see that the bones are exposed and blackened by corruption, then you should treat them with an instrument of this shape.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called an astringent head, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be round like the eye of a needle, punctured by liming or cauterized by a sublimate (as shown in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And apply it to the腐敗 part of the bone, and gently move it around between your fingers, and press your hand gently over it until you feel that the腐敗 is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, then restore the area with astringent and drying causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the area is consolidated and there is good flesh grown over it, and the body has been healed of the ulcer and remains so for 40 days, and there is no recurrence or incident in that area, then you should know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not healed but you should reduce the fissure to its natural shape, and according to this method: you should expose the bone with iron or a sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, you should take a tribe according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the iron should be triangular, and its shaft should taper toward the tip as shown.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then apply it to the bone, and let it be near the tear; lengthen your arm a little bit, and gently move your hand with the tribe so that it penetrates all the way into the bone, and the patient will feel the pain as you push out the wind through him with your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with astringent, drying medicines just as you healed it.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh and area are hardened, then the matter that was effused to the parts around the wound returns to the nose; therefore, there is pus over the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of a protrusion from the nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	If it is necessary to reduce the protrusion of the nose, and if there is a fissure, and you find that the protrusion is not good, then you should expose the bone with iron or a sharp medicine according to this shape.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way of making these powders is to take pieces of linen cloth and double each piece into four folds; make those pieces.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then apply them one over another according to the amount that the nose needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then tightly bind them with a tough cloth with strong compression; repeat the cupping glasses with sucking while you scarify; then remove the cupping glasses and let the patient lie tightly all day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in between, the ligament becomes soft, then let it be somewhat loose.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the bandage during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the nose has been reduced, good; and if not, then repeat the bandage with the powders and compression, and the cupping glasses until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the beginning of a protrusion of the tunica uvnea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	If you see that the pain of the head extends from the head to the feet, and if you see that the beginning of the protrusion is in the tunica uvnea, then you should expose all the bones with iron or a sharp medicine according to this shape:
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and apply wool soaked in egg white over the nose and let it lie until the thread falls down with the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal the nose with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And several times gather from all around with a circle of cloth over the nose where there is great protrusion, and let it be pierced with the spatulum which comes to the preon of the nose, and let the white humidity flow, and the nose will descend and in that time.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then tightly bind until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of alconatis.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness that is called alconatis is not anything other than an ulcer which is settled in the nose like water flowing down and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the way of working on it is that you make the patient sit up straight and lean forward, and then take his head in your hands from two sides and move it so that you see the ulcer coming to the upper parts; then let it be dried and not flow down, and let there be light, and the patient sees the causes as he looks.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not flow down below, you should know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the flow of the ulcer is not prepared with what we have said, then let the patient sit up between your hands and then take a sharp spatulum and fen it over the panniculus covering a little below the continuation of the conjunctiva at the edge of the cornea in the corona (in the area where it is bulging out), so that the ulcer is pushed out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So when it is pushed out, then you distill water over the nose in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be healed with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of water flowing from the nose.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said about the spices of the water in the division and which agrees to pierce with salt declaring, then that according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then let the patient sit up straight between your hands over a basket and lean his nose forward, it bent.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then apply your left hand over the eyelid of his nose, if the nose in which there is water is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then take alum with your right hand if it is on the left; or with your left hand if it is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then place the end of the alum near the edge of the socket by the thickness of the tear in the eyelid of the smaller tear, and apply the alum with strength and rotate your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then enter into the socket of the eye and feel that the alum has already arrived at the lens because you can see clearly.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the path of alum pass through the space from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the socket of the eye; for you will see with that pupil with the vision of the eye by the clarity of the tunica cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then place alum within the socket where the water is, and then pull it down from above to below repeatedly; and if the water descends immediately, then the patient will see immediately over which eye he has broken his vision, and alum in the eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then rest a little; therefore, if the water has descended, then you release that other one before alum is thrown out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the alum with ease, and rotate your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little white salt of gemma and wash the eye within; and then place outside the eye a cotton pad or stopped wool or cloth infused in rose oil and albumen of egg and tongue with that.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those who are of our time put on that a trassated comi with albumen of egg.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey you to alum the interior of the eye due to its hardness — for there are some people whose eyes are hard —, then you should take the spatula which is called 'alberid', and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then pierce with that the junction, and do not push your hand into the wound, and it is only so that you make way for alum to reach its location subtly.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then put in alum as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And when you have finished your work, the patient's sleeping quarters should be prepared in a dark room where he sleeps on his back in total darkness and all movement prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place in nature something so that its nature is smooth, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandage be according to his disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then release that in that dark room and examine his vision, and make him see some causes, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do this at the time of the cure or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Before you leave, ensure that the water is completely drained so that the eye can recover quickly and completely.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if inflammation occurs, then you should release the eye on the seventh day, and rectify that with water that reduces inflammation.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should clear his vision and place a poultice on his face orally so that the inflammation of his eye decreases down to him for several days, existing in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then let it be treated in that room gradually and conversed about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases vision is not restored to the disciple, and then you should be confident about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us from some of those who are the Artach , and some say that it is made by fire in Ayrac magnified perforated with which water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen this done in our land, nor has it been recorded in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of spices so that it be on those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of gold or silver properly, and they are the extremities of them with this subtle triangular shape, the acute extremity like that is its form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of nose pain.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose are grown various meats united of which is some cause which is assembled to scorpion of words weight, or to polyp stone; and this illness is called polypus because it is like that stone represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it is cancerous meat, scaly, of dusky color; and from it is that there is lion meat not of dusky color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in that which is in these meats not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the patient sneeze between your fingers and set him in the sun, and open his nostrils, and prick his nose in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that to the divided foramen, and then scorch it with something you have understood with a pointed spatula from one foramen inside which you know all the meat has been removed; if he sneezes from it due to any cause for which abscission is possible, then you strike it with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that he sneezes.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if he bleeds or inflammation occurs, then you place on it something that it covers; or if they are malignant ulcers, then you cut and cauterize them so that the bleeding is stopped and all the holes are closed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let it be applied to the nose after incision wine vinegar and water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it flows humidity into the palate, then you know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as you know it, then let it be known that within him is meat in the nose in which there has been no healing of the holes.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then let it be known that you put oil of the dog in which there is thickness, and wet in him words of a nosebleed, and place between each nose the quantity of a finger or less, and rub the patient's face and insert one extremity of the oil into the nostrils with the ray or for any other cause which it is possible to him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then having done this, let him breathe in his odorant so that it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and let him spit out onto his palm, for the children at school do the same, and it is a mild cause to him who wants to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two extremities of the oil, one extremity that drips on the nose and the other that pierces into the nose, and then administer a cauterization of meat with the nostrils that are in the oil, and do this so that you know the meat has been cauterized.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the oil, and place in the nose after abscission of blood a cold poultice, and do this for three days or more until you see that it has healed completely.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead pipe for several days until it has healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if it is difficult to cure that which has been squashed, use it.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for cleansing nosebleeds with which are distilled oils and medicines in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this with silver or gold, which is like a little open lantern, likewise with little heat, and the meat likewise.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want to, make a closed pipe likewise with reed, and the socket of the instrument for cleansing nosebleeds is flat, uncovered; to which there is handle on it, with which you hold it in him, pouring oil or what you want from the sucks and the causes sucking.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are the ingredients for this recipe: take the fur of a beaver, white balsam, ginger, saffron, long pepper, spikenard, epithyme and rose-pinks, each in an ounce quantity. You will make an ointment from the juice of beetroot and cabbage, and these should be made into pills, and a pill should be tempered with tepid water, and it should be dropped into the nostrils of the patient who is lying down facing upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of warts on the ends of the nose:
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	A brown spot appears on the ends of the nose, and it grows larger in a few days unless the patient is given a cure.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And because of this, you should cut off that spot at its very beginning and remove it all.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place on the spot a cautery or burning medicine which will remain in place of the spot.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its growth has been delayed until it becomes hard and dark-coloured, with little feeling in it, then do not touch that spot with an iron, because such spots usually cause great harm to the person on whom they are.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the spot is soft and not dark-coloured, and its growth seems possible in all, then evacuate the patient and cut that spot out without fear, and cure the wound with something that will dry it and draw it together until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the stitching of the nose and the lips and the ears when their continuity is dissolved by a ulcer or a similar wound.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that whenever there is an accident of discontinuity in one of these cartilage structures, there are few who perform the operation successfully.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So, whenever for any cause, you find that there is a fresh ulcer with its blood, then bring together the two lips of the ulcer with a suture, and then cure it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the discontinuity of the wound are already separated and each has healed by itself, then cut off each part of the wound that is exposed until its blood issues.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then bring together the two lips with a suture and strengthen them, and over that sprinkle dragon's blood and fine-ground iron pyrites, and place on the powder some of the emollient plaster, or one of the other consolidative plasters, and let it lie for two days or three, and then take off the plaster and change the ointment, and let it lie until the scabs have fallen off by themselves, and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of the stitching is that you put together the discontinuity with needles as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or put together the discontinuity with pitch as we have told you and make known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips on the parts within.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many people have in the inner lips of their mouths hard warts resembling the skin of a hornet, and some are small and others large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So cut through the lips and open up each of those hard growths all around, and then fill the opening with finely-ground sage until the blood is stopped, and then wash it with wine vinegar and cure the wound with something that constricts, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the cutting of the meat which is attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Often there is on the gum a piece of meat attached which the ancients called albus, so you should suspend that with wax or have it held with tweezers and cut that from its root, and let the blood or sap run out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place on the spot finely-ground sage or other constrictive or astringent powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that meat returns, then cut it again and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason of teeth with an iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth on the inner and outer lips and between the gums are attached rough, sharp, black or green spots which corrupt the gum and make the teeth loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	So take a sharp knife and make an incision in the patient's mouth, and press on his head with your thumb, and scrape away the teeth where these rough spots appear, and remove their causes, which will resemble sand, so that no cause remains, and this will remove the blackness and the greeness and the other things until they are clean.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if what is in those at the beginning of the cause is good, so much the better; and if not, then do the cause again on those on another day, and on the second and on the third until it comes to the final point where you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have need of many razors of diverse forms and shapes according to your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore the razor with which the tooth is scraped from the inner lip is different from the razor with which it is scraped between the teeth, and these forms of razors should be prepared as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You should cure the tooth of its pain with every artifice and delay in complete eradication of it, for there is no cause that excuses it when it becomes visible as soon as it is eradicated, for it is a sublimated substance which causes excuse in its eradication.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But if the patient is forced to have that tooth eradicated, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, for many times pain deceives the patient and remains while the tooth is healthy, and you eradicate it and then the pain does not cease until the painful and sick tooth has been eradicated, for we have already seen this through operation of the barbarians.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So when you are certain which is the painful tooth, and that you know it, then cut around the circuit of the tooth with a chisel in which there is some vertidity, so that it is dissolved from the gum on all sides, and then maul it with your fingers or with fine pincers little by little until you concuss it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then put in it strong tenacles with great force or grip strongly, and press the head of the patient between your teeth which do not hurt him, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient major pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and put that down all around with ease and effort the removal of it in such a way as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is cracked or hollow, then fill that crack and tighten it with a subtle wire on the end so that it does not loosen when you apply your constriction to it while you are holding it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should open widely with scraping around the circuit of all parts of the gum and keep your strength so that you do not break it, and return to the patient for the malice which is greater than the first pain of him.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their audacity about the eradication of them, for they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times great sicknesses come upon men which are very difficult to loosen, and their teeth are very hollow or all rotten, or they extract it with some bones from the mandible as we have often witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Then the patient's mouth should be washed with wine vinegar or wine mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flows from the wound, as well as several vesicles, then sprinkle some powdered vitriol over the wound and if it does not stop, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the tweezers and thin tongs with which a tooth is extracted at the beginning should have a long shaft, a short handle, and be thick so that they do not bend when you are working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let the tweezers have such a thick shaft that when you are pulling with them they do not bend, and short shafts.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of iron from India descending from straight shafts, and at the ends of those there are teeth which fit into each other and extract by strong compression, and sometimes the ends of those are in the shape of a stork's beak, which is hooked, and they are of strong compression.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the extraction of teeth and of the dislocation of the bones of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth which is broken due to some cause, then you should apply a poultice over the site for one or two days until the site is softened; and then insert tweezers or tongs, the ends of which are like the beak of an owl called a stork, or hooked, in the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them are made flat like a file or an alfileter.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey you with these forceps or tongs, then you should cut above the gum and uncover all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called a lever, a small one of which the shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be short and thick at one end, and not bent so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if through this the gum is pierced, that is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at one end, in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it is triangular and very thin at the end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are helped with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the shape, properly following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which are used in the extraction of teeth; for help is done with this instrument which is like a wild ox, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular end bent or short, which should have some thickness, and not bent so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another wisdom is that the instruments for teeth are many and similar to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the wise and skilled artist in the art finds for himself materials according to what he understands from the operation and various illnesses; for there are illnesses to which the ancients did not give or assign proper instruments because of the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is broken, or if it is dislocated, then let the foot be treated in its place with what is convenient for him from the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the gums of teeth; and help yourself with a gesture of which this is the shape:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let there be some thickness added to it little by little, and let it be pressed or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or slip until the bone of all is softened; and then restore the site with suitable medicines for it.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a little dislocation in the bone, then scrape away that dislocation and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the cure of teeth which project above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form because of that shape, and especially when it happens to women, and especially to old women; therefore you should consider: if a tooth is adjacent to another tooth, and there is no possibility of lancing or lining it, then extract that tooth; but if it is not adjacent to another tooth, then you insert that tooth with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is like the jaw of a pig, and let it be made of iron from India, of very acute form.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your insertion with which you insert that be in turns for the hardness of the tooth, and let it not be broken by another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is worn away to a file, then file that with an iron file from India of which this is the shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let all of it be of iron from India, and the edge evenly; and let it be of very fine points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little in a few days with ease, so that no other tooth is broken or chipped.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line it at the edge, and scrape it away with some razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth of which one part is broken and lacerated the tongue, then let you smooth that until the roughness of that fracture is worn away and dulled, and let it be flattened so that the tongue is not cut or the speech impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of worn teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot bear what he eats, and you have treated that with astringent medicines, and your treatment has not availed, then because they do not close up, there is wire made of gold and not of silver; for silver becomes blackened and then dislocates after some days, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the wire be of such fineness and thickness according to the quantity which can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the restoration is that you take the wire and wrap it around the double of its width between two healthy teeth, and then that it grows with two tortuosity of the wire between two worn teeth, or if one or many, until it reaches the gum on the healthy tooth from the other broken part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then tighten the wire around the part from which you begin, and strengthen your work with ease and skill so that it is not worn.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your tightening of the wire around which you tighten the wire, so that the teeth do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then insert the ends of the excess wire with tweezers or tongs, and add those in every site with a gesture, and fold them and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the worn tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let it be as tight as possible like Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or jagged, tighten that or those with another wire in the same way at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two worn teeth, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or two return to their place after the falling of any of them in their sites, and they are restored as we have described, and they are worn again.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is not done except by wise artists.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it happens because of some cause of the bones of a cow, and it is made like a tooth in form, and it is placed in the site where the tooth failed, and it is tightened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the beginning of the disease that affects the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This condition that affects the tongue can be either innate or accidental and caused by a plague which has already become consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation on the patient is to open his mouth, lift up his head and elevate his tongue, then cut that nervous ligament according to the width through which the tongue has become detached from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knotting, and this is due to the consolidation of a plague, then you shall cut it with a knife and split it up to the width at which you split the ligament and the knot has been dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And take care that there is not made a fissure in the muscle of the jaw, and that you split up the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then the trace of the incision is to be washed with wine or vinegar, or with water, and a linen cloth is to be placed beneath the tongue; if there is any swelling which the patient has under his tongue on any night and it has not become consolidated in another way, then this should be done.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if blood flows, then apply powdered vitriol to the spot; but if it oozes out, then cauterize the spot with a cautery which is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And let that be treated with the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes beneath the tongue there occurs an abscess resembling a small onion, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function, and it grows larger as it fills up the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation is to open the patient's mouth facing towards the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a dusky colour or black, hard, and the patient feels nothing when you touch it, then do not touch that because it is deadly.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is white and moist, then put a knife in it and cut it all the way through; and if blood flows during the time of your operation, then put powdered vitriol on it so that the blood is staunched.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work and treat it as you would have done if there had been no bleeding; after washing it with vinegar and salt, let the wound be treated with the other treatment for this disease until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an abscess between two ears, and that which is found in the neck, and of the other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When there is swelling in the neck, it consists of glands which are united like cotton; these become inflamed and are named two ears, and when you treat them as we have said in the previous chapter, if they are not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dusky in colour, with little feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a red colour and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron because of the flow of blood; before you leave it, either you will draw it out or it will break open by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white colour, soft, and the root thin, then that is what should be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation is that you should consider before your operation whether the abscess has already been cauterized to completion or has decreased by any decrease; and then cause the patient, facing towards the sun, his head in your lap, to open his mouth, and the assistant taking hold of his hands press his tongue down below with a noble instrument, of which this is the shape:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or brass, and be fine with a point.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press the tongue down with that and the abscess is shown to you, and you put your instrument over it, then take a knife and stab that in the centre outward as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another which pierces through the tunics, and then cut that with an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is like forceps but its ends are bent inwards so that the orifice of each is towards the other, and it is sharp and made of iron, tempered and greased.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if that instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a knife of which this is the shape: It should be sharp on one side but blunt on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one vein, cut the other according to this method of cutting; and then have the patient guard his mouth with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if blood flows, guard it with water of a decoction of bark of pomegranate or of bay-leaf in the same way as for the causes which are constrictive so that the flow of blood is staunched; and then let that be treated in the same way as the others until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there occur in the neck other abscesses besides those two ears, and cut them according to what you see and say about the cutting of two veins equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And there was once treated a woman of an abscess which was found in the neck, which abscess was dusky in colour and had little feeling; it closed the neck of her throat, and the woman breathed with difficulty and was prohibited from eating or drinking water, and she had reached death if she had lived for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had grown so large that it had reached to her two ribs on either side.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then he cut it with a knife and took it out, and it came away as a great lump; then he opened the mouth of the patient, and pressed his tongue down, and then he put the knife in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then he cut a large piece out of it, and not much blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the neck of that woman was entirely closed up and she began to drink water immediately, and then he ate food; therefore he did not cease cutting that abscess many times over a long time, and afterwards another abscess occurred in place of it which he cut so that it is prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then he bled and cauterized the neck of her, then she died on the spot; and afterwards he walked about for a long time but I did not know what God did to her.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the cutting of the uvula when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When mucous matter flows from the uvula and it is abscessed and long, then that is called perpendicular; and if at its base it is thick and rounded, then it is called a buba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But if it is cured by what we said in the previous chapter and does not comply with your treatment, and afterwards you see that the abscess cauterized has become small and thin; and if it is towards the length, and is sanguineous, of dusky colour or black, and the patient feels nothing there, then fear that you touch the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the way that I have said of its whiteness and length, then make the patient open his mouth and press his tongue down with an instrument of which we have said the shape and put a knife in the new one, and draw that towards you and cut it with one of two instruments which are bent like a pair of tongs.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not cut anything except what is over the natural limit, for if you cut more, you will harm their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two holes, and heal inside what is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the incision, use trickery in his cauterization to reduce their fear, and the method of the cautery on him is simply a sharp instrument; then place the patient's head on your lap, and firmly press their tongue with the tool which we mentioned, then take the water which we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with some live charcoal, and pour it into the hollow of the instrument of which this is the shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the end of it be hollowed out like a spoon, and place the medicine inside as well as the concavity of the spoon, then place the instrument with the medicine over the wound; the patient should lie on their side so that saliva or mucous from their mouth runs down due to the intense medicine, so that none of it falls back into their throat and chokes them.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then hold the medicine in your hand, and squeeze it onto the uvula through a space of about half an hour until you see it become blackened and numbed by the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a needle and wrap it in the medicine at its end, then immerse the needle in the medicine and insert the needle with the cotton into the uvula until the cotton adheres to the uvula inside; do this as many times as needed until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then let it be for three or four days until it dries up and falls off.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the medicine needs to be reapplied, then do so; and after the cauterization, wipe the area around the uvula with a cotton swab dipped in a bowl of water, then cleanse it with whatever is in the bowl of water, then wash it with warm water, and dress the wound outside with ointment, and inside with unguents until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is more safe than incision and less frightening.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is healed by something more subtle than cauterization or incision, for it is cured by fumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic thistles, chamomile, broom and similar plants to those herbs, and put all of these ingredients, or some of them, into a bowl, then immerse them in boiling wine; let the bowl be warmed with decent heat, and there should be a hole in the middle of the bowl on which to place an hollow instrument made of silver or copper.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	Then insert the end into the patient's mouth so that the steam reaches their uvula through the tube, until the uvula is very foggy.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then do this several times until it is dry; and beware of doing this cure at the beginning of an apoplectic fit, for it would push the apoplexy too far into the brain, and you should not do this, but wait until the apoplexy has subsided.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed and fix a plug of wool at its end so that the patient's mouth is closed off; for the wool plug prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is beneficial to health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat, and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times something adheres in the throat or a thorn from the foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must extract what is visible from it, then press the tongue with an instrument in front of your eyes, so that you see what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food becomes digested in the stomach, for the cause of the throat often resides there; or the patient should swallow a piece of napkin or a ball of lettuce or a loaf of dry bread; or they could swallow a piece of dry sea sponge, and then chew it with their teeth, then they should swallow it, for when it reaches the spot in the throat where the thorns are, they will be driven out.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Or take an eel and chew it with their teeth, then swallow it, or take a pig's tail and chew it and spit it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if they are not driven out by those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this shape:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be bigger than a small needle, and at its end there should be a hollow which you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let the patient hold their head up, and beware of touching their bones in the throat, so that it does not move them or touch the thorn or anything else; then let the doctor hold his hand there.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient wants to insert it themselves due to their knowledge of the location of the cause and they push it in and pull out their hand according to the amount that is prepared for them, then it will be driven out.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood which adheres in the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood is stopped by what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and does not respond, then consider the throat of the patient when you press their tongue with the instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore if you see the blood, extract it with a small needle or a very thin and decently pointed one.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you are unable to extract it with that, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat; then place a hot iron in the hollow of the tube, and do this several times until the blood is dead and comes out of their throat; then the patient should abstain from all water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a pitcher full of warm water, and pour it into their mouth, then rinse their mouth with it; do not swallow any of the water, just spit it out after an hour has passed, then hold your hand over their mouth again for another hour, for when the blood is dead, it will come out immediately.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not driven out by what we have recommended, then smoke the patient's throat with camphor or asafoetida through the instrument which we recommended for smoking the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this until it falls.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another way to smoke it: take a bowl in which there are burning coals and the bowl should be covered with a lid that has a hole in it; then place the end of the instrument in the hole, and let the smoke out through the instrument; then hold the patient's mouth over the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the smoke has reached the blood, for the blood will fall immediately.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then do the smoking many times; and let the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salt causes and eggs, and drink no water; and by this regimen it will be driven out.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the shape of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the vein when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps except that there is some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the vein, and its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is gloved, in which it is tightened with a file, so that when we press for any reason, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the speech in the opening of abscesses and their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are of many kinds, according to what is remembered about them, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their puncturing and sectioning in two ways, of which one is by the species of abscesses themselves; and because we compress them by the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is by the places in which they occur in the body, for the abscess that occurs in the head is different from that in the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy part is different from that in the joint; and each of them is treated by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some abscesses there are which must not be punctured but rather matured in the pus in them, or completed.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses there are which must not be punctured when they are tough, and not matured according to their complement, as well as abscesses which are near the joints; for an abscess which comes near a joint prolongs its being in that it affects the ligaments or nerves of that joint, through which there is contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay its puncturing when it is mature it will harm the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, and one must not let it mature, but rather to puncture it, so that the pressure on it may not be prolonged and it elongated to the parts within the buttocks, and a fistula made, or that it be done in its term so that it will not be healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you must know the hour of the puncturing of the abscess, and that is when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it is mature when there is the ceasing of the pain and the fever, and moreover the lessening of the heat and the pulse, and the acute feeling of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you should know the puncturing to occur in the place where there is pus below the abscess, and also pus coming from the healing of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncturing is always through the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the place of the tendons, of the cords of the nerves, of the grooves; and, at last, in all places alike in which there is no reflection; for in those where it is reflected, use puncturing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let its puncturing be so that its digestion is confirmed according to its complement, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, the course of the pus of it is prolonged and much filthiness comes from it, and moreover its lips are hardened and its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses are punctured according to the latitude of the flesh or body by reason of necessity, or according to that by which the member needs.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should administer a small puncturing in small abscesses, and in large abscesses great puncturing and ample or many sections according to the diversity of the sizes of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And some are of abscesses in which the vein is hollowed out and cut into, when it is made thus so that bread and made is in term that it already is, as well as that which occurs in trops of dubelec and of buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those some are that are cut into with three angles; and of those is the one in which it is cut as the shape of a leaf of mirtle, as well as the abscesses of the angle-makers.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those some are in which round section and lunar section is administered, and like those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that to which there is not head as with its abscesses superficial, you should puncture it with superficial puncturing, or plane only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, you should puncture it and not be afraid to draw out all the pus in that hour; having drawn from it a part, then plug up the abscess for another day, and moreover draw a larger part, and do this many times according to degree until it is hole-gutted.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of cold nature, or woman in labour, or small child, or old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved by the egress of pus, and very often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore keep this chapter with great caution, and moreover your puncturing in which you puncture these abscesses, you should wash the plagues and consider then if the plague of the abscess is little, or a flat section, then you administer lambs' wool or old linen; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncturing are many, then you must pause a moment in each piercing until they come out.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the vein is cut into or hollowed out in its circuit, then you must complete it with old linen or thread made from cloth of lamb's wool, as well as when you have drawn pans or roots, without moisture; and plug up that for the third day; and moreover process it and heal it by what means of enguentz within that it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if blood flow occurs in the hour of your operation, then you should administer water and wine mixed in which lamb's wool is dipped, and pause that over the place of the blood flow many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the blood flow persists, then you must administer remedy and healing, and powder which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the winter time, and the place of the abscess is the place of many nerves, then you should dip wool in wine and oil cautery, and pause that over the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you should pause wool wetted with water and oil or wine and oil, and all that be rubbed within that it is the third day as we have said, and moreover you unbind the abscess and wash that and administer in its healing what to it befits within that it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And that is what is necessary for the knowledge of the healing of abscesses generally, but according to the way of distinction I have said of each abscess in what manner its way of cure is by chapters singularly.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of section of abscesses which come in the vein of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the vein of the head small abscesses, and they are of species of knots which contain membranes that they are to them made; and their species is many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of them there are bumps, and some contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those some contain moisture similar to dust, and like it; and of those some are scaly, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all these, and in the extraction of them there is not fear, as you must extract those it does not contradict artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you expect those with an instrument, the shape of which comes to light, which is called a trocar, while you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if that which is contained is humidity, then cut that with a section according to length by superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the section of the line from B to G. Therefore when the humidity is evacuated, then you should open that which contains the humidity, and not leave any cause behind, for if any remains, it will return.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then submerge the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, and if not, in water and salt; fill that with it and let it remain for another day, for with that you will腐蝕腐蝕 everything that is left of that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then apply Egyptian ointment to the wound a second and third time if you need to, while ensuring that there is no cause of that membrane left; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains a fatty nodule, then you should cut that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the form of a cross, and cut off the edges between the two lips of the section and cut that all the way through, and use your strength in pulling out the membrane which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your bowstring causes you difficulty, then do what I told you at first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do with the suppurating abscess in terms of section and cure according as we have told you; and a section on a suppurating abscess is easier, for it contains little blood and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times there are some of these abscesses in the head in certain people with which there is no humidity at all; the cause of that is when one has struck an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess like dumb, rough, white stone, which could not be pierced, and if one hits it, it hurts.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But with the other accidents of abscesses in the head there is not this matter, as with the abscesses that come to the heads of children and from the roots of the ears; but the section of these should be superficial sections.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And make the opening of those from their lowest part so that the body is separated from the putridity at its lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then cure those with whatever is appropriate for that cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .XLI.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of sections of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and armpits and angles; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those which occur in the neck, and some are engendered between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own membrane, and similarly with the nodules and abscesses of the head as we have related.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofula are many, for some are stony, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant and do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore with that which you see of good disposition in the Touching, of which the colour of what is manifest is close to the colour of the skin, and is swollen throughout all parts, and is not annexed by the nerves of the neck or the veins or the bowstring, and is not deep, so that you open that with a superficial cut from above down from the part above the body from the line of G. between the line of B., and scorch that all over, and cut off its edges from two lips of the skin with an incision, or with many incisions if you have need of them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and pull that out little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And be careful that your hand not move with the incision or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to be cut; for if you cut a vein or bowstring and forbid yourself from your operation, then apply to the wound vitriol triturated or other powders which stop fluxes of blood, and tightly bind the wound, and let that remain until the acuteness of the abscess is relaxed and the wound softened and begins to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is abstained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then inquire with your finger whether any cause of the other small scrofula is left; therefore cut those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, so that you do not cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Beforehand so that you hold that with strong folded cloth and let that remain until it falls down without doing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old dung which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut that scrofula all the way through, then so that you press the two lips of the wound and suck it at once so that no superfluity remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, so that you intend to cut its root, and open that and administer cauterization and what has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the scrofula which contains humidity, pierce that with a superficial piercing where you see to you the place of its maturity, and make the piercing of that which is lowest in the body as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer cauterization, and apply ointment and similarly to those for so that it corrodes what is left of the corrosion.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Then when you see the wound already cleaned, then cure that with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .XLI.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of section of the pustule of the suppurating abscess within the gullet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They have not yet seen this section in the pilhot, and there has been no man in our land who that has done that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the term of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But with men having scurvy, so that the extraction of the pilhot is avoided, for by that not being done there is not made ease for so that all the veins and the major nerves of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But with those who have suppurating abscesses in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the illness is not in the throat, so use the section of pilhot to avoid the peril which is done by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So therefore when we want that, let us cut the pilhot beneath three circles of the circles of the pilhot, or four with small section for its breadth in him which is between two circles for quantity, and the section is in pharynx, not in the cartilage, and that place is appropriate to section, for it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood from there are drawn.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the patient is pallid, so that he extends the skin of the gullet with an incision, and then split the skin so that it arrives to the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause from those.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then cut the septum according as we have recommended; and it is signified about the section of the gullet by the flame which is from there exhaled and by the breath from there abstained.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Thus when the hour arrives in which piercing is feared, cut two lips from the edge of the wound and sew them up to the cartilage only.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicines that promote the growth of new flesh where it is healthy.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Bukasi says that the gist of what we have narrated is simply that some people have seen patients who have suffered from this type of abscess and the patient has died, and the flesh has become necrotic, and some try to insert a tube into the glottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound to save them from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason he commanded that the wound be left open until the evil of the illness is consumed, and its evil lasts three days; then afterwards, he commanded to sew up the wound, and heal it once it is healthy.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant held a hot cloth to his throat and inserted the end of a cane into his glottis, and I was called to treat him; then I discovered the abscess and found blood which had oozed from the abscess.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then he confessed that he hadn't pierced any vein or artery; rather, the pus had come out of the abscess and I treated it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the servant didn't feel any pain except when he spoke; then after a few days he returned to his usual state.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the glottis there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of an incision on an abscess which occurs in the exterior glottis and is called a glottal hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This hernia of the glottis is a large abscess according to the colour of the body and occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	The natural type is incurable.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental type occurs in two ways: one is like fatty lumps and the other type is like an abscess caused by arterial congestion; there is danger in that.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not use a needle on it unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And examine it and investigate it with your finger, and if you find it like a fatty lump and not suspended by any vein, then pierce it in the same way as nodules; extract its contents along with the skin and bursa; otherwise, probe throughout its entire extent, and treat the area with something that promotes healing until it is healthy.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of incisions on nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Nodules have different types and I have already discussed all of their types in Division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should also know the difference between a nodule and an ulcer if you are in doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that an ulcer is hot and painful with a violent fever until the ebullition of the superfluity ceases; then when the fever, pain, and heat cease, it is complete putrefaction.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a nodule does not have heat or fever or pain, and it contains the lion's tooth which is a proper sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the colour of the body; its beginning is with a boil and it is caused in the same way as a boil, whether major or minor; and there are two types, either fatty and containing humidity, and the colours of humidity vary, as I discussed in Division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to treat a nodule, open it and probe its beginning with the instrument that is called an introducer, according to the form that will appear in the chapter that follows.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the way to probe abscesses and all nodules: take this instrument and insert it into the moist part which you find in the abscess, and rotate your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the edge.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then close your hand around it according to the size of the abscess; then extract the introducer and examine what has oozed from it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the pus is flowing out, whatever its colour, then you shall pierce it superficially as I have said regarding other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no pus flowing from the introducer, then you shall know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it by piercing in a cross shape according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	And if it is fatty and dry, then you shall dry it by cutting the sac of the nodule.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is ruptured in the operation, then it is not possible to extract that pus; rather, many times it goes back inside, and then you shall extract it in small amounts until it doesn't go back inside for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if from it anything goes back inside, little or a lot, the nodule returns according to the cause.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that anything small goes back inside, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place your hand over it so that there is no abscess; then heal it by another treatment until it is healthy.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large nodule, then cut its two lips and heal it with that which makes it grow inside.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if there is a pulsating vein on it, or a non-pulsating one, then bind and fill the area with bloodletting that is mild and let it flow for two or three days until the wound stops ebullition and the blood; then return to piercing where it has ruptured.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of necessary instruments in incision and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Those are the forms of introducers; they are of three types: one is large, one medium, and one small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of a large introducer is thus:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	And the form of a medium introducer is thus:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	And the form of a small introducer is thus:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, brass, or extreme tips tipped evenly so that the instrument pierces the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experienced introducers and one is called a probe.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three types: large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of an experienced large introducer is thus:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	And the form of a medium probe is thus:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	And the form of a small probe is thus:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	And take care to insert the introducers according to the type of nodule, and whether it is fatty or humid.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And do not pierce around, large, long, in the same way as large needles with which the stitches are sewn; they are made of ram citrine, or brass, or iron, and the needles are when they are made of ram citrine.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made the experiments of black feathers, which are agreed that through these there be openings in the cavities of which are reflections, that are reflected by their levity to those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three kinds, for some of them are long, and others smaller, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its tightness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The shape of the great experiment of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The shape of the smaller experiment of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The shape of the small experiment of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the hunchbacks are of many kinds, for some of them are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three kinds: large, few and small.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their bodies are unciform, and they are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some have two curves, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a large simple hunchback, its shape is:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The shape of a small simple hunchback:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a rare simple hunchback, its shape is:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The shape of a large-bodied hunchback:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The shape of a small-bodied hunchback, its shape is:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a rare-bodied hunchback, its shape is:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a large hunchback having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The shape of a small hunchback having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a rare hunchback having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a large hunchback having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a small hunchback having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a rare hunchback having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which they are dried and cut out the nodes and the apostemes, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and rare.
Forma de scapel gran:	The shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	The shape of a small scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The shape of a rare scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those with which the section is made are acute and the other ends are not acute, and they are not placed in such a way, but that it is made gently in the scraping of the nodes for fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and by these the patient is healed and a little peace is given by the burning which gives peace to the excoriation of the aposteme.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the shapes of bandages, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and rare, as well as with plasters.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large bandage:
Forma de magda migier:	The shape of a small bandage:
Forma de magda pauc:	The shape of a rare bandage:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of linen and are similar to a web with which is made a splint.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the pointed end punctured with spathium obscured and in that which runs to the sides within and without, when you will, as well as with vision.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of spathiums, which are obscured between the fingers for fear of piercing the apostemes and not perceiving the patients, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and rare.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the shapes of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of woundings with which is abstained the flow of blood, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and rare; their shapes are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citron wood, round with no length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And if these species of woundings are great, small and rare, that by them you abstain the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when first there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use these to abstain blood in any part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy parts, as well as in the spots of the hands and feet, and in the spots of the arms, and of the breasts and of the belly and of the armpits, and like their spots fleshy moist.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some are made of those instruments other small ones like slices of fruits according to this form; by which blood is abstained when it is done by phlebitis, or for fear of cutting a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of the breasts of men which are like women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some men's breasts are swollen because of the habit of sleeping with their bellies pressed against something, and then they are swollen, and their breasts are like women' breasts, and Roman apostemes.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for him who eats that, when you pierce those with lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. to the line of G., and then scrape away all the thickness, and then fill the wound with medicine of embodiment, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, and cure what is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its size as well as in women, then let it be split into two parts below its sides, with two sections similar to a lunar figure, of which each contains the other according to its end, with the major line containing the minor one according to this form from the line of B. to the line of G. And then scrape away the cord which is between the lips of the wound, and the pingueza, and administer what we have said about the sewing and the powders that are necessary in the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the piercing of what there is to be pierced for the uneasiness of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then let it be filled with a cut of cotton submerged in corrosive ointment and leave that wound until it corrodes what is roms of the gray one, and then cure what is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of piercing of apostemes that come from below the tittles.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those apostemes that come from below the tittles are of the species of scrophulas, hard, which contain one membrane that is dry.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those some contain moisture; and of those which contain moisture let them be pierced with lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. to the line of B. And when all that is evacuated which is in the aposteme of the pus, then fill it with cotton wool and wash the wound on the other day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then let the cotton be worn out and healed with ointment convenient to that, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the aposteme of the species of nodes and of scrophulas, then let them be split over that as we have said in the section about scrophulas.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extended into that which causes burning pain, then administer in it cautery according to what we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of section of apostemes that happen by artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the artery is broken and the vein is consolidated which is over that, then let many woundings happen to the aposteme by the nerves: for when the aposteme is by artery it is long aggregated in the fibre of the body; and when pressed by the ties of the nerve, it feels in the body as if it were stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through the vein is returned to the front of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And an ulcer on this boil is an error, and especially in those that are below the armpits, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great, therefore one must avoid its cure with iron, and that which is in the extremities, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But for that which is through inflammation of the orifice of the artery, split in the long section in the neck; and then open the section with nails and the artery, and free the tissues within so that it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place a needle over it and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to feel pain in extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then puncture the place that is between two tendons with a spatula so that blood comes out of it, and the ulcer is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the tendons fall away; and then cure that with convenient ointment until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an ulcer through a section of a vein, then you must hold with your hand what is possible of the ulcer with the tendon, and then insert the needle below the place which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be double thread in that so that you extract that from the other side, and then tie the ulcer with a good tendon according to what I have told you in the tendon of grapevines with two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert the needle below all of the ulcer opposite to the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the ulcer in the middle of it so that when it is dried up you cut away the superfluity of the tendon, and leave what is tied to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place upon it powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with leaches and ointment until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the ulcer which occurs through twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	So when there is an ulcer in the artery and in the vein, and similarly there is an ulcer in the nerves through their impact or through similar excess,
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in places of the helpers or the heel, or in any place in which there are pained joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a grave ulcer, and it is similar to the color of the rest of the body, and in its major parts there are no pulse beats from them, and when it is pressed with force, the patient feels like he is stunned.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an ulcer accumulated in the front of the body, and for that reason it is below the tendon, and it is pained in all parts and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore of those that are in the joints one should not think it will be cured with iron, for it will quickly cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But he who is on the head or on the forehead let him split the tendon with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small ulcer, then cut that with knives and extract it from its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you suspend it with a hook and scrape that, and then dress that wound; and attach the bandage with sutures, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter .11.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of section of an ulcer which occurs in the jaw that occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It happens to some men many times in their bellies and in the other parts of their bodies from those whose names are called funguals for their similarity to mushrooms, of which the roots are subtle and the tops are large; and already the lips of those are twisted, and it is in those who are small, and it is in those who are much magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in his belly there were two which were similar to mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of fine roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were inverted and split, and moisture ran from that all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I opened up those and found in one in the feet 18 inches. and the other 6 inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation at its opening is that you consider if the patient is humid, and if the color of the ulcer is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you open it up with a spatula lengthwise, and let there be cauteries in the fire, for many times after the section of it is expelled much blood; and if you see the blood, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient fearful and anxious, guard against opening with iron; but take a recently made lead-tipped nail, and tighten on that ulcer, the manner of which we have told; and let there be that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then tighten in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore do not cease to tighten the large lead needle on the ulcer until it is cut off and falls away by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the ulcer is of thick roots, then in its section there is some cause for fear and for dread, and especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you split its top, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure that until the bandage is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And guard against opening an ulcer which is of dusky color, of little feeling, of weak protection, for that one is full of cancers.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come again with reminder of tooth.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter .22.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of outstanding cure of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Eminence of the navel is made for several reasons; or through fissures of the abdomen which is over the belly, and there of it the tissue or intestine according to where it goes into other ruptures; or by blood which flows from artery or vein according to what is in front, or by constriction narrowed on it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is through fissure of the abdomen and by moisture of the tissue, then the color of the ulcer is similar to the color of the body; and there is little pain in it, and then appears from diverse locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by passage of the intestine, then the location of that with respect to what we have told you is very violent, and when you press that with your fingers there is hiding, and then it returns; and it is very strong in it, and it is magnified much because of the intake of bath and violent work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is by moisture, then there is little pain and it is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is constricted, nor is burned.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is by blood, then with these signs appears the ulcer declining to blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is by flesh, then there is grave ulcer, large and hard, and it is made according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is by constriction, then the touch of it is painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider if the eminence of the navel is by blood from artery or vein, or through constriction; then there is a prohibition against its cure, for in that one is fear and dread as we taught in the chapter in which we said about ulcers by artery and by vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	Here is my translation: "And if the protrusion of the navel is by the intestine or by the hernia, then you should order the patient to hold his breath and be standing upright; and then sign with your finger around the entire navel, and order him to lean forward between your hands on his chest, and then surround with a wide sponge around the navel where you have signed with your finger; and then extend half of the abscess to the parts above with a large needle; and then bind around with strong thread or with linen in the decent manner of binding."
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then cut the membrane of the extended abscess over the ligament and insert your finger into that place and seek the intestine; and if you have caught it or held it by the ligament, then you extract it quickly and push the intestine back inside the abdominal cavity.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have caught the hernia, then take hold of it with a needle; and pierce the superfluities of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put on them two strong threads and insert the two needles around the circuit which you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making the needles penetrate; and then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and let the flesh extend and fall by itself; or pierce what is sottile and let it be healed with water that is warm enough to heal the wound.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protrusion of the navel is from meat in him or from humidity, then you should reduce the abscess as we have said and draw out the blood or humidity which you find in it, and then heal that with water that covers and hardens the spot.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53:
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure for a hernia.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the kind of hernia and how it is healed by medicines, and that it is to be cured by iron if it is not ulcerated; we have also said where a hernia is generated and what are its precautions for curing it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia can be in a place where its removal is possible, like one in the breasts or in the groin and similar places of the limbs, and they are inclined to extract all of it, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, then one should not touch it, for I have not seen anyone healed of such nor have I heard of anyone being healed.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is that you precede and let the patient fast and purge black bile sometimes, and then bleed him if there is found a full pulse.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he is located for operation, and then push in nails into the wound which cover that; and then hollow out every part with a good saw without piercing any root of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow and do not cut it off quickly, and squeeze out the places and wipe away the clotted blood with your hand or with an instrument by which it is possible for you to do so.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it causes you distress of clotted blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood is stopped and then heal that with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54:
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, about the kinds of dropsy from water and the signs of each kind, about its cure by medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the kind of althitas alone, and it is not approached by iron to the kind of tympany or to the kind of hyposarka, for these are lethal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this kind of dropsy timpany with medicines and it does not respond to your medicine, then consider that if the patient already has weakness or another illness of dropsy, like one in the chest or abdomen, then beware from healing him with iron, for there is fear over that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient with abundant strength and there is no other illness in him but dropsy alone, and he is not an infant or old, then the manner of operating on him is that you elevate the patient between your hands and the minister then squeeze his abdomen with his hand, pushing out the water to the part below the navel, and then take a pointed sponge according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp parts long, with an acute end like a sponge; but it should have in it some small brevity bit by bit, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the hernia and that you apply it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from parts of the bowels, for then you should with the section lengthen the navel by the quantity of three digits to the part below on the right of him over the abdomen.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is from illness of the liver, then your section should be left of the navel by three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if its generation is from phlegm, then your section should be on the right.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your section be over the side where the patient wants to lie so that the superfluities do not run to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce with the instrument through the membrane and insert into that section and elevate your hand with the sponge between the membrane and the abdomen, and then squeeze it out; and if the quantity of a fingernail or more runs out.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the abdomen so that the sponge reaches the desired place, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and is like a tube of fine silver; it is made of silver or brass or lead, to which at the lower end there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is split according to the manner of a feather, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it there is an eye, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately falls upon the instrument and evacuates the water in a momentary quantity, for if you evacuate from that more than what covers it in the moment, then the patient dies by resolution of his animal spirit or accedes to him five-fold which is near death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from that according to the quantity of the strength of him and according to what signifies to you the dispositions of the strength of his pulse and of his goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument and remove the water which causes it for as soon as it is removed the membrane which holds it, you have recommended to pierce that according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then return the instrument on the other day if you see the patient tolerating that, and extract from the water a little quantity and do that for several days over fear, and beware of error so that it does not burst with too much water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient and let out great quantity of water, then heal that with burial in dry sand, and move sweat upon it in a bath, and keep him away from the sun for long time; and heal that with desiccative medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the liver and the gallbladder are next to the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Here is chapter 55.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment of children who are born with a blockage in the urethra.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes children are born from the womb of their mother, and the foreskin is not pierced (or it is drawn back tightly or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore one should pierce him immediately after he is born with a very sharp spit, according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place in the foreskin a subtle lead nail and ligature it, and let him be for three days or for .iiii.three.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, he should be squashed and urine; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the spot, will not harm this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But he of whom the foreskin is tight, should be treated with a lead nail as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those of whom the foreskin is not in its place, are weak, and this cause is because of that one, which is born and the foreskin is drawn towards the end of the penis so he cannot urinate to the sides inside, until he lifts the penis with his hand to the sides above; and there is no generation for him, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be laid on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with violent extraction, and insert the head of the head of the penis of the foreskin's location with a sharp spit, as it is split with a feather, or that you scrape some part, so that the skin of him comes like the head of the penis and that the foreskin falls into its proper place according to how one wishes.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware in your operation of flowing blood, for sometimes this happens; and place on him that which stops the blood, and heal the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of whitening which happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and of corruption and blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Sometimes this whitening happens in the penis and it is an excess of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not-malignant, one that you suspend with a subtle ointment and cut out all of it; and then place on that spot which is submerged in Egyptian unguent; and let him, cure with the ointment diafinicon until he is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the whitening is malignant, of pale color, then one should administer cautery over its incision and over its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the whitening is in the foreskin of the head of the penis and not circumcised, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then one should treat the whitening which is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you heal that outside, because when you heal that both the foreskin will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And sometimes it happens in the testicles and in the foreskin blackness and corruption, then one should excavate all that which is blackened and wants to be corrupted or that which is already corrupted; and then wash over that with water, which is ground from peel of pomegranate and ground and sifted.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then heal that with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if blood flows, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because lunar cautery has two uses together, that is for blood flow and for the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed all at once, then one should insert into the meat of the foreskin a lead cannula so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	On the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis  (and this adhesion does not happen except in that one of whom the foreskin is loose, and on him circumcision is not required; and when it happens by wound or by pustule), then one should cut with a blunt spit until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to pull them off painfully, then one should cut with a spit some cause of the head of the penis and foreskin, and therefore is because the foreskin when it is subtle, easily pierces the penis more subtly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a subtle cloth which is wet in warm water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let him be healed with styptic wine until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children and the cure of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure of continence like the other wounds: but however it is from our operation and our will, and its use is more properly in children; therefore we should assign to it better operation and by a longer way lose less health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore we say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision in any of their free ones, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which cause is that we have observed the greatest part of the artisans and barbers using circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use adhesive with pitch and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already proven all these manners and not found better purification with forceps, with adhesive with pitch that in purification with the nail, because sometimes the thread escapes above, because the thread of the foreskin is on two tunics, and the tunic pushes from below, and it is very likely to another incision and sure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And with purification which is made by aphexin, and it is digital, of which the sabatiers use, is not secure the incision of the extremity of the male member, because it often enters in its wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, very often you will get iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the thread of the child is short by nature, and sometimes it happens in such a way that he has not needed purification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But of the purification which is made by forceps and adhesive with pitch, the goodness, I have discovered through experience that the forceps are equally proportional incision, therefore that the acuteness which is above is also with the acuteness which is below; and then when you measure your hand so proportionally two acuteness, and insert according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the pitch which contains the figure containing the thread of the penis from all sides, with which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down mostly if he is one of those who understand a little, and do not but that you tie the pitch in his penis only, and then let him lie for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him cheer up in all that way which is possible for you by receiving his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then have the patient lie between your knees, fully exposed and not covered; hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see them or any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then insert your hand into the vagina and blow into the cervix, and draw out whatever is inside so that the head of the cervix comes out, and then clean it of any dirt that has accumulated there.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then tie the marked spot with a length of thread, and then knot it tightly below that, and push your finger into the opening of the ligament, holding it in place with a good grip, and cut between the two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then lift the cervix gently and pull out the head of the cervix; and let the blood flow slowly, for that is better; and put powder on it, and on top of the powder place a cloth that has been soaked in rose water mixed with fresh cow's milk; and leave that on overnight; and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for cleaning, this is their shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one end of the forceps be blunt and the other pointed, so that the nerve in the claw is not cut; and let the length of both jaws be equal to the length of two fingers joined together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in cleaning is that often the cervix itself escapes completely, or part of it escapes from the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must carefully insert your finger into the aperture and push it forward until you feel resistance, then insert the forceps according to its equal length.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then grab it with a hook and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if it has passed three days, and the swelling under the cervix remains, then you must insert it so that the apostome gives way, and cut it out easily, and insert it according to how it is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the cervix, for it will not tolerate that.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And so treat that with the powders we have recounted in the treatise on powders, to promote healing.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut beyond measure, and obeys the rules above, then it will be fine.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But treat that with what we have said earlier, so that it heals.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter .LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction caused by a stone, or by congealed blood, or by swelling or by growths; and it is treated similarly to what we have said about treatments in the division above.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and retention of it is due to a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then have the patient bend forward over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then have the patient's feet placed on something above his back, and have him arch his back as far as is comfortable for him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is compressed and the stone is expelled through the openings behind it, so that the urine is passed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by what we have said earlier and the cause of it is vehement upon the patient, then have extraction performed on him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: Let it be made of silver and let it be hollow like a reed made of aspen wood with a slender hole in its tip, about the thickness of a long finger, to which there is attached a slender cane about the length of a palm and a half, to whose end there is attached a hollow cane.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of removing urine with it is to take the thread and soak it in the end of the syringe in wool or cloth with a good grip; and insert the ends of the thread into the opening at the tip of the syringe, and with the forceps, if there is any excess caused by the wool, but otherwise insert it into the cane with force. Then push the syringe in with force and with the white of an egg.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And have the patient lie down on his back, and open his bladder and cervix with oils, and olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the cervix; then bend the cervix above at the point of the embelic; and squeeze the syringe within that; and squeeze it until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient be bent so that the cause is vacated, and not done according to this order, but the part in which there is tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then slowly pull out the thread with the wool, for the urine will suck up the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then pull it out and let the urine be passed through treatment; use the syringe, do not stop using it until the bladder is evacuated and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of catheterization of the bladder with a syringe and similar instruments that are suited to it.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there occurs in the bladder ulceration or apostome, or congealed blood in it, or swelling is constricted, and you want to distil waters and medicines into it, then have it done with an instrument called a syringe, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	Except that in its tip there is no hole, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it are three holes: two on one side, thus alternately.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In its beginning there is a hollow place, in which it is inserted, and let the amount of fluid opilate that, when a cause is added to it, then it is drawn up; and when it is expelled, with it is expelled, and when it is pushed out from far within, according to how the syringe is pushed with the hand that holds it.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to inject fluid into the bladder, insert the tip of the syringe into the opening, and push with that which is pushed from above, for the fluid is drawn up into the hollow of the syringe.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the tip of the syringe into the cervix according to what we have said about the syringe; and squeeze the fluid with that which is squeezed, for that fluid will pass at once into the bladder, and the patient will feel it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of the hollow needle with which the bladder is catheterized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And let it be made of silver or brass, the tip of which is like a little feather, and below that there is a cane.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder and place in it the fluid that you want to inject into the bladder; then insert it between two with a strong ligature with a thread, and heat that fluid over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the tip of the needle into the cervix.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then squeeze your hand over the bladder with the fluid with firm pressure until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a ring; and perforate it all around its circumference; then insert a strong thread through those holes, so that it is wound tightly; and add the ring thus made as you would also add a ball, by pushing it in where you want to inject the fluids, oils, and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then you hold that in the instrument and do with it as you would have done with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the fluid reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the Extraction of Stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already spoken in the division of the species of stone and its cure by medicine, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have spoken of the stone for which cauterization is used, and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I have given an explicit account and summary of this.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and of its signs are that the urine which is passed from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and appears to be sand; and the patient grinds his loins, and often passes water, and is frequently erect; and with this there are pains in many parts of the body.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the cure is easier in children who have reached the age of 14; and it is difficult to cure the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young it may be cured by cauterization, which is suitable for them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if the stone is large and its cure more difficult, then it is otherwise.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore when we come to the cure of this, it is advisable at the beginning that we cleanse the patient by cauterization in order to open up the passage which is in his intestines; for this passage sometimes blocks the expulsion of the stone as a result of the examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then let him be placed on his feet and made to move about and jump up and down in order that the stone may descend into the bottom of the bladder, or that it may drop out by itself at some other place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then let the patient lie on his back with his thighs drawn up and his legs bent under him, in order that the whole bladder may be made to decline towards its lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then let him void all of this.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the stone in the passage, then immediately cauterize it there.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it does not come out by itself, then let you smear your left forefinger with oil (if the patient is a child) or your middle finger (if he is grown up), and insert that into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And push the stone out by means of your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually draw it into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that with your finger and expel it through the lower opening by means of the place where you cauterized.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand; and order another assistant that with his right hand to extend the scrotum upwards, and with his other hand to massage the cord which is below the scrotum in the place where you are cauterizing.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a piece of sponge in the passage, the shape of which is as follows:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut through it where it is between the anus and scrotum, not in the middle part, but on the left side of the scrotum; and let the cauterization be over that stone, and let your finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse so that the opening outwards may be wide and the opening inwards narrow according to the amount of stone which can be expelled without difficulty, and not larger, for fear it should close up again.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And take note that some stone has corners and edges, in consequence of which the expulsion is made difficult thereby.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And some are like a onion, round and easy to expel.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if it is one of those which have corners and edges, adjust the cautery in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not expelled, then let you press on that, or that you press upon it gently with a suitable instrument, the end of which is curved, and do not allow it to slip out; or insert below it a thin instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot reach it, then let you enlarge the hole a little, and if you see any bleeding, bind up that tightly with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if it is larger than one, then at the beginning push your finger towards the mouth of the bladder, and then insert a small instrument into it; and act in the same way if there are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is foolishness to insert it with a wide incision, for two causes may occur: either it will stay there or it will cause continuous discharge of urine, because the passage has not healed completely.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But let the assistant expel it once it is pushed out, or force it in the fracture with pincers in order to extract that into pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore when you have finished your operation, then fill the wound with cotton wool soaked in aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it up tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that a cloth which has been dipped in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, in order that the wound may heal quickly.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then bind up the patient over his navel, and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened it, wash the wound with water and oil, and then cure that with ointment of diaphenicon and ointment of diabasilicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there occurs an abscess, hard and ulcerous, and this is like a congelation of the blood in the bladder so that passage of urine is prevented  (and this is called by some the exit of blood through the urethra), then let you insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it becomes putrid and rotten it will provoke corruption of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sweet wine, water and salt, and apply all remedies which seem suitable for its cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the whole of the cure let you press both scrota and apply remedies which are laid on the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and lodged in the middle of the urethra so that passage of urine is prohibited, then cure it by cauterizing there, for troops have often been seen to be cured by this cure; and I have also tried it, and it has been found effective, and you should use a piercing instrument of iron, the shape of which is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	triangular in cross-section, pointed, set in a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a hammer and hit the urethra below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing with ease so that the piercing instrument reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the piercing instrument with your hand on that small stone little by little, and pierce through it so that you make the passage on the other side as well, for urine is immediately expelled.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand over that which is broken from the stone in the passage of the urethra, for it is clenched and the passage is closed by the urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not equipped for some cause which prevents it, then strike a hammer below the stone and another hammer above it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then close upon that stone in the urethra between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then you extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then cut the ligament and clean the clotted blood that has accumulated in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to cut the ligament of the gallbladder below the stone, but so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other ligament above, for when the gallbladder is removed and the stone comes out, the bladder returns to its place and the wound heals.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you tie the gallbladder above, you must lift the bladder up to the opening above, or it will return to its original position and the wound will not heal as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61:
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones are rarely formed in women.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if a stone is found in one of them, then its cure is difficult and prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of these is that the woman is very young.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is willing to reveal if she has had sexual intercourse or is married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a woman skilled in this art, especially one who performs the operation with her hands.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the site of incision for removing a stone in women is distant from the location of the stone; therefore, it requires a long incision, and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if necessity compels you to do this, then know that you must take a female doctor who is very skilled, and she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you lack such a woman, then seek a subtle and skilled male doctor, or present a female midwife who is experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then have her present and command him to do everything that you tell him, from the examination for the stone to the beginning; the purpose of this is to determine whether the woman is a virgin, then have her insert her finger into the anus and feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if she finds it, hold it back with her finger, and then command him to insert his hand into her.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina and feel for the stone; then have her pause her left hand over the bladder and press it firmly with good grip.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if she finds it, then have her gradually push the stone from the opening of the bladder to the parts below until it comes out at the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then insert your finger into the vagina above the root of the thigh from whichever side it is found, and center the stone in that part, and his finger should not be pushed back by the stone as he holds it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at first; then insert your finger into that incision and if he feels the stone, then widen the incision according to the size of the stone he knows will come out.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that there are many kinds of stones: some are small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and they have projections.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you should know how many types there are so that you can indicate what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see bleeding, apply crushed vitriol to the wound and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your operation and finish removing the stone.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare the instruments which you use in extracting stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see bleeding and know that the flow of blood is from an artery that has been cut, then you must pause powder over the wound and bind it tightly with a bandage; do not repeat this; remove the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will surely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of the bleeding has ceased and the wound is closed, then return to your operation and finish removing the stone.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62:
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for hernia in women.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane below the diaphragm that contains the bowels; it is named ciphax.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases it is in the lower part of the peritoneum that nature prepares it in the part of the bowels where there are other bowels; and it is the diaphragm below the white membrane that we have said earlier, and it is not anything else but hernia.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the bowels, because this matter flows into them; and sometimes it occurs due to a blow made on the bowels.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors; for the color of it is either inclining towards yellowish or blood-red, or red, or is dark and foul, or it is watery white, and that is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows that this accumulation of moisture is in the white diaphragm that we have said earlier are: for if it is in the white diaphragm, then the hernia is round and declining a little towards length with the figure of the bowels, and covering the bowel; for the moisture contains all around.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the peritoneum itself, then the hernia is round with the part of the bowels and one estimates that it is another bowel.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the diaphragm of the bowels and the white diaphragm, then cut below the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then test the color of the moisture in the hernia with a needle from which the thread has been removed; and according to what is seen in the marks of the needle, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then have the patient lie on his back if that is possible for him, and see his chest.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then let him be reclined on his back for some reason a little higher, and place underneath him several folded sheets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then stand to the left of him, and command the assistant to stand to the right of him, who should extend his arm to one side of the bowels and to the top of the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a pointed instrument and cut the diaphragm of the bowels in the middle part, cutting it along its length through the pentangular.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the incision be made according to the straightness equally distant from the line that must be observed between the skin of the bowels, so that it reaches the white diaphragm.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excorate it, and observe, and be careful so that you do not insert anything into it; and your excising with which you exciate it according to the part that is suspended by the bowels, examine closely by excising according to the amount that is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the lower diaphragm with a wide incision, and extract all the moisture.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and stretch the diaphragm above them; and do not touch the bowels contained, and insert the diaphragm in that way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Then insert it completely or in pieces, and especially with its sides very fine; for if you do not examine the incision of it thoroughly, there is no security that the moisture will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if you notice that it has protruded beyond the edge of its sheath during your operation, then when you have finished cutting the scrotum, return it inside and sew up the two lips of the scrotum of the testicles with a suture, and treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, then cut the vessels which are above the suspensory ligament, extract the testicle and treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the hernia is divided into two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part according as you have done in the other, and if it appears to you to be one operation, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And you should clean the blood and insert into the incisions wool which is soaked in oil or rose oil; and place outside another piece of wool which is soaked in wine and oil, and spread this over both testicles and the abdomen; and place over it folded sheets and powdery lint, and tie those over with a ligature which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and two sheets should be pressed and filled with wool dyed red according to this shape; and the extremities with which it is tied up should be made of gut or of wet wool, and they should be attached by a string to the waistband of the trousers, and one extremity should go from behind between the buttocks and the second should go to the front part of the scrotum, and two extremities on each thigh and two other extremities on both sides of the groin, and all of the string should be tightened at the waistband of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially by cautery instead of cutting with an iron; and you should take a thin scalpel and cut the scrotum of the testicles, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white sac containing the testicle is uncovered, and then you should apply cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is similar to the Greek letter alpha.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And you should pierce with that scalpel and ignite it until all of the moisture has been driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And you should extend the scrotum with tongs and scrape it with tongs, and scrape with a small cautery which is ignited; and incise it according as it is possible for you to do so until you have eradicated all of it; and beware that the fire does not touch the testicle.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from blood flow, and better than an operation with cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you experience an ulcer during cutting or cautery, or blood flow, then know that you should treat the ulcer according to what it requires with treatment which is suitable for it according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is cowardly and does not expect a second operation because of its horrible nature, then you should perform piercing according to what I have recommended when it has been certified by you, through what has been said about the signs, that the hernia is fluid.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed, and pierce the ulcer in the lowest part of it with a broad spear, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the aperture should be ample so that all of the fluid runs out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And you should place gut and ligature over it and leave it there so that the rest of the fluid runs out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And you should treat it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance to the discharge of the fluid when you pierce it: and this does not occur unless the white membrane in the orifice of the wound causes resistance and prohibits the exit of the fluid, then you should insert into the wound a peg or instrument by which the fluid is extracted from the hydrocele, the shape of which has been described; or attach to the compression of the hydrocele a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the fluid returns and is accumulated again after about a month or so; and when it has been accumulated, then it should be pierced according to that same manner, for the patient will pass his days like this.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On cutting on a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in cutting on this hernia there is great fear of death in the greater dispositions; for I have seen the discharge of it and the patient saved by it.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am remembering the operation on that one and the properties of ulcers.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that ulcers arise in the bodies of which the testicles are composed and are caused by many causes: or by acute sharp superfluity, which is distributed to the testicles, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the ulcer is according to the color of the body, and there is not pain in it, and it is a heavy ulcer.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And its surface is smooth, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling to it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by constriction of the vessels, and by inflammation of those thus, as has been perceived by memory of it, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by inflammation of vessels is known by the distribution of the ulcer when you compress it with your fingers; and there should not be touch to it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by inflammation of a vein is not distributed from it because of compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this kind there should be cutting and on the other meats; and you should cut the scrotum of the testicles, and then extend the testicle to the parts above it, and extract it from the white sac, and ligate the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and incise the suspensory more so that you can extract it from all parts of the testicle.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the hydrocele has become consolidated with those meats, then you should extract the hydrocele and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesions for some cause from the scrotum, or between that which is between the vessels, then you should loosen all of that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is generation of flesh in the place of the adhesions which are behind, then you should incise all that is of it and extract the hydrocele as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and you should treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of a hernia which is of veins.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vein is an ulcer wrapped by some wrapper like a bud with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement exercise and walking on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease there is fear because of that by which memory precedes it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, you should apply treatment to it according to what they did at first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed, and compress the suspensory ligament of the testicles at the parts below; and then you should touch the scrotum of the testicles with your fingers at the vessels which have been proven to the staff, and extend those with violent extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And you should incise with a broad spear piercing across the right of the vessels so that the vessels are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then you will cut away any extra skin as we have said in the extraction of an arrow, which is found in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then you will put an needle in those spots, with one thread doubled over it, and tie the first one in the place where the wound occurred, and the other one at the back of the wound.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then you will cut them in the middle according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the putrid and corrupt humidity.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then you will cure the ulcer with a cure for other ulcers where you want pus to be generated so that the vessels which have become black from one of two things, for it is not harmful by that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the wound occurs in all the passages, then you must extract the testicles or that the testicles by that are withdrawn from the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they are atrophied, or that it is useless by that.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65:
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernias.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to an opening that extends in the chest towards the abdomen from the angles of the navel, so that when the intestines are pushed through that rupture into any of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either from the chest or from an opening in it, and these two species occur for various reasons: by percussion, or by blows, or by crying, or by the elevation of some heavy cause, or by similarities.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is from the extension of the chest, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is a suppurative ulcer inside the abdomen because the chest compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is from an opening in the chest; because at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it is a diverse ulcer apparent below the apparent armpit, and this is due to the displacement of the intestine, and its body towards the parts outside the chest.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it is pushed out with the intestine, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is made with a hernia sac, and sometimes a hole in the intestine, and here it is retained, and this causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and especially when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these species of this illness with iron there is fear, because one must avoid the formation in it.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the way of performing this operation is to command the patient to draw in the intestine with his hand towards its cavity if he obeys its return, and then let him lie on his side between your hands, and lift his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then you will bring the armpit which connects with the armpit of the testicles upwards, and you will open the armpit entirely throughout its length; and you will put nails in two lips of the opening according to what you command them to open it with.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the opening according to the quantity that is possible for you, that from that the sac is pushed out.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then you will cut away those chest muscles which are under the armpit of the testicles, until the white hard chest muscle is uncovered in each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you will put your finger into that which connects the testicle, in that which is between the white chest and the second chest, and you will free with it the adhesion which is in the part behind the sac.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then you will draw with your hand the armpit of the testicles upwards, and you will extend the white chest towards it with your left hand, and lift the sac with the chest to the opening of the incision; and you will command the assistant to extend the sac towards you, and you will dissolve the adhesion behind it with a completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And you must pay attention with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped in the white hard chest.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then you will push it back down into the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you will take a needle in which is made a thick thread of six threads, and you will put that through the back of the chest, which is under the armpit of the testicles, which connects the incision; and you will insert the ends which emerge from the thread so that there are four threads, and then you will tie some of them into any shape like a hook; and you will tie with it the chest of which we have said that is under the armpit of the testicles with a strong ligature in two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then you will wrap the ends of the threads and tie those with a violent ligature so that none of the vessels which have become black can transmit any cause so that apostemes do not occur here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And you will pause another ligature after the first ligature, long enough to be three fingers; and then these two ligatures will separate from the chest which is under the armpit of the testicles by the amount of the size of a finger, and you will insert all the rest according to roundness, and push out the sac from it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then you will insert in the part under the armpit of the testicles by an incision from which blood and pus flow as we have mentioned in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then you will administer wool soaked in oil, and pause it over the ulcer; and administer the ligature which we have recommended (and sometimes the white chest is cauterized, which we have said about the incision of it fears a flow of blood, because many times they occur there), and let the ligature fall so that by itself it will close.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if its closing is delayed, then have water heated, and pause it over that so that it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the ulcer with the other cure of ulcers where it is healthy.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66:
De hernia ventosa.	On hernia sac.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there is no one who has been cured with the treatment of it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first thing that is done as we have recommended in the hernia which is with a sac; and then you will tie the intestines over that incision with ease of it; and then dry in the middle around the ulcer with that which causes that, from which the intestines fall out.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the ulcer as we have said so that it is healthy.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67:
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the rupture which is made in the angles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the angles as we have said, and it emerges from the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not allow any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if it occurs, that is rare; and return it in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with that, it is a fracture in the chest from which the intestine emerges in the chest; and this occurs because of the extension of the chest which is in the angles as we have said, which cause is because the chest is extended, and then it becomes soft and the place is suppurative and emerges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And its cure is with cautery as it is preceded by the narratio of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and the patient hangs over his chest between your hands, and then drys the place of the rupture of the suppuratives emerging from incision according to the length of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tightly tie the white bandage that is under the cord until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the thread and place it over the prominent part of the wound, and press it to the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two prominent ends of the wound with the thread, joining one end to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then pull the end of the thread, but do not cut the bandage at all, nor stretch it out, nor any other cause that you know about in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of ulcers, and when you insert the gallbladder, cleanse it and restore the ulcer until it is consolidated; for the bandage is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not tightened.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68:
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cords of the testes.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the cords of the testes in some men are softened because the flesh that is between them is softened, and the guarding of it is weakened.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the person treating the patient to make him lie on his back, and insert all of the softened cord along the natural cord; and then sew two lips with thread.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, sew up the superfluity of the softened cord in three or four places and with a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the stitches; and then treat by the treatment of other ulcers until it is healed and the gallbladders fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69:
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for two reasons it has been related to me in this book: the first is so that the doctor who is questioned about it knows its treatment, and the second reason is that many times we have needed to castrate other beasts for our own purposes, like horses, oxen, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting through.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the method that is done by crushing, the procedure is to make the beast defecate in warm water until its testicles are softened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then grab those with your hand until they are dissolved and do not appear below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by cutting and sectioning, you must hold the beast and squeeze the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then cut through the suspensory ligament and insert between each pair of processes with one cut until there are two holes.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then insert those more that you have cut off.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on the bandage over them, but only the thin bandage which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done by crushing, because crushing strongly leaves no cause in the testicles so that the beast desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the ulcer until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70:
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphrodites.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodites in men are of two kinds: the first is when there appears an orifice between the cords of the testes, where there is a figure like that of a woman’s vulva between the two testicles.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from it urine flows from the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women there is only one type: and it is that the clitoris on the foreskin is like two testicles of a man, a little of everything at the beginning of the foreskin like the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you insert those tight flesh until the impression of that flows out, and then treat those with the treatment of other ulcers.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men from whom urine flows from the cord of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 71:
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the hymen and prominent flesh due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The strong hymen is tightly attached to natural causes so that it is pressed and made thin the guarding; and in some women it is enlarged so much that it is stretched like men and can enter into intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you must grab the superfluity of the hymen with your hand or with a needle and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not pierce in the incision, especially in the part of the vein, so that no blood flow ensues.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with the treatment of ulcers until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But born flesh is flesh that grows in the womb of the mother to fill it, and very often it grows out from the foreskin according to the appearance of a snake (and because of this some call this “tail-like hermaphrodite”); therefore we must insert it like an hymen and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72:
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of syphilis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Syphilis is when the clitoris of a woman is not perforated, or it is a small wound.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to a wound that has preceded it, and that is caused by tightly bound flesh or a thin bandage or membrane.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the womb or the bones of it, or in the supine part of it, or in the lower part of it, and strongly prohibits copulation and pregnancy, and very often the menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the diagnosis of it is made by the guarding of the midwife, if the oppression is evident, then you must cover it with bandages; but if it is not evident, then you should draw it with your fingers or with a thread.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the oppression is due to a thin bandage and is prominent between the two lips, then you must cut and rupture it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And so that it rests on both lips, and then rest your fingers from both sides and press them inwards.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And let the woman be on her back with her legs extended, and then extend both lips with force so that the thin bandage is broken and the oppression opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it over the wound, and anoint it with ointment every day until the wound is healed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the bandage is thick and tough, then you must insert it with liniment of lat or myrrh resin.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the oppression is due to bound flesh, then suspend that with a thread and insert it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Let them be the medicines that cause bleeding to stop, like aconite, and dragon’s blood, and alder, bound with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead cane for so that the wound is not healed loosely.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days and give it cool water of lye.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then let it be healed by the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents happen in the great conception of other meats, and then they are conceived according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is by the ulcer of the bone, then do not do any opposition to the ulcer of the bone in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure of hemorrhoids, and of tail and red buttock which happen in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an obstruction of the orifices of many veins from which much blood flows continuously, and when hemorrhoids become old and are formed.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of them the species and signs of them, and thus say those who receive a cure and those that do not receive a cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	I say therefore hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the depth of the vagina and do not appear to the senses, then in these there shall be no cure made by iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the opening of the vagina upon which one can see with senses, these are those which are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cause the woman to be in a hot bath and then extend it with tweezers or with rough cloth, and insert those with roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over them one of the insulating powders without biting, thus with aconite and similar to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then put in a pouch their feet for an hour and then place that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood continues then do that in a decoction of cummin and of onion peels and of pomegranate peels and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And take wheat flour and cook it with honey and sour wine and make a poultice with that over the back of it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood has dried out then it is good; and if not then attach with two leeches and at the breasts no scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take wool and immerse that in juice of coriander or in juice of marigold or in juice of wild garlic with red wine and make that adhere to the place until it is healed. And cure the place with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But that tail which is of rough guard, cause you to insert that according to what appears to you from that according to what was said in that gouging.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of piercing of a wound in the vagina.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of ulcers happen in the vagina, thus with bone ulcer and ulcerous ulcer and suppuration and wormy and ragged and others ulcers.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these diseases and the species of them and their signs and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And cause I to say in this treatise of bone ulcer which comes in the vagina when it is of the ulcers that are congealed and if you want to know how to do its cauterization with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the ulcer in its coming is acute with concussion and phlegm and fever, and cause that to be swollen and if you see on it the senses then do not cut it with perforation and cure that with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents cease.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then cause you to make the woman lie on one side with her two sides; and recline on her back and join her feet to the part lower than the belly, and let her thighs be extended, and pause her arms under her elbows and let each hold according to what is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife follows the right side and administers the instrument by which is opened the opening of the vagina, the form of which will come in those causes that will be appropriate.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer that instrument then cause you to make the depth of the vagina of the woman and what is entered in the vagina of the instrument not more than the depth of the vagina and lead the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the depth of the vagina then cause you to pause powders on the texture of the depth of the vagina so that it be prohibited the entering of every instrument in the depth of the vagina.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And cause you to pause the wire which bends in the instrument from the side above and that it be administered by the person who holds the instrument and revolves the wire until the opening of the vagina is open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the exit is seen and it is touched by the hand and it is cold and moist then cause you to dry that with broad linen.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated then cause you to pause in the wound a poultice immersed in rose oil or oil with some astringent, and place the poultice in the section on the depth of the vagina.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And pause wool around the vagina and above the pubic hair clean wool immersed in water in which are boiled mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And let it be cured after two days with ointment convenient to that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some are washed the vagina and the wound with water in which is boiled aconite with water and then with water in which is boiled root of lily or of aromatic arnica and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is bleeding in the vagina then cause you to be prohibited from the cure of it with iron but have a cure that we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the children will be medicated when they come according to non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of the child's coming according to its signs and it is that when you see the woman pressing on her parts below and wanting to smell the air, and when she is eased by what is above her and the part is made easy for her, and hastens the exit of the child, then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and the exit of it upon its head, and the second one with that or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you see these signs then cause the belly to be pressed so that the embryo descends gently when he comes out upon his head, and let the second one come with that or suspended from the navel, and it is cleaned of those superfluities by a good cleaning.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is another of this part is non-natural and not laudable when the child comes out upon his feet and his body before his head, and his mother's hand or on his foot.I. Or is come out the head of it and his mother's hand or to its belly and bent it is converted over his neck and similar to the figures of it non-laudable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I show you the entire figure of those, and what craft is in them so that it be signified by that and is laid upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the child is come out upon his head by natural force and that is violent upon the woman and it is made for him a difficult part, then cause that to be done, or that women hold it, and evaporate the depth of it with fenugreek cooked and with oiled herbs.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife put between her fingers a little broad sponge and split it with that the second one, or dry that with its nail until she comes upon what is in her of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press on the woman's abdomen where the fetus is descending.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then the woman should be anointed with an ointment of linseed and fennel seed mixed together.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command him, the one performing the anointing, to apply pressure and make the mother sneeze with the mixture; and hold her mouth and nose for an hour so that the fetus will come out quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both hands of the fetus are not coming out at the beginning, then you should gently pull them out little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if the fetus does not respond to the instrument, then place the woman on a board and lift her feet up, and gently rock the board back and forth on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall off the board due to the rocking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not bent back and the fetus is not born, then insert your hand inside and break the fetus's head or grab its body with a cloth and pull it out little by little; for in this way, it will come out.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	About the delivery of the embryo on their feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on their feet, then you should gently push those up and turn the fetus a little, and suck it in, and grab one of its feet and pull it gently.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it has come out between the thighs, then you command him to push it out, and make the mother sneeze with the mixture; for it will come out if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not born with what we have described, then you gently return the fetus little by little to where it was, for it will come out more easily with its natural movement.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is not possible with all that we have described, then take myrrh and dissolved gum, and pound them well in the mortar, and apply this to the woman's vagina, at the bottom of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then make her drink tepid water while she is achieving the vapor bath.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when his feet are softened, then you give him the smoke of myrrh and place it under him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when she has been in the smoke for an hour, then you make her lie down on a board and make her sneeze and open her mouth, and lift up the lower part of her abdomen with gentle pressure, for the fetus will come out at once.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Delivery of the fetus onto its hands and feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is delivered in this way, then you gently pull its hands inside little by little; and the woman should be bent forward, and her feet should be pushed down, and those hands should rest on the ground, and she should complete the delivery.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And you gently press on her abdomen little by little and pull what is under his feet from the ears while she is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not born, then take his feet and move them violently, and press what is above the hips little by little while the fetus can go to the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And you gently pull its hands and suck in the fetus little by little, and command the woman to push while the fetus is born.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Delivery of the fetus hanging down by one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	You should gently pull the hand and suck in the fetus little by little; but if you cannot reduce it, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the ground and rock her thighs with violent movement; and you should administer to her any remedies that are given by doctors made from mucilage.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the delivery has come, then make her lie down on a board and study the hand's reduction and suck in the fetus according to its natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and command him to push so that it will be born.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Delivery of the fetus on the neck with its hands and face spread out and the fetus' face towards the mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Then the midwife should hold the fetus' hand and gently turn it little by little, and this will be easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is turned and how it is sucked in, then you apply to its head what we have recommended of oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command him to grab his mother' hand little by little, and when you have done this, then make her lie down on a board and command him to be bent over the right side, and command him to push; and make the woman sneeze with the mixture.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the fetus prepared on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it comes out of the mother' body in this way, consider and then you insert your finger inside so that it is evacuated from moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over its face and neck, then you insert your finger inside so that it is not retained and delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then you gently push the fetus to the sides so that it hangs down as you want, and command the woman to push several times; for it will come out with easy delivery if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes there are three or four; but this is strange and rare, and it does not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count them; and if they are multiple, there is a second one, and they are separated by the umbilical cord, distinguish those inside the navel of each one of them; and sometimes they are born like this with easy delivery, and sometimes with delivery that is not possible as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver and come to what we have said about the non-natural shapes, then you cure them as we have recorded.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife does what she does with ease and subtlety, and delays, and it is made according to all the forms as it is prepared for him by bringing health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten; and I have verily seen a woman bear six, and another ten, all formed, which cause was made through measurement by the glorious wise ones.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And know that it is in the science of the midwife that which is strong for her to approach this little one like that, and therefore stop it from doing so.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not yet out, then you should consider if the woman is of sound health and not of any of the accidents by which she is feared to suffer harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then you should have the woman bent over her chest and her head bent down, and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the midwife should hold that in two parts or be tied in such a way that the body of the fetus does not extend because of the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mouth of the patient with moist oil and with mucilage of alder, fenugreek, and seeds of it.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilage, and then inserts her hand smoothly into the vagina, and then seeks with her hand the place where the nails are in the foot.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And if it is convenient in that case: then you consider whether the foot is prepared so that it descends over his head, and then you place the nails in his heels, or on his neck, or in his mouth, or in his palate, or under his beard, or in the hollow of his chest, or under his armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is on his feet, then it is in the instep, or in the middle of his back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And whoever has the nail holds it with his right hand, and places its curve in that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, and inserts his hand smoothly and puts the nail in one of those places we have mentioned, until he reaches the true cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and fix in the aperture of him another nail, or a third if necessary, so that there is an equal attraction, and not extension according to his rectitude only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	But let the mouth be opened to its full extent, so that the extraction of it is facilitated as it is done in a tooth that is pulled out.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And whoever in him that is between them let the extension be softened; and if any part of him is retained, then let the midwife anoint one of her fingers with oil, and insert that skillfully and turn it about with what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the part of the foot is dislocated, then let the nails be interchanged into a place that is higher; and do this as long as all of the foot is dislocated.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is dislocated in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by compressing it, then let a bandage be wrapped around that; and then extract that as long as all of it is dislocated, and insert it into the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do this also to the other hand and the two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the foot is large, or there happens to it compression in its extraction, or there is some constriction on him, then let the midwife insert between the fingers a spatulate and pointed instrument and split the head and extract the fluid, or discover that with an instrument which is named 'alundat', the shape of which will come with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter which is to come.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And likewise do if the foot is of a large head by nature: and then let him insert that with a ligature, or take it with an awl as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is dislocated and there is constriction due to the collarbone, then let it be split so that the moisture which is in the foot be discharged.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor obstinate in its dislocation, then you insert the head immediately as soon as possible to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the hernia of the abdomen is ulcerated or is dropping out, then let you pierce that so that the fluid that is in it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the foot is on his feet, then the attraction of it is greater and the direction of it to the mouth of the vagina is farther.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted due to the abdomen and the foot, then let you extract that with a bandage which you will have wrapped around your hand, and split the abdomen and the foot so that what is in them runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members stand and turn the head, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the vagina is open, then she inserts her hand in the anus of air, and seeks with that the head, and pulls it with her fingers into the mouth of the vagina, and then inserts into him a nail, or two nails, and pulls him with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the vagina is constricted by an ulcer that comes to the u, then let it not be rubbed on him; but beforehand let the flow of moistening fatty causes be administered.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the foot is on his side, then if possible let it be turned; and let what we have said about the living foot be administered to him.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then let it be inserted into wooden stakes, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And let there not remain any cause inside the secondina.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure in ulcerated cauteries that come from the vagina.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there comes blood flow, then let it be stopped with astringent waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in whose abdomen was a dead fetus, and then over that other fire burning, and then the dead fire is the other fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	There happened to him an ulcer in his groin; and it was swollen so that fire broke out, and he began to vomit blood.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to his cure, and medicated him for a long time, and the ulcer was not healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied to him some plasters of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and then passed some days, and extracted another bone; and I was very marvelled, since there was not bone in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I cut the ulcer, and extracted from him some bones, the woman having remained in the same disposition, and already lived for a long time, a little of the blood flowing.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not think that anything was strange except that in it is science and aid to what the doctor artifices with his hand for cure administers.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertigine with which is open the vagina:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of straitness in which are engaged the lips, to that engagement are two virtues in two extremes of two parts.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this virtue let it be more subtle of compression, and let it be made of ebony or of wood of boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the thickness of each wood be as two fingers and the margin of either side is one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle part of two woods are two joints of that woods which are already fitted, of which the length is the measure of a palm and a little more, and the thickness of each is as two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the vagina so that it is open by them when you turn the two prescribed straitnesses.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Other form also similar to that more subtle and farther:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Let it be made of boxwood or of ebony according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But in the end of it are two additions thus with handles, and the length of those additions is as a palm, and the thickness of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb, then you should let the woman lie on her back with her feet hanging down, and open what is between their thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument as you would with forceps according to the amount that you want from the opening of the womb while the midwife does what you ask.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of delivery which the ancients described is:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of delivery by force in which the fetus is forced out:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of extraction with a large head
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps which have teeth at the end, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, and sometimes with teeth like a pair of jaws with which it is cut and crushed.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of extraction of a few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form having one thorn:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of one thorn having two thorns:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps whose teeth close to crush the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two ends, with which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when they are more numerous and prepared by the artisans, then they are easier for the artisan and better for men because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And whether you have any of those instruments or not, you should be prepared, because the need for them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the placenta.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the placenta is retained after childbirth, then you should command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze with cinnamon, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if she vomits it out, that's good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a bowl and pierce the lining with a knife, and place in it herbs that burn the mouth of the womb, such as hellebore and ruda and anise and camomile and scilla and arabic hellebore and cassia wood and sanderswood.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the bowl, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a straw in the woman's mouth, and hold that while the evaporation comes into the cavity of the womb.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the placenta will be forced out with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure does not work and it has not come out, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in mullein, and then insert that in the vagina and scratch with that the placenta, and when you have found the placenta, take hold of it and pull it out little by little according to rectitude so that the woman does not feel too much pain.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before this, make sure that it is moved to the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of traction, because she will obey and relax from adhesions.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the womb is narrow, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and medication in the bowl with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not forced out with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful that you do not tire too much on her in iteration of abstraction, but instead what comes out of her mouth lies in the woman's lap, and then close up that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; because that will cause to rot that, then dissolved and forced out.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it is rotten, there comes from it a bad odor to the head and stomach, and then what the woman vomits out lies in her lap; and then let there be administered sub-fumigations and convenient things for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have already tested sub-fumigation of netherwort and of dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated because of retention of menstruation and of the placenta:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made of brass or copper.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the thin end is placed in the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is held over the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that while the sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of cure of the anus of a child not pierced.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Move children who are born and whose anuses are not pierced, which cause pain and are swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then let the midwife pierce that with her finger; and if not, pierce that with a pointed spatula, and be careful that it does not touch the clitoris.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place over that wool soaked in wine and oil, and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is swollen, then place in the slit a straw for several days, and hold it when the child wants to urinate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And then it happens that the swelling of the anus comes from hardening of a boil or abscess; therefore let that hardening be lanced, and then cure that with what we have said about the cure and the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of cure for fistulas that come from below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that come from below in the perineum are low and thick, which come out near the anus or in the space between the parts.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that hardening becomes old and corrupt by the moist white or purulent discharge, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate some.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what comes out of them through the opening and by flatulence; and sometimes the woman vomits, and very often it comes out of them vermin.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes those fistulas penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the vagina; and sometimes they penetrate into the junction of the hip and into the notch of the anus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that in which the fistula penetrates into the anus but does not penetrate is that you put your finger into the anus and insert a pointed probe of brass or iron into the fistula when it is tense.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if in that it is tense, then insert into that a probe of lead or of horsehair until you feel the probe or the bristle in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything in it nor any sign of discharge or worm or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrated, and then go to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the vagina, then its sign is emission of urine from that and prohibition of that towards that which the place is medicated with ointment.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the hip joint or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit of the perineum; and its sign is that the probe goes through there if in it is not tense within the bone, and pain in the circuit of the perineum; and when there is no discharge from there, nor worm, nor flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is not healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas there is not a complete cure, and the cure of those is work and labor of the physicians over it who are firmly set.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is expected according to what I have told you, and that which I have already tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And let the patient lie on his back and raise his legs up against his chest, with his thighs bent towards his belly, and then insert a probe of lead or of copper into the wound if it is a tortuous fistula, and feel around to find the place where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient is suffering from a hernia in his neck, then you must push your index finger into his neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe pushing itself in through the opening when you insert it with your finger, then you know for certain that this is a penetrable hernia; and so you should not operate on it, for there will be no cure, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some people say that this kind of hernia is curable in certain individuals who are thin.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the treatment by which recovery is expected in such a case is that you apply a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned before, and insert this cautery into the hernia around the neck; then repeat this twice or thrice until you know that all the flesh around the hernia, which resembles a feather reed, has been tightened.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat it with poultices wrapped in cloth until all the flesh around the hernia has healed; and treat the hernia itself with medicines that generate and solidify flesh, and if it is cured, well and good; but if not, no other cure will help.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe goes in and does not go through your index finger, which is placed over the anus, and there is a space between the probe and the flesh or membrane, then cut off the fistula where it touches the surface of the skin; then dry up the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see that it dries up by means of the probe, and let the probe be in the hernia until its end is reached at the place where the probe goes through.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean off the flesh around the hernia which resembles a feather reed, and none of these things should break open.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows out between you and your operation as you press against those flesh, then the best milky pus-like substance is cauterized with fire or with a sharp medicine; for fire cautery achieves two good things: it dries up those moist flesh around it, and it cuts off the flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat the hernia with poultices wrapped in cloth or in cheesecloth until the swelling goes down; and then cure the wound with a ointment that generates hard flesh and solidifies it.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And this is how medicines which have astringent and drying properties work: when the swelling has been restored, then it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the hernia has permeated into the rectum and is elongated from there to the surface of the body, then insert your index finger into the anus and feel around with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you feel the probe and between you and it there is membrane or flesh, and it is close to being penetrable, then this hernia should not be operated on by a direct approach, but only according to the way of confidence and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This can be done in three ways: either by cauterizing it as we have said; or by drying up the hernia so that you achieve its cavity and it is possible for you to insert instruments and perform the cure close to the hernia; or by not cutting into the membrane which contains the neck, but by having the patient lean forward from the waist so that the hernia slides down away from the neck without his will, and then cure the hernia as we have said since it is very easy to heal; or by elongating this membrane and cleaning out the pus which has dried up around the anus, using a probe or some other instrument with a sharp end, and then clean off the flesh around the hernia which has been cut through at the place where you can pierce it by pushing in; and then strive to make the whole wound heal by cutting, and if the orifice above is not solidified and the fistula remains open at the anus, then pus will flow out through the hernia.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the hernia is finished in this way: when you insert the probe into the hernia it is at the side of the anus around the surface of the body and at the edge of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated end, which is made like a needle for piercing ears in this shape:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and then insert it into the hernia until you achieve its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it is penetrable at the edge of the anus close to the inside, then you must pull out the probe from that wound just as you would insert your index finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the probe and squeeze both ends together, and hold it like that for a day or two, and when you have inserted the probe further into the flesh, squeeze it tightly so that those flesh between the two ends of the probe are pressed in.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifice of the hernia is not penetrable, then make it penetrable in whatever way you can prepare it, unless it is in the rectum, for you must not do anything which would pierce the membrane; and then cure it as we have said until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatulum with thorns by which the hernia is split open: one end of it is very acute and the other blunt, so that you do not pierce what need not be pierced.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of suturing up hemorrhoids from which blood flows when they are cut.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways, for either they are between the anus like charcoal or they are like grass with fat on top.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And some are small and large, and the blood flows from them at times; they are raised up and are around the anus and at its edges.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those which are outside the anus are according to the months of little moisture; from them flows water with a little blood, and they are according to the colour of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for those which are inside the neck is to command the patient to sit up and to press in so that the neck dries out and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you must pinch and suspend them with your nails or what you have those with your fingernail, and then cut off their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not gripped in them due to their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or a cord or a strip of wool, and pull them out with your fingers, and then insert them and sprinkle some powdered caustic on them over the cut, so that they are as cauterized; or cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure them with the other cure so that they heal.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey the exit, then castor the patient with castoreum in which there is a small bite, and let it be washed with that which is in the neck and let it obey the exit gently when the patient is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is looseness, and you must take them with your fingernail or with a needle, and insert them, and then cure them as we have said so that they heal.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	Here is the translation:
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one untouched so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate over the anus; and have the patient lie down and rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that one untouched; and when it has healed, treat those with ointment or some other treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of fistulas:
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	They often occur due to dryness of the wound or as a result of constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and unresponsive to medicine, then you should pierce them with the point of a spatula or your fingernail so that they become moist and prevent their consolidation; and then treat those that have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should open them with a more violent incision than the first, so that some blood flows and they become raw; and then treat those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Treatment of syphilis:
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that syphilis, which is the key, is not apparent except for a dark red color on the body resembling the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body and mostly in the parts below the feet and the fingers, and because of this you should treat the pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And so when it has been pierced in the area around the nail, and held with forceps or tongs and pulled out from its root; then treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one mentioned in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Warts are small, rough, round, and fistulous protuberances on the surface of the body, and they often occur in children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its treatment is that you stretch it out and pierce it, or tighten it with gut or string so that it falls off.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And thus they are eradicated from all directions using the instrument I have described to you.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	And however, a wart is a small, hard, or fistulous protuberance on the surface of the body, and it often occurs in the palm, and when rubbed, it feels like an ant bite; it is caused by an infestation of ants around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its treatment is to take a needle made of goose feather or peacock feather, which should be strong, and place it over the wart so that the needle contains the area around the wart; then rotate your hand with the needle so that you pierce what is around the wart, and place it in the palm of your hand, and eradicate the wart from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle made of ram's horn or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the needle be drawn out thinly, silently (so that it is not pierced), and wrapped so that when placed on the finger, it appears smooth and the rotation of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the wart as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The form of the instruments that are administered to give a cautery:
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cauteries are made of silver or brass or molten and hammered ram's horn; and sometimes they are made from small and large instruments according to those they are administered, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose anuses are sore or painful, their cauteries should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large and slender cautery:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle, above which the pouch is tied, should be made wide according to this manner; and let there be a distinction where the pouch is tied as well as the times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be silent  (so that it is not open), drawn out thinly; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and more coarse one small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the pouch in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its root be one palm long.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be pierced with many holes so that when it is rolled, the thickness of the finger is between the holes.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those holes strong thread of hard gut which is made from ten guts, or wrap that around it; and fasten with that the pouch, and when the pouch is placed on it, tighten the head of the cautery between two distinctions with a strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: However, the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should lie on his back, and raise his legs up and place underneath him a board or a pillow; and then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and then insert that into the anus easily, and then take the pouch and squeeze it with both hands strongly so that everything in the cautery is evacuated; and then withdraw the cautery and the patient raises his legs against the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to defecate, he should hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps with that for a whole night, he is better off.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	However, if you cauterize him in the illnesses of looseness of the belly and his defecation stops, then you should repeat the cautery until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then let the cautery be very thin and sharp, of those cauteries with which children are cauterized.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Treatment of piles:
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said in the division of the treatment of piles what suited the free, and I have thus described their treatment with hand and medicine according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore say that piles are varied according to what they are made of and according to the location where they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which piles are caused are thus: a stone is lodged in the anus or the rectum is pierced by a spear or a staff, or it is struck with a lance, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	However, the piles that are in the body's locations are thus: a plague which falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the buttocks, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I have recommended the treatment of some piles that stop that reasoning and rule over the others.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin the piles of the head simple, for the remembrance of the compounded ones will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or something similar, and the skin has torn only slightly and there is a large wound and you fear that pus will form, then you must immediately open and flebotomy the cephalica vein, and do not delay this; and extract the blood according to the amount of its virtue if nothing else prohibits flebotomy, especially if the blood that flows from the wound is scarce.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it should be a flebotomy on the opposite side of the wounded part; and the patient should be guarded against repletion, wine, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some reason prohibits it, then let the food be diminished and do not bring him near meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place over the wound, if it happens that pus forms, a poultice soaked in rose oil or wine in which there is a styptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if he is sure that pus will form, then place over the wound, if it is recent, his own blood and let the air not have changed that powder which I will shortly mention.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then place some ointment on it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or it is due to a cut from a sword and similar weapons, and its lips are not joined by threads, then join them with stitches according to what I will mention about their stitches.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is uncovered to the bone and there is no retention of it except for a small bandage, then insert into it and heal the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by applying in place of thread, and order the patient to abstain from foods whose nature is coarse: heads and formen roots and similar things to them, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the thread putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all of that rotten matter and throw it out, and heal it afterwards.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not severed by medicines, then probe for the artery and if you find that it is not severed, then pierce it with a spike, or ligature it; and if necessity compels you to do so, cauterize it until the blood is severed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is lightness; therefore you should dust over those this powder, for it will solidify before the air changes it.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take olive oil a quarter part, dragon's blood two parts, and gum arabic three parts; let all be well pounded and sifted, and fill the wound with it, and apply it tightly so that it adheres to the wound and coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then bind it tightly above with lint and let it be so while there is pus in the wound, for if you remove the medicine before it is healed, the wound will not be cured.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes it does this alone, when there are no dragon's blood or gum arabic at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method of operation is also done on large wounds when it seems that it should be applied and the lips of the wound are joined together, and only on recent wounds whose blood has not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially during the summer, then it is not necessary to apply this powder, but afterwards cure those with what we have mentioned, by applying over them some digestible ointments or pastes made from flour of barley with water and honey so that they form a poultice; and heal them with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if there is a broken bone in the wound and it is small, then you should extract it with tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will tell of the cure for head fractures when they are punctured.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds in the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in its medicine, and it is similar to the medicine for a simple wound on the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there should be no incision made in it but rather avoided by applying medicines to it that cause violent contraction, as with cinchona and zinc which are like vitriol and similar things because they hurt nerves and constrict that place.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not put over the wound anything causing any heat, for the substance of nerves is heat and their continuation is through the brain, which is the source of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is being cured by medicines that are cooling, as with water that has been sprinkled with rose oil or not, and thucium when it has been washed with tepid water and the other stones according to this manner, then apply moist ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches or tie together its lips, and heal it afterwards with lint until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if there is depth to the wound or there occurs in it pus with blood, then probe that place more deeply.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the artery is cut and blood flows from it, then stop or dry that place, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the spondylous bones of the neck or all of them are cut and the veins of the neck are saved, then join together the lips of the wound with stitches above the spondylous bone of the neck and do not touch that place; before you return it to its natural shape and bind it with decent tightness and let it be bound for several days; and heal it with ointments in which there is contraction and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound is on the bone and there is depression in it, then probe it and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract them all that you can; and let what you cannot extract be left inside so that the wound becomes suppurative, and let its discharge be separated and the swelling of it alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent then dust over it the powder that I have mentioned to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if there is a fistula in the wound, then heal it with what its memory will come to you afterwards in the next chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds on the neck or similar when made between the shoulders and made with a spear or a staff or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a piercing of a spear or staff and its depth, then consider also if from the wound there is windiness when the patient breathes, then know that the wound is lethal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with its blood, then apply over it in the first hour powder, and do not bind it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and weakens the patient; but apply over it attractive ointment, and let it be loosed two times a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at hand, then probe the wound's orifice with a stick so that it sucks what there is of moisture; and let the patient sleep on the wound so that it runs what is retained in it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the plague and the patient does not experience any spasms, tremors of a bad heart, or stricture of the throat, and you see other signs of good health in him, then you may know that he is saved from the plague; and then cure his wounds with cupping and with other remedies until he is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of him is excused and all time is open, then you may know that a fistula has already been made; therefore, cure it through its opening.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is from an incision of a spear or knife, and it is simple in appearance on the surface of the foot or leg, then cure it with water that has been preceded by sewing up the wound, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if there has already been an impression on the bone and you see that it is incising into pieces, then you must twist the plague and cut to extract those pieces if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then let them remain inside so that the plague can be poured out; for their extraction is dangerous.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And as for other plagues affecting the other members, the cure is the same as what we have already said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of plagues of the belly:
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disorder that occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great ones, sometimes you will see an intestine or nerve of the intestine, by which there is made an intrusion of them and the sewing up of them is made more violent and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult in another way, and one knows that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not cut off their intrusion into their place at once, for it opens and becomes swollen, so that the insertion of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is middling, for in that the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the sewing up of the belly is according to four ways; but two sewings are common and convenient in the sewings of the other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sewings are proper to the other plagues, but they are more proper in the sewing up of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I will now give you an account and explanation of each one.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the plague is small and has come from some cause of the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when there has come inflammation of the intestine because of the chilliness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when this is so, then you should warm it in such a way that you submerge a sponge or piece of damp cloth in water made tepid only with squinant, and cypress, and spic, and embrocations with that, and apply it to the intestine so that the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes this is done with wine in which there has been added camphor, and it is better than water alone for the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is added alder and mallow, for by that the insertion of it is eased by a little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the insertion of it is excused after this cure, then split the disruption a little with an instrument by which are cut off hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is proper that there be no section and no occupation to dry up close to necessity and defecation.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, know its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is bent acute, and the other part not acute, and its extremity be subtle, and may not have the subtlety of a spatulum, but rather be obtuse a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the plague is amplified and you see it outside the intestine, then know that its reduction should be according to the form of it natural, in its proper place, if possible on it, for that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is ample and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place his head and feet higher than his middle parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay attention and your consideration always on that so that the part in which there is the plague be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And therefore you should administer this in great plagues and in middling plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small plagues, pause what is prepared for you and let the minister be between your fingers, which holds the disruption all by his hand and tighten the lips of it, and let him discover to you that he knows the sewing up of it from any cause or another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the way of common sewing up: you take the needle or thread according to the amount of the amplitude of the plague; and let it be taken from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and tighten the thread one turn, and then you do not put oil in the two extremities of the gut, with two extremities of the phalanx which is below the gut of the parts of fingers, inside that you make it to penetrate of that part; and you have already added two extremities of the gut and two extremities of the phalanx, and so you have made four turns.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And therefore tighten with oil double in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and let it be added the two lips and the plague by decent agregation; and let not cease doing this if it is necessary with needles until you have filled all the contraction of the plague.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be middling between thickness and subtlety, for subtle needles pierce the flesh more readily; and thick ones are of difficult insertion in the gut, and therefore let them be middling in thickness and subtlety.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And let the needle be fixed in two extremities of the gut nearby, so that the flesh is not pierced readily and the plague opens before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not be prolonged in sewing up so that the plague may not be prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And let the extremities of the needles be inserted so that they do not cause pain to the patient as he wakes from his sleep; and you shall pause upon the sewing up powdered expanders of all parts, which hold the extremities of the needles; and let them be stopped when you know that the plague is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of sewing up with needles in this manner is more convenient in small plagues, for you have at the sewing up of them one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second sewing up is communal: and it is that you administer with sewing up the four extremities, of the gut and two extremities of the phalanx, in one go, with a needle in which is oil wrapped in thickness and subtlety.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And therefore when you have with the needle penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle of that meted part from which you began, so that the oil withdrawn draws the pus from the more superficial part to the plague, so that the sewing up is according to sewing up of cloth by which the cloths are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each suture the amount of the thickness of your little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This is how surgeons sew up wounds.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this type of suture I sewed up a wound which had been inflicted on a man in his belly, and it was a wound two fingers wide, and the rupture was of the size of a palm, and it had come out of the intestines about two palms from the anus; and so then I reduced that after the intestines had been outside for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed within fifteen days or so, and he recovered and returned to his normal self.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not recover; and by miracle it healed, because I did not cure it with ointment, but instead placed a piece of cloth twice a day on the wound and washed it often with honey-water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell you about two types of proper sutures according to the account of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is so that you begin with the stitch of the thread, and you insert the needle from outside to inside at the beginning.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And then when the needle penetrates the thread and that end goes in according to rule and along the length of the entire body, leave the tip of the ciphac in which you have inserted the needle; and let the other tip of the needle penetrate from inside to outside at the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then when you have made that one penetrate, then make the other one penetrate again at the other end of that wound from inside to outside; and leave the tip of the ciphac which is on this side, and let the needle penetrate at the other end from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And let that one penetrate with the penetration by which you make it penetrate into the ciphac at the end of the wound that is on his inside so that everything penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin from this side of the wound and sew that with the tip which is of the ciphac on the other side, and pull out the needle of the thread which has penetrated, and then return that into that thread and sew the tip of the ciphac which is on the other side with this end of the wound; and pull out that of the thread which is on his part.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and then again, and do this once more until you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with the stitch of the thread by which you sew the skin, so that you sew the ciphac one time from the end of the thread, and then let it be on the other side so that the edge is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second type of proper suturing which I describe is the way of Gualia, and this is from the same matter as him and recommended by him; it is that you sew that according to semilitut with which some doctors sew it, in such a way that they join every part to its equal part in him conveniently by nature; and apply one end of the wound to the other end of the wound, and this is done according to what you judge.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Put the needle into the end of the wound that is near you from outside, and make it penetrate to inside in this one, and leave two tips of the ciphac; and then turn the needle and let it penetrate from inside to outside in two tips of the ciphac.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those ones, and let them penetrate from inside to outside in two ends of the wound that are on the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common lighter suturing, and it is the suturing of which I spoke before.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the way of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some said that the suturing of the belly is rectified with two needles, so you insert into these one needle at a time, and begin from where you are supposed to, and let it penetrate into the other side according to the way those who sew the body with the mouth sew.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when a rupture is in the middle part of the belly, then the suturing of it is more difficult than of other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judging of medicine for a wound is judged according to other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of this is because when you find the wound still fresh with its blood in front so that the air does not alter it, and reduce the intestine and sew that and dress it decently, then place on it a carnificative powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then place on it some ointments which are to you known so that they make a hard stone and draw the threads, and let the ciphac and wound be consolidated; and then cure that in this way as is the curing of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then place on it immediately, because as soon as pus begins to flow out, change that two times a day, and let the patient move two times a day, and take care of him until he is healed, for you will not need other medicine in many dispositions when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound will communicate to the main members, then take wool of lion in oil of good quality, or in rosated oil, and place that around the places which are between the angles and under the joints.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, which it should, then anoint that with black styptic wine, and especially so if the rot is caused by the intestine and there is a penetrating opening into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what is of the gross intestine is easier to heal than what is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called “gegunu” does not receive healing from a wound that boxes in it from all sides; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of its size, and because of the subtlety of that one, and because of its proximity to nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what comes from the wound is the thread, and you obtain that fresh, then reduce it according to your rule by which you reduce the intestines in the same way.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has come to that space and is already green or black, then let you strengthen that with thread over the place that is blackened in it, because of the flow of blood, for there are veins and arteries in the thread.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert that which is other than that one, and let two ends of the thread hang from the end of the wound outside it, so that on you be eased the attraction of it by means of the seating of the thread and emission of the pus of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering of the wounds when they happen in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption happens in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some people, therefore because I saw one who had been wounded in his belly by a lance wound, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and he vomited and had ventosity.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I followed the curing of him until it was known that he was not confident in his healing, but continued to reduce that until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I have already seen the location consolidated, I guided over the patient that I received about him an incident of evil in his belly; and not receiving anything for this evil incident and remaining in their own dispositions eating and drinking, and also going into bath and being exercised in their words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And I have already said some experienced people that when the wound is in the intestine, and it is small, then we must sew it according to this manner: and you should take pieces of skin from large animals; and then join together the two lips of the wound and place one of those pieces with an open mouth over both lips of the wound; therefore, when it takes hold of those and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another worm nearby the first one, and do not stop doing this with worms one after another according to the quantity of the whole wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return that one and sew up the wound; and those heads attached inside will remain until the intestine is healed; and nothing harmful should happen to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be tied with a thin thread made from an intestine of an animal attached to it, because it is thinner than a needle; and you should take the end of those intestinal threads and make it very thin, and then tie the end of it with its own thread, wrapped around, and pierce that thread through needles and sew it up with that thread, and return that one to its disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of stitching with worms is not anything but according to the way of confidence and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is big and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then there is nothing but thinning, and not complete healing for it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment of hernia and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound and pustule when it becomes old and ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and oozes pus all the time and is not healed, then, in whichever part of the body it may be, universally, it is named fistula, and we call it hernia.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is hard, white knotting, without pain, and to which there is a hollow like the hollow of a bird's leg; and because of that it is named some knotted, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people it is moist, which oozes pus; and the moisture is cut off in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is increased, and is less, and is thick, and is thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said when I discussed wounds that any ulcer which is not healed or is not naked flesh, there are only one of nine causes for it: one of which is either due to lack of blood in the body, or due to wickedness of it; or because between it and its lips there is hard meat preventing growth of meat; or because it is of increased leanness; or because that ulcer within itself is rotten and the matter which is within it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable for treating it; or when corruption happens in the region, and it is pestilential; or due to property of the region like in Zaragoza, where there is made difficult digestion of evils, and delayed healing of apostema by nature; or because in it there is bone, or rotten bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already shown all those causes and their signs and the treatment for them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so I will make you know the treatment of hernia which is made by way of operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that hernia happens in all the parts of the body; for there are hernias which happen to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the joints composed by composition like that of the hand and the foot; and those are near to the principal member and similar ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore that one of these hernias which is according to this manner is of the evils of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is any hernia whose depth does not reach to those places I have said, and you expect and trust in the healing of it, and want to know about it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the hernia goes straight, and examine it with that.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the hernia is crooked, then investigate it with a probe of subtle lead, for lead with its lightness is separated and bent according to the crookedness.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the hernia has horrifying bumps, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, cauterize the openings for their openings, for the moisture by which you cauterize it goes through the other openings and comes out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then examine closely, according to which way you can know if there is a bone or nerve, and know whether the hollow of the hernia is far or near, or it is a hernia whose openings are on top of each other and is due to the sum of your strength, with your examination, with which you examine the patient, and the invention of the pain happens according to your compression with the hand over the location, and similar to the signs and the causes of the apostema.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have understood all those causes with true state, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider if it is an apparent hernia near or in a salty location, far from a joint, or of a nerve, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the locations which I have said to you and told.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry up the hernia as I have said before about its formation, and know what is in that filtration and of corrupt meats, and what is born in the opening of the meat, or of blood and of similar things, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the hernia is of great depth and is straight, then know that you pierce it in the preon as much as is possible for you to do so, and then cleanse it of all its corrupt meats; and then administer hot waters wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those within the hollow of the hernia, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that some times within so that the sharp medicine corrodes all that which is left in the hollow of the hernia of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with unguents which produce healthy meat within so that it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of hernia is bone and it is due to you having certified that, then examine it and dry it up according to what we have recommended, unless you forbid any cause of vein or nerve or of principal member as I have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is revealed and there is in it any corruption and blackness, then cut out that so that all the corruption is stopped; and then cure that with what it grows within so that it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and pus comes out as I have said, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then uncover it again and examine it closely and do the reason for it and the cleansing of it with your very strong medicine, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And thus if it is healthy, it is good; and if not, then you should know that the corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and so to you it is not wise to do anything but to leave it as it is.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the rotten bone is small, or it is possible for you to pull it out, then you should pull it out with fine forceps which are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then you must carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and of none should you leave any trace with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of the moisture makes you worried, and in their incision there is no fear or mistake, then dissect those membranes or meats if they are here, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to extract the bones at that time, then place over the wound what will fester the wound, and let it stay in there so that it is around those bones of meats and membranes, and guard the wound so that it does not heal, and the incision which you have made in your operation is constrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you are worried, place over it a pad soaked in oil, or a pad soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments; for when those membranes fester and the bones are separated from them by the incision, then their attraction is removed.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the bone of the leg or thigh or similar to them, and what is rotten in it is only its fascia, then cut away that fascia only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then close up the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is rotten in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that up and to incise all around where the corruption has come in, and then to heal that up so that it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you to have a man lie on his side so that he places that on his hip as an example and helper for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around thirty years of age had pain in his head, and the pain came from the parts within because the matter was brought to the head from within, and it is matter of an ulcer with a great ulcer, and there was not any external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so the time was prolonged with that because of the mistake of the doctors until the ulcer opened up, and many matters came out of it, and its cure was properly paused while the leg was fistulated, and there were many openings in it which all gave off putridity and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And so he was treated by many doctors for around two years, and there was not any wisdom in them but in the art, because I was called to him.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw his leg and the matters that ran out of it from those openings for a long time; and indeed the body of that man was all emaciated and his color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And so I inserted the probe into one of those openings and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And so I probed all the openings and found out that they came from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And so I cut and incisively entered into one of those openings where I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten, and it was already rotten and blackened; and a part of the leg was also rotten because it had penetrated into the membrane.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And so I removed what was discovered to me and prepared of the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and removed, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And so I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And so I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondly on the first discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I removed what appeared to me from that corruption, and so I made the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And so I discovered on him another time and did not cease to incisively enter the bone little by little particularly and to probe the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I had incisively entered around a palm of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and so I restored that with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation and incision on him except for the disposition of his pulse and for the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, because he had fainting in all hours from excess of evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so he is healthy from whole healing, and nothing is in place of hard bone; and the disposition of him in his body is good and his strength has returned, and he is conversing in his dispositions and did not make for him any contradiction in walking nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the prominent bone is in place of the body and has been extracted, then you should do this afterward in this manner: and you should take membrane and strengthen that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that while you hold it; and pause that membrane of woolen thread over the meat which is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the meat to the parts below, and you uncover the meat over the spot which you want to close up so that the saw does not cut the meat.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause wood or table below the bone properly, because when you do that it is not prohibited that the saw not cut the rotten meat.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And you should do the sawing on the rotten spot little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone and corruption does not appear in its appearance to feeling, and force the sawging on it another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not prominent, before it is one party continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the meat from all parts entirely; and so pause wood below, and then saw that from the first party where the corruption is so that the sawging is continued from the other party.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawging should be according to the spot of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, enter that rotten joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no ratio in it except wit.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the breast of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however you should examine the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and open that, and cut that according to any disposition which is possible for you, and with each wit be straightened to you when it does not make for you contradiction vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that the incisors and saws for cutting these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness and thinness and greatness and smallness, and hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for every kind of operation convenient instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that that operation makes for you on the kind of instrument of which you are adept; when with you is great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and witness of ways of illnesses, because then you have them by your tools what is convenient for them of the instruments for all illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Here is my translation of the first sentence, with no additional comments:
Forma de serra:	Form of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a razor:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this razor be shaped like a star-shaped key, and its points be shaped like the points of a stelefegi.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not convenient unless with this one are rubbed the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or a large mouth wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw decently made: Let it be made with a higher arch and the sharpness of it from iron, and its member of wood decently made.
Forma de lu:	Its form is:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which there is a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor similar to a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of a chisel with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller chisel:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another chisel; this one similar to a razor, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is used in various places on the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a razor which is convenient for cutting into those bones that are perforated:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and acute.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly to all the causes that we have said about razors and chisels and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of cutting extremities and of serrating bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be cut either by an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or you see the corruption go deep into the member which you have not perceived any cause, then know that you must cut that member to prevent the patient from dying or suffering a greater harm.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of him to whom it happens is that the member is made black as if it were burned by fire, or it becomes black close to where that decay has entered that member and it affects all the body; therefore cut with your chisel at that member.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of corruption is a percussion of some poisonous causes like that of the sea scorpion or of the viper or of the rattlesnake or of their likes.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is at the extremity of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it has accessed the hand, then you cut that at the joint of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter into the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead the arm is affected, then cut the arm at the elbow in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption goes further and turns around the elbow, then death follows for the patient; and in addition, another cause occurs in cure which is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, do this to the foot when corruption affects its toe, then you cut that at one of its toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it affects the instep of the foot, then you cut all the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it has entered into the toe, then you cut the foot at the joint of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached the toe, then there is nothing but dismissal, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting the member or serrating it is that you tighten the ligament in the part lowest where you want to cut, and tighten another ligament above the location; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts lowest, and extend the other minister in its place; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so as to be split wide open until all the flesh is exposed; and then it is cut or serrated.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And know that it is put on a linen of all parts so that it does not touch the affected location, and that it comes to the patient bandaged tightly and apposed with cauterized wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if it happens bleeding when wounds are opened, then you cauterize the location tightly, or pause there some powders to constrict the bleeding; and then return to your medication until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then bind the bandaged member with a ligament in a suitable way, and cure that until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And then he returns to you that he has fallen on a man on his foot, this accident which you have recomposed, which is when blackness has come to him in his foot by a scorching that was similar to the burning of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption has first occurred in his toe and extends to all the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for himself remedies more than that medicine may go to the member with the strength of it that was struck by pain and scorching, and he cut that foot at the joint, and fire healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time had occurred to him that corruptive condition in the toe of his hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me and so I perceived the excess of that suppuration with that which was applied on the hand of remedies, and then the cleansing of his body; and the suppuration is not reduced and began to go to another toe as it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he called me to cut his hand, and I did not want to do that hoping about the reaction of that suppuration, and if he had to die because the virtue of life was above cauterization.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he left me, he returned to his land and came back to me that man prepared and cut all of his hand, and it healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narration unless it is an aide about that which strikes at the source of this disease, and that it is a sign by which it is understood and according to which it turns out.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of cure of sores and quality of cauterization with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When apostemas occur in various members of the body and the space of the apostema is prolonged as it collects pus, then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, and the place is washed clean, and there is not inflammation on bone or on nerve or on ligament; it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged as corruption prevails in any member, then it is called a sinus and not a fistula.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And its cure is that you cut that codena completely as it is rolled, and more so when it is made with a saw, and compresses that do not adhere to the affected location by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the codena adheres and that corruption does not succeed by other consequence, and in the codena has been a hollow, then cure it with a plaster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you see gives off an offensive odor, then cauterize it with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and wine agreed and received parts equally in a vessel, and are placed tightly over the fire so that the medicine is made hot and poured to specks of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from him and dissolve it with water and honey; and enema the rectum with it, and strengthen its orifice, and leave the medicine in him for the amount of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract it with a syringe; and do this for as many days until the rectum is cleansed and the modesty restored.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is enema'd with water of ashes when you do not have this medicine at hand; and it is that you take the ashes of wood, and put water on top of it; and then stir it and enema with it until you are certain the rectum is cleaned out.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then enema with water and honey mixed with ground cinammon, and also with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine causes adhesion to the rectum, and especially when there is excess of dryness and stippling in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are convinced that the rectum is restored, then enema with something that makes the flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take the thin unguent and dissolve it with rose oil and stout wine; or you can enema with some other medicines and unguents which I have already written about in the treatise on unguents.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the rectum is tight and does not receive the cannula of the enema, then you should widen it with a small iron gradually, and place cautery wrapped in unguent Egyptian or unguent Basilicon on it until it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you should sew up the lips of it and leave a quantity in which the enema can be inserted without addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of it through which the bowel runs is raised up to the parts above, then dry that in the pus base place that is in it so that the bowel runs down inside, for when the bowel is constricted in the rectum, flesh will be generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the rectum all around in the pus base place as you wish, then you should make an incision so that you prepare the member with preparation by which the bowel runs slightly more easily according to what you have experienced and that no cause of the bowel be retained in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take medicines that solidify, which are placed over the rectum conveniently so that you extend those over linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the linen should be of such great quantity as to make the communication of the whole rectum; and then cut in with forceps at the right of the orifice of the rectum a wound more ample than the orifice of the rectum; and then extend over another piece of linen of the unguents of lions according to the amount of the wound, and place it over that in position distant from the orifice of the rectum so that the bowel's discharge is away from it and not obstinate the great linen but rather after some days once a day.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is over the orifice of the rectum, which restores in all hour by itself that which is stuck in it of the bowel.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if that which runs from it of the bowel is little or much, or is digested, or not digested:
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this consider the place of that rectum, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the orifice of the rectum already sticking, or becoming attached, then on the third day you can loosen it, and when you loosen the plaster, then change the linen and renew the unguent.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the rectum a subtle humour flows for a long space, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is proper, for some men in whom generation of flesh in their plasters is delayed and of those so in whom the contrary to it is done.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the rectum for several days bowel of undigested food is discharged, then know that the rectum does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the rectum is delayed and the cause prolonged, then you temper in the dryness of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus with thin unguent when excess of addition of stiptic is in it.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best with which it is cured is that you take thin unguent and dissolve it in rose oil, and is on top of it old wine tempered in its substance, and then confect that with it, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And already do likewise in that action when there is no bowel, thin unguent, honey when it is cut in so that it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and mix all together and powder it over the honey which is over the fire, and then line that over linen and strengthen it over the rectum; and line that with the honey which you have cut in so that it is thickened and powdered over linen and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are administered with long aristology and slices of heavenly lily (and it is heavenly lily) and farina of erys and centaurea, and use those simples or mix them, powder all together and over the honey which you have recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the rectum is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption is in its depth, and already do incision on the bones or in the other hard members or bowels; then you cure it with tubular treatment, thus as above is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment of panaricus and nail scraped and digit addition and section:
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaricus is an abscess which arises below the nail of the finger of the hand or of the foot, and it is very strong in the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or it is an abscess of cauterisation, or it is corrupted, and causes bowel to flow that corrodes the roots of the nail, and very strongly corrupts all of it, and very strongly pervades its corruption to the bone within which it has a fetent odour, and its extremity is made dark, and its colour is made dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that according to what we have said in the division and your cure does not come about, then see that you incise with iron all of the excess which is swollen from the nail and then cauterise the wound, for cautery benefits greatly in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail are closed and compact, and they begin to press and sting it, then see that you pause a subtle ray below the angle of the nail which presses the flesh, and drive that up and insert that flesh with facility, and pause over that which exudes from the flesh of the medicines scorching within so that all is restored.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already pervaded the bone, then see that you incise the bone and extract it, for there is no time in which the bone corrupted is healed.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the decay and corruption go to the finger, then you insert that in one of the knots according to how it is premeditated, and then cure that so that it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if there is a blow or scratch on the nail and as a result there is intense pain in that place, then you should start by bleeding the patient and dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse cut above it, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate the flesh below the nail, for you will cause intense pain to the patient and will provoke the birth of superfluous flesh in that place; then heal that place with something that alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But since it is found in some people that there is very little flesh and very few bones, or very little nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some are born in the root of a joint, or are born in some knuckles of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some knuckles of the finger is not painful, and that which is born in the joints is very painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And with those who are born fleshy, the cut is easy and you should insert it into its root with a wide spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But that which is born in the root of a joint, its cure is difficult; and therefore beware of cutting it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But with that which is born in the finger at the knuckles, you should start by inserting the flesh of it into the bone with a round incision and then bind it with one of those sutures appropriate for that purpose, and heal that until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But the consolidation that happens to the fingers between their joints, either from the birth of the person, or from consolidation of a plague, or from a fire, or from something similar, then you should dry that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between them some bandages soaked in rose oil so that they are not consolidated quickly and separate those, or place between them a thin sheet of lead subtle enough so that it is consolidated according to the situation.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From an incision of a vein, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are varicose and are thick coiled veins full of melancholic superfluities that come in the parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you should administer a purgation of the body with black bile several times with a strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But their cure is according to two methods: the first is that it is incised and that black blood is drawn out; the other method is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The cut is according to this method: soak the leg first with hot water so that the thick blood is dissolved, which is feculent in the leg, and then tighten the patient's leg from the highest part of the thigh towards the lowest part of the groin with a bandage, and then dry the vein at one, two, or three places with a wide cut, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the lowest part of the leg upwards, inside and out, until the quantity that you want and can endure is expelled, and the strength of the patient permits.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bind that, and order him to abstain from foods that engender black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this affects the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But their elevation is according to this method: you race the leg of the patient if there are pains in it, and then put him in a bath and soak his leg with hot water so that he becomes red and the veins become swollen; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not available, so that the member becomes warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the vein on the right side of the leg by cutting it in the long or behind part of it, or in the lowest part of it below the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the vein with nails and gouge the vein from all parts where it appears to you, and its appearance should decline to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore, when you see that white and chord-like substance, then you know that the vein is tied.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you put it below the thread so that it is elevated and let out of the vein, and suspend that with a lion-skin thong.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another cut, and then dry that cut through three fingers, and gouge the vein from above where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and insert it into the posterior cut below the ankle, and then extract it and elevate it until it is expelled by the second cut, and then extract it from the cut above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the highest or uppermost cut of all the cuts, so that all is expelled; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey you in extracting and elevating, then insert a strong bent needle into it and ligature that and extract it, or insert your hand below the thread and turn your hand all around where it is inserted.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not broken; for if it is broken, it is difficult for you to elevate that motion and it has come upon the patient through that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it is expelled, then place over the site of the plague wool soaked in wine and rose oil and not-rose oil, and heal that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity, to which there is involution at its parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you should gouge that in all of its tortuosity and its involution, and then suspend that with nails so that you elevate it all.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that you do not cut the vein and plague it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incision from which the vein is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of lion-skin thong:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not cut in this way with nails nor is it of acute extremity so that it does not plague the vein; and it is of great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein through its subtlety; it has in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extraction of the leg vein:
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands as in Al-Ateg in the warm land of Arabia and in the hot and dry lands of India, where there is little vegetation and few trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is very rarely generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction which comes below the vein as venom from serpents and worms and maggots and worms engendered between the vein and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the occurrence of this vein is that there is violent inflammation in the leg and then the place becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that blister which seems like the root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when his extremity appears, then you must wrap a piece of lead weighing half a drachma around it; and hang the lead from the arm by means of a thread, and let it rest on the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see his eyes go outside because of something, wrap that up in lead and put it on over there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the swelling persists, then you insert a piece into him and wrap around the rest; but do not insert that part which was on the outside because it will be constricted and go inside the flesh and cause inflammation, pus and a bad ulcer at the site.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it should be treated gradually and extracted little by little, until it is pulled out completely from the rear of him so that no cause remains inside his body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, there are some people whose length is up to 20 or even 30 palm-widths; and I have seen one that was over 50 palms in length.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut into during the time of its medication, then insert a needle into the opening and pierce it with a long needle throughout his body until everything that is in the material is evacuated, and cause putrefaction of the site for several days using medicines; and then cure that through the treatment of ulcers.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and comes to him many openings, and is extended from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so cure that as we have said in the division and with what is above said.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	About the generation of worms under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some lands bovine disease because many times it affects cows and it is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes through the whole body pushing and going down, and it is revealed by its movement from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is through putrefaction of certain humors just like it happens with worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice because when it goes through the body and rises to the head, then it breaks out violently and goes in and destroys the brain, and that is why many times it happens.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done unless through his walking and appearing from him; and then when you see it above him and what is under him with strong constriction, then dry it out on him and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is buried in the flesh and you cannot pull it out, then put fire on the site where it is hiding; and the main reason that is feared is corruption of him by which he corrupts the site just as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	But if you see that it has reached the head close to the brain, then constrict on his forehead with a strong grip and dry him out there and extract that; and if the patient needs cleansing of his body with medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors and guard himself from foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	About the disease of children.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is named in our land a pain, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then is transferred from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you will see that according to what I tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a woman patient at a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation on the vein of the arm, and as pus came out for an hour, I saw that inflammation go like a worm pushing, but slowly, just as if it were a living silver when it goes from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then it went into the pain of that site and settled in the muscles, and then I applied a plaster there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it went throughout his body until it reached his other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I saw it move throughout his body just as I saw it, and was very surprised by its movement from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my own eyes according to that manner; but I have seen many which cause pain being transferred from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see that with the eyes just as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that it was because the woman was old, with thin skin and veins showing through, and in this she appeared to me that winding movement transferred from place to place.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this backward-cure in those who are delicate and with thin skin and veins showing through.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure that and the patient feels the pain, then do not put your hand on the opening as we have said above, but constrict it and pull it out slowly and dry it out there until that winding movement is stopped, and cauterize the site.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then cure that through expulsion of the body and by causing that winding movement to happen, and take out those by foul-smelling pills and pills of serapium and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	About extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to their species, and according to the parts of the body where they hit, for the diversity of them is that some have great points, and small ones, and hooked ones, and blunt ones; and there are those that have three angles, and there are others that have tongues.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the flesh in which they hit is according to two ways: for the members are either principal concavities such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and their likenesses; and then when it hits one of these members and appears to you to be a death-stroke, which I have told about, then beware of extracting that arrow in those who show those great dispositions, and if you do not see those bad signs, and the arrow is not buried deep in the member, then extract that and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the liver are when it hits that arrow and pierces the bone and is stuck in the cyphax which is above the brain, for then occurs violent soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and heat in the eyes, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasm and mixing of the mind and vomiting of bile, and a strong loss of speech and destruction of voice, and moisture comes out from the wound site like white pus, and you see him like bloodless.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow if it is not out.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart are that it is near the left mammary gland, and if it is stuck in a hard cause, and not a soft one; and then the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and it draws out black blood from the wound site, and causes shivering of the limbs, and fainting, and syncope; and then you know that death is certain.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when it has wounded the lungs are effusion of bloody spume from the wound site, and the blood vessels that are near the throat are swollen, and the color of the patient turns pale, and he breathes heavily, and asks for air to breathe.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if he pierces the arrow into the veil that is on his foot, and the pain is then near the little ribs, and the great vein is made with great pain and sighing, and all the parts of the muscles are not painful.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if he pierces the arrow into the stomach, then very soon you will see from the plague some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if he pierces the arrow into the belly, and it is stuck in there, you will see some slit of the plague, or the fabric, or hernia which is torn, and there is no hope for the cure of him without extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow pierces into the bladder, and urine flows out of it, and some cause processes outside the parts, and there is great pain on the patient, then know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members like the face, neck, and throat, and shoulders, and the joints of the back, and the collar bone, and the hip, and their similar parts, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows so that you can understand it and use it for your cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason is that in a man who has been shot with an arrow in the tear duct of his eye, and I extracted it from the other side, after cutting through the bone of his nostril, he healed and did not lose the use of his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was shot in the bone of his nostril, below the eyelid, and the arrow was already concealed and he did not get it out except for a small end with which it adhered to his face, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's claw at its tip, and there were no nostrils.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew healed, and his eye did not suffer any evil accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that one to which the bone was attached; and then I entered between two bones with it, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I made it thin with that, and then extracted it, and the Christian healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who was shot in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and then, since more than thirty days had passed and there was no change in him about his dispositions, I entered into the arrow and worked on it, and he healed, and no evil accident befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow was shot into his back, and the plague solidified on him, and after fire had been applied to it for seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who was shot with an arrow in her belly, and the plague solidified inside her, and she did not change in her dispositions in any way, and the woman did not suffer harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man to whom an arrow was shot into his face and the plague solidified, and the arrow broke, not causing him any pain, and similar things happened here.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow of the king's son who was shot in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right a little, and the whole arrow was concealed.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his cure when the arrow entered three days ago.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the plague of the arrow very tight; and then I inquired into it with a very thin needle, and he did not feel that; but he felt a sting below the right nostril, and then I perceived that this sting was from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the place with ointment in which is verityative and digestive, believing to me that the location appears to me to be the location of the arrow, so that it dries on it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there happened no significant incident to the location that the arrow had reached that location; and I continued with the ointment on it for many days, and there happened no accident; and the plague consolidated in the meantime, and the throat of the extraction of him healed over a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and made me aware of it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied acute corrosive medicine to the plague for many days until fire opened it up, and with a probe, I probed that, and found the tip of the arrow sticking in the bone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I continued the perception of the plague with that acute medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared to me visibly, and I passed through time with that for the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then when the plague was swollen, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and remove it, without resistance, I did not cease probing and working on that with various tools, until one day I began on that with tools of descentment, according to the form of those in the end of the chapter, and extracted that; and then restored that plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored that and the plague consolidated, and the throat healed with entire health, and there happened no evil in him.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows so that you pause this rule and significance about what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by narration or understanding, nor does it comprehend those the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare a little about what is moving about what is absent; and find operation new and tool novel according to the descentment of the causes strange of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not wrenched from the parts in which they are stuck but according to two ways, either by attraction of the location in which they enter or by the contrary of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is wrenched from the location from which it entered, or is arrow proceeding in a fleshy location, and is drawn out and wrenched.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not yield to pressure of the hour in which it entered, then know that you leave it for some days until the flesh around it dries out and is loosened from its entrance and exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is stuck in bones and does not yield to you, then let it go for some days and repeat that with attraction and motion on each day, and it is wrenched.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not yield to you after some days, then know that you bore into the circuit of the arrow in that bone of every part with a very thin borer until the location is enlarged, and then extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already progressed into one of the ventricles of the brain, and there appear in the throat some of those accidents which I have said, then abstain from the extraction of the arrow and let it go until its owner becomes equal after a few days; for if the arrow pierces the skull, then death is not prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck but in the bone of the body only and does not pass into the brain, and the throat does not suffer any cause of those accidents for some days, then you probe with the attraction of the arrow and with the attraction of him.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is very stubborn and does not respond to your efforts to extract it, then you should administer cauterization around the arrowhead as we have recommended, and then heal the wound where it was located.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is hidden in the body and hidden from the senses, then you should probe that area with a pointed instrument that is suitable for extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the tightness of the flesh and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in the way, then you should cut into the flesh so that it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are ears attached to it, then you should carefully loosen the flesh around the arrowhead, using all your skill; and cut around the arrowhead, if you cannot extract it through the opening in the flesh created by the fracture of the ears and by twisting them so that they loosen.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you are extracting the arrow from any location, you should use your hand with forceps in every way possible to make it loosen; and gently with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and it is easy for you to extract it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot remove it immediately, then you should leave it for a few days until the tissues around it have healed; and then try again when the time has passed.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you are facing a flow of blood, then you should do what we have said about healing in its respective chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard against damaging any veins or nerves, or the bowel; and use your skills in every possible way to extract the arrow, doing so with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as we have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And when you are contracting the arrow to pull it out, make sure the patient is in a position that will facilitate its removal according to its direction and angle, as that is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then do what is possible for you based on your knowledge of the patient's anatomy.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are shot in the opposite direction of the other side, or those that have exited through the opposite side, or cause a bulge at the tip of the arrow from the deeper part of the wound, then you should press on it; and cut it according to how far the forceps can reach; and then pull it out, as it is easier to remove.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is stuck in the bone, then you should twist the blade according to its angle so that the arrow cuts into the bone, and enlarge the wound, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Otherwise, leave it for a few days, and then try again when it has become loose.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in it, then you should push on it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer pressure, then you should insert it into the arrow's groove so that it fits snugly into the concave part of the arrowhead and then push on it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrowhead is concave, then you should push on it with a strong instrument inserted into it, as the arrow will be loosen by that action.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is stuck in the wound, then you should cut away all the flesh around it that is possible for you, and then heal it as best you can.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow pierces the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your finger, then you should cut away around it and guard against damaging any veins or nerves; and extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary, and heal it.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of the forceps used to pull out arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	They are shaped like the beak of an eagle, serrated so that they grip the arrow tightly and don't slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And they are made in various shapes: large and small, wide or narrow, depending on the size of the arrow, the depth of the wound, the width of the opening, and how tight it is.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of the concave tip is designed like the beak of an eagle to loosen the arrowhead inside it, and to create pressure on the shaft;
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The shape of the tip that pushes against the shaft:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	shaped like a nail so that it can loosen the arrowhead inside the concave arrow and is pushed by it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From the puncturing of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which blood flows out when they are punctured are .xxx., which are in the head .xvi., There are two pulsating veins which appear near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that grow on the temples; and two veins in the tear ducts of the eyes, called aspicientz; and a vein prepared at the middle of the forehead, and a vein at the tip of the nose; and two veins at the neck; and two veins at the upper lip; and — these are called the algelic veins —; and two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are punctured in the arms are .v.; Because one of them is the cephalic vein, and it comes from the wild thyme; and the people call it “the vein of the head”, and it is superficial, and it is a small vein composed of a branch of the basilic vein and another branch of the cephalic vein; and the people call it “the vein of all the body”, and the basilic vein is the one that runs along the arm, and it is called “wrist vein”, and the common people call it “vein of the belly”; and the funis vein, which runs along the forearm, and it is the one through which the puncturing occurs, and it appears prominently; and the salvatella, which is the vein between the little finger and the little finger, and there are two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the leg and thigh there are three veins; one of them is below the curve of the jaw of the jaw, and the other is the sciatic vein, which is below the curve of the domestic jaw; and there are other similar veins in the leg.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of the veins near the ears is through old catharics, bloodletting, and ancient ulcers and sores on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding them is according to what I instruct you: it is that you cut the patient's head, and wash his head in the occipital area where both veins are located with a wide bandage, applying good pressure; then tie the patient's neck with a cloth so that the two wounds near the ears appear on both sides of a depressed area of the head; and feel their pulses with your finger, and if you sense their pulses with your finger, here is the sign with your finger.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the cutting knife, and it is the one that is inserted, and then you insert it below the vein in the bone so that the puncturing comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand up with the vein and the bone above, and pierce the vein with an inserted knife.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be the amount of two fingers, give or take a little; and let the blood flow as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply a strong powder and leave it there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now, at the beginning of the book, we shall describe their appearance and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But the two veins of the temples, from which bloodletting is performed, are ancient and rotten, and have constant suppuration and acute overflows to the ears.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the way to let blood from these is according to what you see: constrict the patient's neck until the two veins become visible by a clear feeling and are demonstrated by your finger; and then you pierce them.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you lift the vein above the artery with your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy needle beneath it, and lift the vein upward; and you pierce it thus as you have done with the other two veins; and let blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the constriction on the patient' neck and place your finger over the vein for an hour; and place a bandage and strong powder over it, and leave it there until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the description of them, their appearance, their cauterization, and their attraction have now been described at the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the phlebotomy of the vein on the forehead is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic artery for ancient diseases of the face and for suppuration and bad ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the way to let blood from it is according to what you see; it is that the patient constricts his neck with a bandage until the vein becomes visible. Then take the instrument named "fossory", of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the prominent point at the top of the fossory onto the vein and pierce it with a needle or other sharp object in its hand, and let blood flow according to the quantity you wish. Then loosen the constriction on the patient's neck and strengthen that area until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened by phlebotomy on the side, but not so that the phlebotomy has a sharp end as other phlebotomies do, rather it has a flat end, and it is phlebotomized according to its width, because the bone is near and would break through if it were too thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the phlebotomy of the two veins that are in the lachrymal area for suppuration of the eye because of bad ulcers and diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And its quality is that the patient constricts his neck with a bandage and then you phlebotomize them while you are standing over his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy is done according to its width and length a little with few phlebotomies, because there is no flesh in that place; and if the phlebotomy is thin, its end will easily be broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let blood flow as much as you need, and place a bandage over them, and strengthen that area for a day, and then loosen those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But the phlebotomy of the vein on the nose is relevant to acute fever and violent suppuration, and diseases of the face and suppuration that occurs in the face, especially when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the way to let blood from it is that the patient constricts his neck and then you take his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy needle long and thin, and insert it in the middle part of the nose according to its straightness, because the vein does not become visible here, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Take care that you finish your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and let blood flow according to your need; then bind it for a night, because it is restored quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the phlebotomy of the two veins that are on the arm is relevant to constriction of the elbow and to the beginning of leprosy, and many diseases, and bad ulcers as well as with herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And its quality is that the patient constricts each one under his neck with a bandage; and the doctor stands over the patient's head, and the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein along with a small, wide phlebotomy needle little by little. Then extract blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what you see is needed for that; and then do likewise with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then loosen the bandage and strengthen the two veins with a mild constriction so that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it on until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the phlebotomy of the veins in the armpit is relevant to small blisters and pustules on the mouth, and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and its surroundings.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And its quality is that you make the patient lean forward, and strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then open his lips and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other is on the left; and their demonstration is through their blackness, and more so because in the surroundings of those are small black veins. Then pierce each one with a piercing incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you are doubtful and do not know which is which, then listen to the incision of the larger one, and to the pus that is manifest in them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And do likewise with the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But usually it is better to pierce the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of the two veins that are below the tongue its phlebotomy is relevant to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for suppuration that occurs in the throat, for the disease of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the way to phlebotomize them is that you follow the patient between your fingers in front of the sun, and lift his tongue, and look underneath it, of one side of which there is a vein and on the other side there is a vein, and the color of each is inclining towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize them; and be careful that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomizing them, because beneath them are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are phlebotomized in the groin are those through which blood usually flows in all men, and their phlebotomy is done according to two manners, either with a needle of myrrh or olive oil at a declining thinness; or with a cautery blade, and it calls if there is no pain, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this no-pain is that it convenes to incision and of those there are wide and thin ones according to the width of the veins and according to their constriction.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of phlebotomy of myrrh:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Take the needle in this way with its times, and it convenes to open the veins that are curved, full and apparently gross; and to those that contain thick blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of phlebotomy of olive oil:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and of very thin extremity, and it convenes to phlebotomy of veins that contain subtle blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the phlebotomy of the basilic vein which is one of three veins; for extracting blood from diseases that are below the throat and neck, and what affects the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, to be very careful and cautious in it, because beneath it there is an artery, and if he err and puncture the phlebotomy needle into the artery, it will cut that artery and cause blood flow, so that whoever performs that phlebotomy with a phlebotomy needle, before doing so, should incise with a scalpel.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear through a manifest appearance, then you should leave it and change to the other, or look for one of its branches; or phlebotomize at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and incise it with a phlebotomy needle with alnessil as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you wish to perform the phlebotomy in the middle of the arm, then before the constriction of the arm, touch the area between the wrist and the elbow, and place a ligature over it; and raise the arm and incise the vein with a concave section using a phlebotomy needle as we have said; and be careful not to pierce the artery in any space of the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling in the location that you have placed the ligature, then that swelling is an artery, and so avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as yellow as infant's urine, and the blood is thin, then know that it is arterial blood; and so cover it and place your finger over it for a long time; and press your finger, and if the blood is stopped, even if it flows several times, then tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the patient from the moisture of it, and be very cautious with it and do not harm him for several days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not stopped, and you see that you must apply medicine to it, then you should incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of it is constricted, and the blood is stopped; or take a piece of cotton, and cover that, and take half of it and tighten that over the location of the vein with a bandage, descending with a ligature on another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is stopped, that is good; and if not, then heal that with what it was preceded from the location of the powders causing stopped blood flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the blood in some dispositions is difficult due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of constriction of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But from the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial when you extract blood from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because of this it is composed of a branch of the basilic and of a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist to be very cautious in the phlebotomy of that, because beneath it there is a nerve; and so if he err and puncture the phlebotomy needle into the nerve and injure the nerve, stupor will occur, and healing from it will be difficult, and some people will not heal at all. And this nerve sometimes appears to some men and is subtle and not obvious, then you should place the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with a section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and benefits illnesses of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is appropriate in this particularly that you should phlebotomize with a phlebotomy needle made of olive or of myrrh; for it is the safest of all veins, because beneath it there are no arteries nor nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But however, it is appropriate for you that in phlebotomy, you should be careful that with the phlebotomy needle, you do not puncture only the head of the wrist and seek the location farthest away, and do not notice it if it is not struck by the first percussion to be over it by phlebotomy several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But however, in some people, it is only apostemat when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not notice that apostema.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of that and its accidents are many, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that one should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in preservation of health and for hope of it, and that phlebotomy be done at the beginning of spring, over breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter, when there are signs of engorgement.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy be done and on the third day, or the first after that three hours have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But phlebotomy which is administered, but when it provokes convenience and necessity for that, or at night or during the day, at any time and at any moment.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And a child should not be phlebotomized until he is fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized who have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, it is appropriate that he cleanse his intestines before phlebotomy with a lion's claw, if in them there are motes of retained fends, so that the veins do not cast off the superfluities in the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are purified, and that they do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let not be phlebotomized the patients with recent fever and vomiting, or recovering from illness, nor due to drunkenness, nor because of the cause that dissolves virtue, whether in body or soul. And let phlebotomy be avoided during colic pain and after vomiting, and after abdominal discomfort, and during multiplication of urine and defecation, and from every cause that dissolves virtue.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in the subtlety of humors before that if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible for it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or it is exercised by some exercise so that the blood is purified.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And do the phlebotomy of him in the feet in the middle of the day, so it is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And be careful that the feet of him are guarded in that day from all evil accidents, as it is anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as it is labour and excessive pain and voiding and شبیه to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in its use, let the causes be present in the use of which the blood is used for men with aromatization and odour and with balsams and شبیه to them according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the phlebotomist follow over a joint that is above that the joint which must be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extend his arm, and rub that by the phlebotomist two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a bandage and wrap that two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the constriction be moderate, because if the constriction is not equal or the constriction is with superfluity, then blood flow is prohibited; or it is with softening, and then blood flow of the body is prohibited.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then the constriction, so that the person who is to be bled, rubs his hands together between them until the veins are swollen and become apparent to the sense.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebотомist anoints his phlebotomy knife with a little of the proper old oil; and then he places his left hand's index finger over that vein, below the site from which he wishes to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein escapes a little, and the pulse is slowed down because some veins are compressed like cords when they flee, and from those is extracted the ventosity, and when you place the phlebotomy knife upon it, it is contracted by the phlebotomy knife, and the phlebotomist is discovered; and the phlebotomy knife does not open the vein, and if it opens it, that vein is constricted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, so that the phlebotomist is stopped up and is solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then you put down the phlebotomy knife, but if the vein is open in a bend, then it is good; and if not, you iterate that or another bend below that location a little, or on it with a festival, if the location is not pustular.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is pustular, or the patient becomes frightened, then you let it be for one or two days, and do not strain the limb, because soon it will throw off the pustule through cautery, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then iterate the phlebotomy if it is desired.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and subtle blood seeps out, and you fear that not enough blood will come out the desired amount, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that cut according to rectitude and adjust in the wound a little, and do that with festival in front of what the location is pustular, because the location is pustular in most men due to small wounds.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that one already pustular, then do not iterate on it, because it does not excuse you for any cause; and put over that some part of the cut with oil, because it expels the body of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this location than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer cut of oil in every phlebotomy with which phlebotomists phlebotomize the veins according to the prohibition of body of blood, and they do that tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is put from one of those on the location, because the blood is subtilized and is revolved when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of the phlebotomy a great pustule is engendered, because many bends happen, and mainly to that which is not bled but that bend, or in the wound of the vein little, then you cut it, and put on the location sponge infused in water and salt, a little warmed, and constrict that for one hour, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And so that he does that appropriately the movement of blood from that vein with fulfillment of him or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it turns in the location for several days any blackness or greenness, do not note that; and if you want to, put over that some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of gentian or of camomile or similar to him.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times happen pustules and eminences due to phlebotomy of the basilic.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then put your hand over that, and if you then press upon that with your hand strongly, then that eminence is wicked and bad; and then beware that you put on that any cause of what we have said, because soon blood will flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a poultice with what is astringent, so that the location is hardened, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And so that you extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color winning over the blood according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, then you let it go until it becomes red; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it go until it becomes subtilized; and similarly if it is acute, until the acuteness of it is lost.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And so for him who is full and strong and has need of extraction of blood in a bend, let the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy knife be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in him who is feeble, let the contrary of that be done, and so for him who extracts that in many bends, let the cut be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And what is best administered in phlebotomy of vein is that it is the transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from flow of blood and incision of nerve, and it is more pleasantable and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to whom is accustomed to occur syncope due to phlebotomy, and so you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little of bread infused in wine of pomegranates or of simple oxymel warmed; and extract from him blood in three or four bends.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is fainting of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy bread infused in myrrh syrup or in scented honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in scented syrup and many odorous things.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if it happens syncope due to phlebotomy, and it is caused of him issue of much blood, then so that he take in drinking water of meat and scented syrup mild; and use of aromaticity with aloeswood, and let his feet be unbound by that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes which we have said in the division in the chapter of syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to open his arm and dissolve his blood second bend, let that for whom the phlebotomy is for much evacuation, and whose virtue is feeble, evacuate the blood little by little according to the quantity of his virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But who wants to open his arm and let his blood second time, and whose body is strong, then do that after seven or nine hours of the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But who wants to throw the blood of his body contrary to the side to which he inclines, let that be opened on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But the body in which is much blood already warmed and acuteness happens and fever occurs, let that be extracted of him blood in one bend and let there be extracted of him great quantity and let the wound be amplified so that syncope occurs, then you will have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy; and let your hand rest over his pulse due to the body of blood, so that death does not occur in place of syncope, because many times it occurs that when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And not when you want to open the arm and evacuate blood second time, when the opening of the vein is closed and there is made difficult issue of blood, let that be pressed upon strongly by you and bent it be extended lengthily, because that is too ill.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let that be stopped before it is phlebotomized second time; or remove that with the acuteness of the phlebotomy knife when blood coagulates in the opening of the vein; or put over that tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress that with lengthier compression so that blood is expelled.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is pustular, then let it be left alone and do not touch it until the pustule is settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if you are prompted by necessity to let blood again, and there is no excuse, then you may bleed him in that spot or on the other arm into another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called “the rope of the arm” is bled in place of the axillary or basilic vein when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient puts his hand in warm water so that the vein swells up and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then it should be tightly bound with a small ligature; and phlebotomy should be done according to the small transverse vein, not latitudinally or according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And the incision should be wide and your phlebotomy should be with which you bleed that on the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you put the hand again in warm water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from putting the hand in warm water, and the month is put the body of blood in cold water in winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins because from here there is no pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the wrist of the right hand is related to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that you bind the hand with a ligature or your hand, since you have put it in warm water so that the vein is swollen and is clearly demonstrated by looking at it; and phlebotomy the transverse vein; and if you pierce it from any side it will not harm.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And beware that you do not pierce your hand with the phlebotomy, because here are the nerves of the teeth which are bare of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then put the hand again in warm water and let the blood run in that, for if you do not put it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you put oil and salt on the vein so that it is not consolidated by clotting; and similarly you do in all wound.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the benefit of phlebotomy of that of the left hand is related to diseases of the brain.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the phlebotomy of him as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of phlebotomy of the vein is to diseases that are below the body, as well as diseases of the mother, and retention of menses, and diseases of the lungs and ulcers of thighs and legs, and their like of the diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient puts his foot in warm water and makes friction on it so that the veins appear clearly; and bind over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein is found between the toes, and from there it is branched into the fascia of the foot many small branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore phlebotomy the widest branch or below the leg where it comes from the talus bone because it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you phlebotomize that in the fascia of the foot, then you must beware of nerves which are below that on the fascia of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize across, as if you wanted to pierce it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomies be gentle.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if it is prohibited to raise the blood, then you put the foot of him in warm water and let the blood run in that so that it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist mistakes in the first time, then you repeat with phlebotomy on his few times, for the location is safer; and do not fear of evil, but beware of nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do with the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic nerve, its location as we have said is below the talus bone from the wild heel.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of phlebotomy of it is to hip pain when it is due to blood heat.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient bathes and ties a bandage tightly around his thigh from behind below the hip over the top of four fingers in one long band, for it appears only by this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to any angle that is possible to you and according to the transverse vein, and it is better; or pierce that by incision or secces that vein by section, for its location is safer.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men hidden; and if you pierce that, and it does not appear at all, then phlebotomy some branch of it, and it is the one which appears on the back of the foot opposite the little finger and ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of nerves, and let the blood run in the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then loosen the bandage and place it over the location of phlebotomy tightly, for loosely it is not healthy.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozes are of horns, or of ram, or of glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done according to two ways: the one is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation which is without scarification is according to two ways, for it is with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilations which are administered by scarification and extraction of blood are twelve locations of the body, of which one in which they pause ventilations is the alnocrati, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle location of them from two parts of the neck together; and ventilations of the chin below the mandible more below the mouth; and ventilations of two spatulas; and ventilations of alohoster, and it is on the edge of the throat; and ventilations of two focils, and they are of two arms; and ventilations of two cavilhas; and ventilations of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood but from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and for that it does not have the virtue through them, as well as through phlebotomy; nor beware that ventilation is done with fire or without fire in any disease made by repletion so that the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity prompts ventilation for disease or continence, administer that at the beginning of the month and in the end of it, and in the middle of it and whenever time is.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason for which it is in men in which blood is multiplied while indigestion of extraction by ventilation and atrobation in his head heaviness and dryness; and of those who atrobate repletion and rigidity on their face, and on their neck; and of those who atrobate pricking in the face, or that the tongue is swollen and spews blood; and of those whose sleep is multiplied, and of those who bleed in sleep awaking and old and phlegmy and other causes to them similarly.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when you see any of these signs, and especially if they occur in the third or fourth week of the month, then we command that a purgative be administered after two or three hours have passed during the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the purpose of purging from the neck is that when there is pressure in the head and this is accompanied by a swelling in the throat, then it is appropriate for there to be an evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this purging is in the place of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use one who has a complexional tendency to phlegm, or in whom there is a cold, for this causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And because of this, one should not use those who are old and whose heads have cold diseases.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But if someone is being treated with this method and they show signs of fainting, then one should command the person doing the purging to lift their hand slightly from the affected area in order to prevent the patient from losing consciousness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But the purging of the neck vein is in place of phlebotomy on the external carotid artery and the basilic vein: and because of this it helps against asthma, and the constriction of the larynx and the division of the instrument of voice, and coughing, and regurgitation.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is advisable to keep the neck purging light, because if it is too strong, it causes weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the purging of the temples helps against sudden pains in the head and against ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-eye pain, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy on the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And one should command the purging practitioner to not press their hand after scarification so that they do not cut into an artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And purging below the chin helps against ulcers in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; it stands in place of phlebotomy on the alar artery which is on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the purging that is done on the two spatulas helps against headache, which is caused by regurgitation of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the purging of the two parts inside the corners of the eyes helps in the same way as phlebotomy on three veins: namely, the basilic, external carotid and cephalic; because that attracts blood from all those small veins which are in the skin, and those small veins between the larger veins through which the attraction comes to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the purging practitioner not to go too deep in scarification, because the place is denuded of skin and under it there are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a purging with which one purges the anus, and it helps against hemorrhoids in the rear end and ulcers that are lower down.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And one should command the purging practitioner to use a strong purging, and that it is of a ram's horn, because the place needs a strong cutting; and they should also cut it with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But the purging of the legs should be decreased if there is a visible decrease, because it draws blood from all the body, and it helps against old pains in the knees and hips, and in the mother, and in the bladder; and it provokes menstruation, and it helps with cough and phlegm; and it stands in place of phlebotomy on two saphenous veins, and on the saphenous vein, and on two small veins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the benefit of purging on the saphenous vein is similar to the benefit of purging on both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the purging is that one should pause the purging at the beginning and suck gently, and not prolong the position of the purging, but pause them briefly, and let the humors come to the place by equal attraction.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease repeating this and continue until I see the place already red and swollen, and the blood appearing.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you can scarify and repeat the suction a little at a time, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because if the person has soft skin on their buttocks, one should not scarify it again and again so that the place does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the purging practitioner to enlarge the scarification and take a little more, and to temper the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then one should scarify two times, because in the first scarification the way of subtlety to the blood and its liquidity are opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second, one acquires the perspiration of the extraction of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then a third scarification should be done so that one achieves the last result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And lastly, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, then we should scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scarify with profound scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which the depth of the cut is merely superficial.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one from whom the cut is deep, tough, and dark, and whose veins are narrow, then the places of the purging should be anointed gently, open widely; in summer time, use oil of aloes or oil of violets, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of cedar wood; and if it is in winter time, use oil of nard, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those similar things.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superficiality is thick and hot, then the oil should be of myrrh, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloes, or oil of anise, and to those similar things.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the purging practitioner has ample experience of tender skin, then oil should be prohibited from them; and to those for whom the places of purging are near, the purging should be washed with water or hot water of solanum, or water of cedar wood, or water of borage, or similar things.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the blood is of great humidity, wash their purgings with sour wine, or water of myrtle and sumach, or similar things to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superficialities are thick, wash their purgings with old wine, or water of mace which is myrrh, or of fennel, or of camomile, and to those similar things.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And one should keep the purging in a bath; let them have a bath, and let it be administered near the bath for an hour or two, and let him sleep after the purging.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary that he should be bled before purging.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And let them consider at the beginning: if the purging practitioner or he who is to bleed is choleric and his blood hot and inflammation, then one should take cold remedies, also with milky parsnip, and endive in sour wine, and lettuce, and celery, and dry sage, and to those similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give them food like this with puddings, and meat of young birds, and seasoned foods with vinegar, and to those similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose complexion is hot and moist, let them drink aniseed syrup, or hempseed syrup, and sumac, and wine with a strong scent between old and new; and let him be recommended to drink little and eat little, and give him dishes of partridge and hempseed and pigeons and small birds.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And for those suffering from windiness or bleeding, let them drink more than they eat during the day.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And for those who are given to drinking at certain times of the day to some men tarragon or myrrh, or medicinal musk, so that it is musky, or alcelita before windiness or bleeding, or afterwards, in order that the principal members be comforted and that the blood be subtleized; and let no one take that wound.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the windings that are made without scarification are windings that are paused over the liver, and over the melsa and podagra, and over the navel, in the places of the kidneys, and the pygidium of the broad, since these members do not undergo scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired by them but attraction of blood from the member, just as they pause a ventosa over the breast in the malady of a flow of blood from the blood of the nose; and they use that so that a moist winding may be dissolved, invaded the member, just as they pause over the belly and navel; for that rarefies the member and cuts it and removes the pain since it resolves windiness.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already paused over the armpits when they occur in their swelling or poultice, for by the strength of attraction, their swelling is very much reduced and the poultice eradicates the pain from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it does when it is paused over the liver and the melsa due to windiness in those who are incarcerated.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these windings are administered either with sucking or merely with fire; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are administered full of tepid water in the maladies of the melsa.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And for this reason, the ventosa is filled and a pus-like substance is pushed out, either with water alone or water in which herbs appropriate to that are cut.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of ventosa administered with fire: let the width of the orifice be two digits, according to how we have formed it; and let the quantity of the fire be the size of a palm; and let it be in its side, in the place that is in its circuit, the size of it, the hole be small according to the quantity that enters into it an awl.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of red copper or citrine, of thick edges, lion, handles and thorns so that it does not hurt the member due to its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let there be at its middle a transverse groove of copper or iron, where the candle with fire is paused.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this ventosa be somewhat larger than that which we have recommended; and the small one less than that according to the maladies and the condition of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the windings for children and emaciated people are different from those for young people and people with large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing this ventosa with fire over the member is that it extends the wick with fire from decent wood in front of a few candles of wax, and pauses that over the middle of the transverse groove in the middle place of the ventosa, so that the fire be kindled around the part below so that the patient's body is not burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then let it be paused over the patient's member, and the finger be over the hole that we have said, until when we hold the windings and do not feel the finger and the steam rises over that hole, then the ventosa will dissolve at once.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And blow the wick according to its manner, and repeat that if you feel the need for it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in the ventosa that is administered in the malady of pleurisy, with water, in which there is not a transverse groove or hole, and it is not administered except that it be filled with water, and is paused over the member merely.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this ventosa, the larger it is, the better, so that it may receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not administered in small members except in those in which it is not possible to place windings because of their smallness, just as with the toe and gum and their likes; or in a member stripped of flesh, just as with the finger and nose and their likes.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that if you have found in the doubled waters of boiling clean.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then let them be placed in tepid water until they become swollen, and that no cause remains in their belly; and then let the body be evacuated at the beginning with bleeding and with windings; and then let the member of the patient be rubbed so that it becomes red; and then let them be paused over him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and swollen,
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	and if it is possible to suck the place with a ventosa, it is better to do so in bleeding.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with sharp wine and then with warm water; and let it be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood is prolonged due to the use of leeches and that drips, then you dip a cloth in tepid water and pause it over so that the dripping is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is profuse, then powder vinegar mixed with it, or gall nuts and their likes of the causes styptic, so that the blood is stopped; or let the pods of roasted peas be applied to it, and let them be paused over him until the peas adhere to the place, and let the blood stop.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if it is necessary, let there be repetition of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then let the place be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle be stuck in the places where blood flows; and then let them be paused over him, for those when I sense some blood at once.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, powder over them a little aloe mixed, or salt, or ash, and tie at once.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the protection of the third part: the restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and of accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, you will know from this chapter the foolish doctors and the vulgarians and those who do not guard the books of the Ancients nor read from them a letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, the manner of those wise in our land is private; and I have not practiced it at any time, nor have I been obliged to do so; and I have not used what I learned, except through length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, so that I extracted science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then add to experience and study in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that contains my science and about which my experience has passed; for I have shortened it in the end of shortening; and demonstrated it in the end of demonstration; and formed in it many forms of instruments that are administered in it, as it is done by addition of demonstration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary of the nature of broken bones, from which a knowledge is necessary before we begin to discuss in detail the healing of various bones and parts.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Now let us present at the beginning of this chapter, summaries of the subject that the reader must know and understand before we begin; and these chapters are for those artisans who have already achieved mastery and understanding of the truth about these matters, and also for you and others who will learn or perfect this noble art.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so I say that when there is a fracture or dislocation or twisting or displacement, you should first apply leeches or other remedies to the affected area, or some other treatment, if no counterindications are present; also according to the strength of the patient, whether it be an adult or a child, and also taking into account any other conditions such as being in a state of weakness, or the age of the patient, or the season of violent heat, or violent rubbing.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And you should also be careful with food: eat fresh herbs and the flesh of birds and crabs; avoid fatty meats and rich foods that fill the veins with blood, unless you are sure there is no risk of pus forming in the affected limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their normal routine, and correct any deviation from it that may have occurred.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the broken bone begins to heal, then you should feed the patient nutritious foods that are rich and heavy, and contain a lot of moisture; such as dishes made from wheat cooked in water, rice, peas, beans, and the bellies of cows, and pigs, and fresh fish, and fatty wine and similar beverages, and with this regimen the fracture will heal sooner and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that the bones of old people and children are not able to knit together and heal properly because of their dry nature.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are knit together and healed according to their nature by the drying of those members; and they are knit together and healed in this way at the end of the period of softness, just as with the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and unifies the broken bone from all sides by a kind of bonding process, by which it becomes larger and stronger, until it reaches its final state of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, unless some counterindication forbids this; and no cause can prevent this from happening.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to feed the patient foods that are heavy and rich in moisture and substance; as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There are different kinds of fractures, depending on the kind of bone affected.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the kinds of fractures vary according to the different bones affected: a fracture of the bone in the leg is different from a fracture of the bone in the head, and a fracture of the bone in the foot is different from a fracture of the bone in the hand; and likewise all other bones are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And now we will discuss each kind of fracture separately, in its own chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There are different kinds of fractures, depending on the cause.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the kinds of fractures that occur in bones are diverse according to their cause: some fractures are arched and others occur as stars; and some fractures depend on the length of the bone, such as fractures of the ulna and radius, and also there are fractures of the carpal bones, and also there are disruptions and fissures.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each kind has its own special pain or discomfort during healing, according to the location of the fracture; and we will discuss these separately in their respective locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	There are certain signs that indicate a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by these signs you can recognize a bone fracture: it is crooked and prominent; there is pain on pressure, and also when you press with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore if there is no crookedness apparent in the bone, and the patient does not experience great pain when you press on it with your hand, then this is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There is a possibility that it is only a minor crack, and so you should not press on it with your hand, but rather apply medicines to the area; then wrap the area tightly with a bandage.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you should know that when the bone is arched and not split in two or any other way that causes a break in the skin, then you may begin to treat it immediately with an cauterization of the wound; then wrap the area tightly with a bandage.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if pus has accumulated in the wound, then let it drain for several days until the pus stops; and then treat it according to the nature of the wound and its pain.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you should know that healing and hardening of the bone is a slower process than when it occurs in other bones.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to what we will discuss below.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is split in two parts at the joint of the leg or hand, then it is necessary to extend that affected limb in two parts, with the help of the hand or foot, or with just one hand, or with a cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And hold the limb in its natural position, while you extend the two parts of the broken bone outward; then you will have to pull them back together as strongly as possible, and according to any method that can be used on these joints.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful that your movements do not cause any pain or injury to the patient during this operation, and apply as much strength as you can, while holding one bone against the other in their normal position.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And you should apply as much force as possible with your hand while holding the bone, and if you find some other cause, then straighten it out and harden it according to the amount of strength that you have.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, as this can cause pus to form in the wound due to their operation, or it can also cause contraction of the limb, as we have seen happen many times due to their operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then you should use splints, or an apparatus and proper operation, and a tight bandage on that limb; and rest and tranquillity; warn the patient not to move during his vigils and while sleeping, and observe his revolution and movement, and attend to his excretion, and control all his movements with as much strength as you can; and be careful that the position of the limb is one that does not cause pain, for this is the cause when there is discomfort in the disposition of the limb; then change it to another position without pain; and be careful that the bone is straight and hardened, so that the limb is not crooked when it heals.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the degree of tightness of the bandage should be one that you can tolerate; for you should know that broken bones vary in their size and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm, hand and fingers, then a fine piece of linen is used to wrap them.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are large like the thigh or leg, then a hard bandage is used to wrap them; for a tight bandage connects the large bone and strengthens it all around evenly, so that no swelling can enter.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then you should begin by loosening the apparatus, stopping it from time to time in that place, over the fracture with three or four bandages according to the size of the bone; and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then bring him to the most superior part of the area of the fracture, and with great care so that you do not break your grip on the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then lengthen and loosen the bandage around the area of the fracture a little, and ease the tightness little by little while you take hold of a large part of the area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another bandage and wind it around the other side of the fractured area, and then bring the bandages to the lowest part of the fracture; and your operation on the tightness of the bandage and its loosening should be according to what we have said about the first bandage above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then place between the bandages of wool or cloth with which the crookedness of the fracture is equalized if there is crookedness in it; and if not, then do not put anything at all in it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then place another bandage over it and tie those decently made layers together at once, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and then place on it something that stops the abscess and reduces the inflammation; and leave it for several days, and then tighten the layers.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the splints should be of the thickness of a straw or reed, and they should be cleverly formed; or they could be of wood or palm branches; and the length of each splint should be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the splint that is placed on the fracture should be thicker and longer than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to how long the limb is in size and shortness; and then tighten the splints with another bandage according to your first tightness; and then tie it above decently according to what we have said about tightness, and let your tightness be according to the location of the fracture more, and as much more as it is lengthened from the fracture, so much the lessness of the tightness.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be moderate in thickness and thinness, and they should be of linen; and if the threads are thick, then as I have seen through the operation of some foolish people tying their threads with rope and it is a great error when the tightness is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve with them through tightness what you want, and let there be between each splint no less than a finger's width.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the splints when they are tightened in their places, then place below them wool or dyed wool so that it does not harm him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture is with pus, and there is disruption in the tendon, and I have come to remember that one in the chapter according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that every broken member is not bound with splints on the first day; the cause of which is because the member, when it is large, let there not be placed on it splints except after several days or a week or more, according to your certainty about the occurrence of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the plasters with which the Ancients restored, and they were placed on fractures and dislocations and twistings.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plaster as a remedy for fracture, convenient to many complexities and especially to women and children, because it is that with which heat nor friction comes: and take from the powder of milling, and it is the core of the flour that passes due to the movement of the mill on the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And sift that as it is, unless you sieved it with white of egg, and use the composition of it not thick nor thin; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another manner of healing broken and dislocated bones: take of assafetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, the juice of wild mastic tree, all in equal parts, a drachma each; of myrrh and aloe, a drachma each; of honey, twenty drachmas; mix them all together and add enough alum wine to make an ointment, and spread it on the affected part. This preparation is of good composition, and restores quickly broken bones, and confers health to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another manner of an ointment that heals broken bones and dislocations: take mastic and white myrrh, a drachma each; myrrh and aloe, a drachma each; acacia, six drachmas; Armenian bole, twenty drachmas.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are strained in a mortar with mortar, and sifted, and mixed with vinegar or white of egg, and let it be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and to alleviate pain accidentally in those and to fissures and fractures: take a piece of flannel which is wet with warm wine and oil and let it be placed over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Let this plaster not be efficacious for restoration, nor for abscess, but rather to expel pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster which restores a broken bone: take bark of fig tree and bark of wild poppy; crush both and make plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of plaster abridged administered for the restoration of a fracture of bone and when you want resolution of the residue of an abscess: take ground of poplar, of camomile and flowers of violets, of flour of oats, of all an equal part .x.; and let all be strained and mixed with wine if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scalded, then let that be moistened with water of yarrow or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plaster stronger in resolution when that first one does not occur, when there is an abscess hard due to the restoration of the member: take ground of poplar and of seed of linseed and of balaustine, and marjoram, violets, camomile, of all an equal part; let all be strained and mixed with water of yarrow or with water, all according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	And let the hypocrass not be applied on its own but let it be placed over the broken member due to its restoration unless a poultice is made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and let it be moderate between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May the healing of the broken limb be accomplished by placing on it those remedies that cause moisture, heat and a quality like myrrh, incense and similar substances to those we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A way to make a plaster that will benefit a wound and pain: take honey, eggs, human hair or bird feathers, alder bark and salt, all ground together; strain them through a cloth and make a plaster from it.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the amount of time that the binding should be left on depends on how well the healing is going and whether there is any pain or swelling or if the bone is broken or dislocated; if there is no pain or swelling and the bone is not dislocated, then you can leave it in place for a few days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation in the area, then you should either cut it off or take off the plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a piece of linen and a sponge soaked in sea-lion oil, and dip that in lukewarm water and use it to wash the area until the swelling goes down and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour; and apply lanolin mixed with sweet wine or rose oil, and leave it on overnight so that any pus from an abscess can come out and so that the swelling of the limb will go down and the pain will be relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat this subtle binding and plaster, and don't tighten it too much with your first binding, but apply it sutilly so that the limb can heal.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess and heat and pain and swelling and all the other signs have gone down completely, and you have removed the plaster and binding, then you should repeat the process as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if none of those causes we have mentioned occur in the limb, then don't take it off but rather leave it on for three or four or five or seven days. And sometimes it is left on for twenty days according to how well the limb has healed and the fracture has joined together and the flesh has healed over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then tighten the binding a little more than your first binding and adjust it according to how well the patient remembers it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the fractured area becoming dry and thin, then know that it is prohibited for nourishment to reach it; therefore moisten it with lukewarm water every three days; loosen the binding a little, and through this operation the limb will receive nourishment and heal quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what the foolish restorers of a broken limb do is another way when it has not healed at the beginning according to how it should have, and it is healed crookedly according to their operation; therefore it is a great error according to their operation and a great fear, and if they had known this they would have made a much better cure.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, for it is more reasonable that they not do so.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: Of fractures when they occur in the head
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse, and their causes are distinct; for some fractures are caused by the impact of a heavy object, and the impact goes through the whole bone, breaking it as it goes, just like it does to a log, and for this reason that type of fracture is called a split fracture; or the heavy object hits only one part of the bone and breaks into the flesh but does not go through to the other side, and for this reason this type of fracture is called a simple fracture.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the size of the fracture is either large or small, and it may be narrow or broad; and the cause of it is impact from a stone or fall on a rock, and their likenesses.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture may be penetrating so that it approaches the membrane that is below the bone; or it may be in the face of the bone, and the size of these two fractures may be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And another type of fracture is that which occurs in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for this reason it is called a hairline fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And there is another fracture that occurs from falling or being hit by a stone and its likenesses, when a thin layer of the bone is forced into the openings within it, and this occurs in concave places just like it does to the fingers when they are hit and their tips are forced inward.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most often this happens to the bones of bent bodies, like the skulls of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures are set in such a way that they are separated from each other.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will remember all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you will know all these types of fractures by detection of them and by inquiry into their likenesses, and by examination of the rotten flesh that is above them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And hairline fractures are known by their appearance when the flesh is pulled back from the bone and washed clean; for then the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures you should first consider the signs of the patient, and then if you see any signs that clearly show fear, like vomiting from cholera, or extension, or loss of understanding, or loss of voice, or fainting, or acute fever, or sweating and heat in those parts, and likenesses to them from the major dispositions, then he will not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	But if you do not see these signs, then you should begin his cure.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of this is that if the fracture has occurred at the beginning in the winter days, then you should study the healing of the bone over the course of fourteen days according to its entire disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then you should let the bone be bound for seven days, so that what is below the membrane can be corrupted by it, and so that the signs we have mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the membrane and covered the brain, and it is narrow and sharp, then you should wet the sharp edge according to what I have told you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you should wash the head of the patient who is fractured, and uncover it according to custom and in a way that is possible for you according to the shape of the fracture, and so that it is loose on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you see the detection of the bone, or bleeding or an abscess, then you should stop it with what occurs, and so that humors flow from the wound into a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil, and let the fracture rest so that the abscess is relieved, and then begin the girding of the bone and its healing.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you insert the bone with a narrow instrument, and this is its shape: And then you administer another instrument, one slightly broader than the first; and this is its shape:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And the other way is that you insert the bone through penetration with a narrow instrument, and this is its shape; and then you administer the broader instrument.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should have several instruments of different widths, some of which are broader than others, and some are narrower, and some are acute in the end, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And they have ease of use in percussion on the scalp to prevent concussion and lead him to that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must pierce through its surface before administering the scalpels, which are called non-deep scalpels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named like this except that they do not reach the bone of the skull to what is right next to it, so that the scalpel has a rounded tip or edge below the sharp tip of it, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these scalpels, each one according to the thickness of each bone, so that they are present in all skulls of the brain, whose end is sharp, and the amount in length and brevity is according to the thickness of this skull.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of scalpels: The quality of piercing through the broken bone is that you place the scalpel on the bone and turn it with your fingers so that you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the scalpel to another place, and pause where there is a quantity of thickness of the vein or around it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incision with scalpels what is between each crack of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can on top of it at the end of elevation, thus as we have said, so that you radiate the bone, or by your hand, or by any other cause by some instruments which you will have prepared for this, such as tweezers and subtle forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure to keep the incision away from any cause of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And then when you have pierced the bone and separated it from the brain if it is continued with it, and you will have extracted that, scrape and gnaw that in its roughness with another instrument similar to an incision, but however, let it be more thin and more subtle than the other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you pull out some of the small bones and threads, then take that with ease from what is due to you from the instruments; then cure the wound with lint and bandages which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manner of operation is lighter, distant from fear, which Galien and Lauzeck praised for great praise; and this is their speech about it: it is necessary for you in the beginning to begin to uncover the part of the bone of the place where there is the most violent and most manifest fracture, so that when you have uncovered that part and placed below it the tip of this scalpel slow and gentle, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular part is round and does not insert into any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides in length, as well as a wedge; let the lenticular part be applied to the brain with the sharp face of it inserted into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then percute on the scalpel of one part with a small hammer so that you insert all the bone with ease as it is turned, and be sure of the membrane that it does not happen to him accidentally, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if he removes any cause attached to the bone of the membrane in some places of bones, cut that from it with the tip of the lenticular scalpel, and free that from it with ease, because it is freed from him without harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the membrane, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is the face of it, and pulls in it roughness and subtle threads, then scrape that roughness and gnaw those threads with subtle razors by which you have prepared their number, of different quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in every place most conveniently, and according to what place you are performing your operation on that broken bone.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And be sure to administer in your reason with which you scrape the bone at the beginning of the most side of those razors, and then use that most subtle one, and do not cease to do that according to continuity until you come to administer the most thin and the most subtle of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, be sure to cure it according to what you come to rectify it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a cause that is not hidden from all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have written about what we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the membrane is extended when you radiate the bone, then take cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the hole of the wound; then take another cloth folded or doubled and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth and do that as gently as you can so that you do not weigh down the brain; then administer over that bandage with fat length, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound has so much only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that with this cure for a day or two so that you are sure of cauterized pus; then loosen it and then administer medicines with which there is excessive dryness, such as linen rags and errhines of linseed, and powder of aniseeds and aristology, and of similar things to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these medicines powder which is sprinkled over the wound, as they are dried; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property of which there is one that cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and do not let there be any putrefaction or other in it; nor do you leave virulence to settle in it; because when it is applied over the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and rots it, and malevolent malice happens about the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the skull of the head, as when the bone is cleansed and most when the cure of it is diminished, and there is blackness on its surface; then consider therefore if it happens to the patient the accidents which we have said, know that it is mortal without doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if blackness does not happen except from the medicine which is placed over it, and it is because of that medicine that makes that blackness, then be sure to take some honey and parts of rose oil iii., and with those lines a cloth, and then place that over the skull; then cure it with the spices of cure which are convenient so that it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except in two parts very much uppermost, or one of those some few times, because in it there are two bones, because the part below is cartilage, and is not broken, and it does not happen to it except tension and tortuosity and sinuosity.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then be sure to insert your little finger in your nose, and gnaw that fracture inside with your index finger, and with your middle finger push it outward, so that the nose returns according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for you with ease, and be sure that it does not hit because of your operation on the pain of them.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the highest part of the nose, and the patient does not perceive it, then one must make a small incision at the end of the bone where there is some thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should act accordingly.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And provide treatment for him on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then return to it or wait seven days after the formation of the blister.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Then insert a piece of linen thread into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part; or put two splints in, if it is in two parts, and let there be as much thickness in the splint as will fill the crack in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorators say that the splints should be wrapped in wool, and changed every day, but this has not been seen by me; they say that the thread should be wrapped in alum-soaked linen, that the bone may be held firm, and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And in some cases a feather quill is inserted into the nose instead of a splint; and this should be done when the fracture is very violent, and the patient not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause does not need you to act; and if you want to do it, then do it; and if you want to make splints, then make them.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another blister occurs, plaster the nose with cerate or cotton soaked in wine vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if a blister does not occur, then plaster that part with sesame flour and powdered onions cooked in alum vinegar; and place over it a piece of linen, and do not apply any other thing to the nose.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then cut them, and extract them with instruments appropriate to those; and close up the cut, and cure it with something that encourages flesh-growth and bone consolidation, and plaster it with convenient plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if pus occurs within the nose, then cure that with splints and administer lead tubes to ensure complete healing.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is broken and the fracture does not have pus, then consider whether the fracture is only external, and not broken in two and curved inward at its parts; then its treatment is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert the said index finger of the right hand; and move with that the dislocation inward at its parts with facility by means of the other hand at the part of the bone outward; decently equaling those.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the mandible is already separated into two, then administer extension of both parts according to rightness so that its position is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if disruption of teeth occurs from concussion, then strengthen those which you hope will break with silk thread or silver wire or cedar; and plaster the broken mandible with cerate, and place over it doubled linen, and over that decently made great steel plate, or a sole weight at the length of the mandible; and tie that above according to how you are prepared for its application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and quietness, and give him drink of sorbents of wine.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you judge that it has already been altered in some way, then you treat and loosen it on the third day; and correct what has been altered, and plaster it with alum vinegar, or with sesame flour, since you have removed its cerate, and place over it linen wool.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And after that, when the plaster is in place and adjusted over it, and the position of the bone is not altered, then leave it, so as not to loosen it until it is healed and the fracture strengthened; for many times this fracture is healed within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another blister occurs, then administer what we have said several times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and let that blister be lanced.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture has pus in it, then consider whether the bone is separated or shattered; then you act subtly that you remove those shatters with whatever is appropriate for their removal.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the pus is narrow, then you enlarge it with a flebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those shatters, and if they do not ooze pus again, then close up the opening of the pus, if it is large; and if not, plaster over it one of the plasters appropriate for that, so that it encourages flesh-growth and is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the clavicle in front of the breast is broken by the muscle; and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is either broken, or separated, or separated in two parts other than those which do not occur shatters; and its treatment is easier; or occurs therein shatters, and it is difficult to treat; or the fracture has pus in it.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And its action in that, when the fracture is without pus, is that you have two agents, so that one holds the helper and follows the collarbone broken, and the other extends the collar to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then join the fracture with your fingers within it so that its form is made according to how it should be, and there is not a little prominence or concavity in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then let the patient hold under his chin a pillow or some wool, and the size of it according to the quantity of your need; and extend and raise the collarbone and stop the holding with your hand within that you join the fracture according to how it should be.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot draw the end of the collarbone to its parts outward, so that it is approached to the breast, then let the patient recline on his neck, and place over the muscle of it a pillow on the left in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the agent press the muscle of it to the parts below so that the bone of the collarbone is raised that which is in the breast above; and then you correct the fracture and join it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel shatters of the collarbone and they are oozing, then let loose over that and extract those shatters with facility.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you invent an incision of it with one of the saws which you have prepared for that, since you had paused below the collarbone the tool which serves the ciphac; and this instrument is of wood or iron, and its form is such:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a chisel of which its concavity is such; and its breadth according to what you have need for it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But its length is according to what is possible for you in the operation; that it have two ends thus reversed, and one end be ample and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the wound, which you have opened when you extracted the splinters from the bone, is wide and you are sure that there is no abscess, then you stitch together the two lips of the wound.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the wound is small, or you fear an abscess, then you fill the wound with lint and powder according to the size of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if there is an abscess, then pour wine, honey, and rose oil onto it and place a poultice over the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the binding of the bone when there is no wound or fracture, is that you place a plaster made of wheat flour and egg white, and place a poultice over it; then place lion's blood under the plaster, and then place honey underneath if it is infected; then take a strip of turpentine resin as long as the finger, which has a width of three fingers, and wrap that in linen; also, place the powder on top of the poultice and the plaster; then take a wooden stake as thin as possible whose width is that of three fingers and length similar; then wrap that in cloth, and wrap that cloth with the stake onto the fracture site; then apply honey all around, and wrap it onto the patient's neck and under his armpit on both sides, and reduce it to its original position; and when you see that the fracture is healing well, and no swelling remains, then there is nothing more for you to do.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Also, make sure that the stake is not pushing against the broken bone; and therefore, when you see the patient every day, if you notice that the ligament has loosened or the stake appears to be pushing out, then rectify it and tighten the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then place the pillow under his neck and another pillow underneath his head, on which he should sleep at night; in such a way that by this means, the shoulder on that side is raised, and therefore the fracture of the collarbone is also elevated above the level of the muscle; or his arm on that side is pulled up towards his neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Do not loosen the binding unless there is pus or an abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see that his face is changing due to it; and tighten the binding, and restore him until he is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and encouraged according to the month in twenty-eight days; and sometimes in some people, it is done within less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6:
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken on its broad side and not on its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is broken — and it is broken in its middle part — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture you prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every way that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place onto the site powdered wheat flour and egg white, and lion's blood; then place a double-layered piece of linen; also place over that a wooden stake as thin as possible according to the width of the spatula or more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if under the stake is a hollow space in one of the places of the spatula, then fill that hollow with lion's blood and then raise the stake according to its equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then tighten it above with long honey and decent constriction, and with the firmness of the stake so that it is not pushed out from its site.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the binding every day; and whenever it becomes loose, make it tighter again and adjust the stake if it is pushed out from its site.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient on his unaffected side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-fifth.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the binding; and know that it is of the bones from which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if it progresses from the bone's site and you place a weight under it, then you split it, and remove it, and proceed according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone regarding an abscess.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7:
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a leg fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The leg sometimes is broken in its middle part and this is usually the case; but its ends are often not joined and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And regarding its accidents when the middle is broken it inclines to the inner parts and there occurs great pain in it, and difficulty in walking, and coughing, and strong vomiting and bleeding; and a cavity is declared in the broken bone and it does not remain hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And its restoration is that the patient should be laid on his back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; and press against their muscles, and adjust their ribs with the hands of two people, and gently in the operation and in the adjustment according to every way that is possible and convenient for it, so that the figure of the bone returns according to how it should be.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place onto it plaster and lint, and over that a thin stake of ash or of lime, or similar, after you have wrapped that in linen; also gently bend that over the broken bone so that it is not pushed out; and go around it with binding according to its roundness on the back sometimes, and tighten that with decent constriction; and consider the binding every hour, and when it becomes loose, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it causes detachment due to swelling or pain, or an abscess that occurs in the site, then you cut and loosen it, and remove the plaster and adjust what has occurred due to its way of curing; and then return the binding, if there is a change in his face; and tighten him so that he is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8:
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are cracked.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in large sites that go along the back; and from their ends in front, it does not occur to them unless they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And its knowledge is not hidden from feeling due to the inquiry with fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And its restoration is that it should be joined with fingers according to the possible way so that it is swallowed according to how it should be; and then plaster and tighten the broken bone with a stake if it requires it.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines to the inner parts, then there occurs to the patient violent pain and piercing, also with piercing that occurs where it has pleaded, and because of this there is difficulty in walking, and coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is of difficult curing.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Aンティクス have been applied to it with very heated instruments.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them there is issued: that one should stop foods for the patient that cause inflammation and fullness, so that the belly is flattened and extended, and the fracture is driven to the outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we abstain from this so that it is not the cause of gout, if it has not occurred; and if it has occurred, then let us help it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they will order some of them that it should be stopped over the wound and that it sucks with strength; and it is like reasoning, but it is feared that the wind draws away the superfluities to the site due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they said among themselves: whoever is in charge of the patient, let him be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil, and let there be powder placed between his ribs where it can be filled, so that the binding is as round as a ball; and let the patient be treated with poultices of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if there is a violent constriction that the patient cannot endure, and the bones puncture the veil with their teeth, they fear for the patient; therefore, whoever incises over the affected area, exposes the broken rib, and places upon it an instrument that retains the phlegm, the memory of which precedes, and incises the bone with ease to extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then, sew up the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, and treat it with poultices until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if there is an abscess inside, then cut and pour powder in warm oil over the area; and let the patient be treated with something that treats the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him sleep on his back until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9:
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of a fracture of the spine and of the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, and they rub against each other with pain, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider the following: If their bones are already soft and stupid and dead and cannot move or bend any more, and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and there is no pain, then know that they will not be healed, and in most cases it is lethal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they are painful and there is a constriction when you press them or prick them, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and the patient will be healed with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see something similar in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Now, if you see that they are already soft and there is something similar to what happened in the bones; and if when he lies on his back, he experiences windiness and involuntary defecation, and sometimes he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is lethal and you should not continue with his treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of these things happen, the prognosis is better and recovery is more likely.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for him is to apply a poultice of hot oil to the abscess on the fractured vertebra with cauterized wool or with flowers of hound's tongue, and to apply it sometimes during the day as long as the abscess is suppurating.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply one of the comforting and soothing poultices; and strengthen it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to take rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side that causes him pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a separation of the bones due to some cause, then cut and dry the cord, and let them put it on the bone; and then sew up the two lips of the wound with a stitch if it is large, and treat it with something that encourages the growth of new flesh until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the end of the bone is broken and it is the end of the spine, then let him insert his left index finger into the anus, and hold together the broken bone with his right hand as much as possible due to the second condition; and then apply a poultice over it and splint it, if there are any signs of pain, and then bind it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel that the bones are broken in him, then cut and dry over it, hold it, and treat the wound with what has been mentioned until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10:
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of a hernia.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the hips are often fractured, and when they are broken, their fracture is not only in their extremities but also in their length, and they decline towards each other; and there is pain and puncturing in the patient at that location, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And its restoration is for you to extend your hand over it so that it lies over the fracture in the same way as its shape.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if it is fractured at its end only, then hold it together according to what appears appropriate to you through an equal binding so that it is similar in shape to its natural form.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in its length and it inclines towards the feet, then let the patient lie on his belly so that you can restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have bound it, apply a poultice over it, and then place over it a splint of wood or cord, and bind it tightly so that you do not fear the puncturing of the fracture or the removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And hold the cavity with something that fills it so that it takes on the binding according to its equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if there is an abscess, then stop its extension and its restoration until the abscess is suppurating, and apply over it what has been mentioned before; and then return to its restoration, and bind it in the same way as previously described.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if they are broken or crushed, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11:
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of a fracture of the elbow.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The elbow is what is between the shoulder and the head.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, then its restoration is in one of two ways, and the first is that you take wood of a medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let it be tied at its two ends with two threads, and then let it be suspended from the raised location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lean on one of his hands; and then let him bend his broken arm over the wood so that it reaches the tip of the wood at the location where the wood is attached to the curve of the wood.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it with some heavy weight, or let the servant extend it towards its sides; and then let the doctor and his assistants press the fracture with their hands, so that the fracture returns as it was before.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is for the patient to lie on his neck and suspend the arm of the collarbone with a bandage; and then let two servants hold one of them holding what is over the fracture with their hands, and the other the patient's feet, and each of them extend it towards its side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then bind over the fracture with a bandage and another one over that, and each of the two servants extend it towards its two sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then let half of the bandage be over the tip and the other under the fracture towards the shoulder.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if it is close to the shoulder, then let the bandage be over that location and over the shoulder.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Hold it with ease and without pain, and then when it is bound according to its shape and there is no abscess, then bind it tightly if there is no abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if there is an abscess, then loosen it on the seventh day, and apply over it wool soaked in vinegar and warm oil so that the abscess is suppurating, and then bind it tightly.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the manner of strengthening that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm onto that support, and place your open hand over his muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen the support for the arm so that the arm is in place of the broken bone, unless prohibited by any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the others; and place between each splint the width of your finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers of all together.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the splints with that binding which has been said at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your binding over the site of the fracture be more tight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, let the binding be shorter.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore if you see the placement of the splints and binding as we have said in the time when you restore the limb to its position, then do as follows:
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an ulcer, then you should leave off the binding and splints for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occur in the area; or it is prohibited that food come to the limb due to excess of binding; and therefore rectify all that according to what has been said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are certain that no such cause will occur, then do not loosen the binding but rather three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on his back, and let his hands be over his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the support a poultice full of wool soaked in water, and consider throughout the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not deflated nor dissolved, or that the binding be softened; therefore rectify all with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give the patient food according to the order which we have mentioned before, so that the food be subtle in the beginning as it is commenced strengthening; and then cover that he grows fat.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For it is customary for the support and his bed to be tightened for 40 days; and then cover that they be loosened and a bath be administered and he be medicated with ointments which rectify that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is white, then you should not loosen that binding and splints for 15 days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of restoration of a fracture in the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is made up of two bones which are called two radii; one of which is small, and it is that which the thumb presses, and the other is large and is that which is pressed below by the small finger, in the part lower down.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often only the larger radius is broken, or the smaller, and often they are both broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the lesser radius is broken above, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when it is broken below the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the bone which is broken is the lesser radius above, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to facilitate its restoration, that he apply a small extension with ease.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger radius is broken, then cover that he apply more violent extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both radii are broken together, then cover that you apply motion most strongly.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And cover that you place the hand's shape for its restoration and extension stretched out over a pillow, and let the wrist of the hand be higher than all other parts, and let the thumb be highest of all the fingers, and let the patient be lying on his back with his arm stretched out over one cushion.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And there should be a pillow under him in the height or bend of him, so that the patient does not labor.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then one assistant lengthens the arm from below with his hand or with binding, and another assistant lengthens above similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor soaks the bone in order to reduce it according to the best figure he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the making of the bone there are bumps, then pierce through all hardness in its place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if an appearance of separated bumps shows up which press the tendon and it is not in your hope for its restoration, then you should pierce through it and correct that according to the manner which we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with swelling, then I have already made a particular chapter about that, and therefore take its cure.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an ulcer occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be in between being thin and soft, and strengthen the cloth over that with subtle binding so that the ulcer yields; and then remove the cerate and apply plaster prepared from powdered mulberry pulp, and then place splints; and let the splint which is placed over that fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of the arm's splints you will see in the major dispositions, or let the fracture be in one radius or in both radii together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen your binding over the site of the fracture most strongly and most violently, and when you loosen the binding on top of the fracture or at the bottom parts of it, loosen the binding a little softer according to how it is preceded in the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the clothes which are wrapped over the fracture should be soft and moistened with oil, and not hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is strengthened should be between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the binding for a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs which necessitates correction, as we have mentioned earlier when it occurred to the limb, then cover that you embrace the limb with warm water so that that yielding ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be restrained while it rests, and then tighten the binding.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the binding is already softened and the bone is bathed and like those, then rectify all with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider also if food is prohibited from coming to the limb due to excess of binding, then cover that you soften it a little and let it be for a few days so that the food comes to it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if in the patient there occurs none of those causes which we have said, then do not cover that it be loosened for 20 days or thereabouts from those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the patient's hand be suspended by its virtue of active movement, and let him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 42 days, or most likely it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter .13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of restoration of fracture of the wrist of the hand and of the fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that to the wrist of the hand and to the knuckles of the fingers there is sometimes fracture, and there does not occur to them except a little swelling.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When the hand becomes broken or dislocated, then you must have the patient lean forward and place his hand on a flat surface, and then apply pressure with your own hand.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor applies a poultice to the affected area.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then they apply a plaster and gauze if no abscess is formed; then they place a splint above according to the size of the affected area, which you have already wrapped in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the break is in the fingers near the palm, then they should make a splint out of cloth, and instruct the patient to keep that hand closed with the broken finger; then it should be bound tightly with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	The splint of wood should be bound with cloth, in such a way that the wood is applied to the palm; then bind it tightly according to how it fits.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the break is in the outer part of the hand, then they should place above a splint and another splint below at the base of the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then apply the binding as the hand is rotated at the knuckle with the fingers bent.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a knuckle of the fingers becomes broken, then if it is on the thumb, it should be bound according to how it fits and then tightly bound with the palm; and if you wish, place above it a small straight splint so that the break is elevated and not bruised.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the break is on one of the other fingers, like the middle, index, ring, or little finger, then it should be bound and tied with that finger; or they are all tied according to their arrangement, which is better; or place a small splint above it as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And in your restoration, consider the disposition of an abscess and its cause — through your own operation — according to what happens when any of those occur, as it is repeated in his account.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter .xiv.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a broken thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone is often broken and it is felt in the leg according to how it turns towards the front and the upper part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And its restoration is done by binding the ligament above the break and another ligament below it; then have the patient lie on his belly and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the assistant extends all the ligaments to their parts according to their quality when the break is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is near the root of the thigh, then have the ligament near the armpit extend towards the part of the hip so that the extension goes upwards; and the other ligament below the break.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is near the armpit, then have the ligament near the armpit and let the extension go towards the lower parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor should apply the bone with both hands to reduce it according to its natural appearance and let the bone be joined by a good conjunction; then they apply a poultice and binding if there is no abscess in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess occurs, then you must leave it for several days until the abscess has subsided; then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The binding of it is done thus: take a hard bandage and fold it two or three times over the break, and remove the superfluous length from it; then wrap the leg so that it comes to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert long sticks between the thigh and the leg near the armpit towards the lower parts; let the ends of the sticks come from the uppermost part of both sides, then wind them over the leg and the thigh what exceeds from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place splints on the thigh in the place of that break and place one of those splints on the shinbone.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the emptiness between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths so that the binding is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then start with strong binding over the place of the break with three or four layers; and as you lengthen with ligament of the place of the break, your binding should be lesser and looser and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend the ends of the sticks to the lower parts so that they come to the ankle of the foot; tighten both ends of the splints from the other side so that the ligament is not loosened from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then leave the binding over it as long as there is no corruption or abscess or inflammation and likewise to those; and if any of these occur, then treat them with removal of the binding and correct what has happened in each case, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a wound on the bone, then you should heal it according to what is possible for you; and if not, leave it and cure with that of which the account has been preceded so that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this break of the thigh is bound with splints in addition to those we have said for the thigh and arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in its restoration when it is bound in such a way, let there be no claudication for the patient; and if it is restored alone, let there be claudication of that from which it was previously affected.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is bound for 40 days or a few months or a few years, and all of this is according to the variety of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .xv.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the break of the shoulder blade.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the break of the shoulder blade hurts there, but it occurs in many places.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it occurs with break, then there is nothing more than crack or split in its parts; and over that all is felt.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And its restoration is done by having it bound in the parts that are broken with fingers so that they are gathered and joined according to what is possible through action, facility and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place a poultice and place over it a round splint, if there are signs of that; then tighten above with binding according to what is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions which we have recounted for other breaks, likewise if there is abscess and likewise towards those in which there occurs any accident with that which to him is convenient so that it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .xvi.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the break of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is named by name the leg; and the other is slender and is named fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it occurs in each of the species of break that there is occurrence to both bones of the arm; and for that its restoration is done thus with the restoration of the arm bound, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken at once, then the leg is turned to all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the more slender bone is broken, then the leg is turned to the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, turn it backwards, and those causes are that they are not bent.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and alignment and lengthening of the bones according to that treatment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg is wide having many calluses, then the extension should be lesser and closer to each other, and push with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And if there is any cause for operation on the leg and you are making a cast of the bones and completing your entire operation, then you will take wooden pieces of pine which are placed below the causes that are placed on soles, and they are made into split pieces of palm leaves; attach those to which are small thicknesses, and it should not be of the sweaty ones, and its length should be according to the length of the leg, and from the inside going down.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap around each cloth in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one over the end of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the inside going down the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then tie the two bones in three places of the ends and in between the middle location, for with this tightness, the leg is prohibited from tilting to the right or left side, and stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a wooden splint is administered according to the length of the leg, and it should be placed on it so that it conserves that movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And most importantly, you must do this in a fracture, and when it is a plague specifically.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg in each day and study it with that previous study, and you should guard it from swelling or inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes happens, then apply to it what is needed for it to heal.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus does not experience fracture entirely; but to the bones of the foot there are some fractures; and to the toes of the foot there are few fractures, and they do not occur except for pressure in the months of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if there is a fracture to the bones of the foot and they see those bones elevated against each other, then the patient should put their foot on the ground prepared like this:
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot over those elevated bones, and then press and pull those back into their locations.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply plaster and stop it on top of that, and place below the belly of the foot a small table to which are two flat pieces placed.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that with the foot with descending extension, because you have wrapped it with cloths and other causes from which it needs strengthening.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed for it, then you loosen the binding, because you will find the bones to be aligned, either broken or displaced, and the operation in those is like this:
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some toes are broken, then restore those, and align them like this as you saw and instructed in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place to the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be lower than it by a bit; and below the foot this table which you have been instructed in, and strengthen that with descending extension.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then you place to each toe a splint of its quantity wrapped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table below the bottom of the foot, and it stands on one of the ends of the table out from the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes that have been said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said, and apply to any accident what is needed.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the bone of the female thigh and the bone of the penis shaft and the wand of man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the bone of the female thigh is broken, then make that to be bent in a sitting position, and then tilt it towards the end on one side a little bit, and it should be held backwards.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the hollow of the thigh, and it is made in the bone of that like this with hope; and then the woman is bent, and lifts the end of that a little bit by bit, for all that is forgotten inside that as it faces the end of the bone like this with hope and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powder on the end of that, and when it wants to urinate, move the thigh with ease and then urinates, and reduces and returns that according to the way in which you measured it at the beginning, and then return to its first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around them, because it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a bladder of goat and strengthen on the break of that a cannula of straw; and insert the entire bladder in the bone of that, and then blow in the cannula with strength so that the bladder is inflated inside the bone, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is filled with thigh and stays for some days according to what we have instructed, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis shaft of man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and piercing of it what we have instructed in the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is straight is not hidden in these nearby fractures and that hardly anyone knows it, most especially to him who has some study and understanding of this my free word; because that fracture indicates to you in the major dispositions directly in its restoration and in the strengthening of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the wand of man when it is broken, take garlic of oak, and put the wand in that; and then apply plaster on it, and let it be wrapped, and then let it be loosened after three days or around them, and it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of the bones when they are with plague.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him to whom there occurs fracture with plague, and especially if the bone is large like this as it is the bone of the head or of the helper, or similar to that, that you treat it and fleubotomies it just as the conditions of fleubotomia testify about it.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plague and flu flow out, then you should strengthen that to hold it in like this as you pulverize it with powdered zegi trissat, unless another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should lift the restoration of it on the sixth day, while it has settled the abscess, and do not approach it in the third day or the fourth of all, because you will make accidents occur.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered tendon, then strengthen that for you to reduce it and align that with your hands with ease and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared for you and the alignment of it with your hands, then you should reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and it is an instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is seven digits or eight, and its width according to the amount of plague, and it is necessary for the doctor who takes from those three or four according to the amount needed in the cure in all species of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	Let him be laid down flat on his back, and let there be no awkwardness in his posture so that he is not bent over during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Let him be laid down flat on his back, and let there be no awkwardness in his posture so that he is not bent over during the operation.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it should be done:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And in Greek it is named "labre volentz atelarem", and that means a small knife for cutting.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the lower end of the bone should be elevated above the upper end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And it should be pressed into a groove until the bone is returned to its position and bound with some tourniquet.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then press the ends of the broken bone together between your fingers, and if the broken end is thin, and doesn't fit well into the instrument, then you should insert the end of that bone so that the instrument can hold it in place.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you are unable to reduce the bone using the methods we have described, then cut it with one of the saws that suits your purpose; or saw it in some way that is convenient for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then smooth away anything rough on the bone and any small protrusions.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, if you find that it causes great pain to the patient when he moves it, then understand that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and therefore do something that gives great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have finished your treatment of the bone, then immerse it in black-staining wine, and especially if it is summer; and do not place cerots or any other cause of oil on it, so that swelling and corruption do not occur in it.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then give a poultice at the end of your treatment of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can apply the traction with forceps and the use of bandages according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to stretch the wound with the fracture, for there have been many cases where foolish doctors have caused death or a bad disease to their patients by doing this.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your tightness is looser, softer and different from the tightness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that some harm might come to him from the accidents we have mentioned, and he feels pain in the area, then do not apply poultices to it, but make a bandage of hard cloths in place of the poultices and bind it tightly with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound has begun to heal for about a day or two and pus is being generated inside it, then remove from above the poultice the cloth which you have placed on it, and then apply hot poultices according to the custom of our medicine, also tetrafarmacon and similar things.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is appropriate for you to loosen the ligature and examine the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed; and let the limb be prepared in such a way that the swelling runs from it into its parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If after several days the wound is not consolidated or the pus has not been expelled from it, then understand that here are small obstructions; and therefore probe the wound with a tent.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those obstructions which are separated and removed, those from which the member is not separated and cause pain, probe to insert them according to what you can do.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if pus occurs in the wound or it turns black or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction happens, then do whatever is appropriate to it according to what is written about its cure in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from this, let your speech be brief and do not make it long: when a large bone is broken, let the member project above the limb just like the bone of the thigh and the helper, and those which are similar to those of the great limbs; and do not presume atraction of it, nor its extraction for many times it has caused death; let it remain until it becomes dry, for certainly after 20 or 30 days. And then heal the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the cure of nodules that happen in the path of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this nodule happens in the path of healing a fracture, and usually it is near the joints, and it strongly prohibits the limb from its natural action.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore consider if the nodule is recent and apply to it medicines which have tightened like aloes, and onions, and mallow, and thistle, and similar things; in such a way that you take some or all of them, and mix them with wine-based medicines, or with white vinegar, or with sour wine, and place that on the nodule with a sponge, and bind it tightly.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the ligature not be loosened for many days; and then loosen it and repeat another, in such a way that the nodule is rubbed; or bind tightly over that a sheet of lead descentment, for lead has the property of rubbing everything which is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the nodule is already turned to stone and it is tight and it causes necessity to cut that with a saw, then cut it at the part which is most prominent from it, and insert the superfluous and prominent, or remove it with some saws in such a way that it is rubbed; and heal that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then what happens to the limb which is sottile and frail not according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb becomes sottile and frail, this happens for many causes: of which one is abundance of solution of the ligature and of its binding not according to what is appropriate; or by superfluity of stricture of the ligaments in such a way that the nourishment is prohibited from running to the limb; or by abundance of superfluous swelling; or by superfluous movement not at the right time; or by deficiency of blood in the body of the patient and of his weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure for this is to give food to the patient and make his heart tender in such a way that blood is multiplied in him; and apply poultices; and place leeches and let them remain on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a bandage on the limb, in such a way that the bandage draws nourishment to it; or continue to rub it with warm water in such a way that the nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the cure of bones which are broken and then restored crookedly, and prohibited from their action by what is appropriate.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the limb already restored that its healing of crookedness and prominence of the broken bone and nodule, and is thus weakened in form, but however the limb is not prohibited from its natural action, then do not accept the word of him who examines that limb as if it were newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But already there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is most reproachable, presenting the sign of which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the limping and nodding are recent, then they should be treated with a compress of warm water in which soft herbs are steeped, such as leaves of alder and its roots, and sweet-smelling plants similar to these; or he should be given an ointment made from a softening ointment base, such as one made from liquid paraffin; or a poultice of alder root gum should be applied, either with cotton wool or with olive oil, and then bandaged with that; or fat figs should be cut into pieces and bound with pigeon feathers, and similar remedies to those mentioned for strengthening the joints.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction with moist hands, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the twisting has gone too far and become strong and turned to stone, and requires treatment with iron, then the pus should be drawn out from above and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved, and that which is superfluous of the nodule of that joint should be cut away with thin instruments, and ease should be administered to it through solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of its place, by which it is prohibited from moving, and the shape of the limb is distorted, and it brings great pains and serious injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when dislocation occurs, it should be reduced immediately, for if it is delayed, the joint will become inflamed and very strong, and the reduction of the dislocation will then be difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, he should not be beaten nor stretched in the hour of inflammation, for many times it causes spasms and pains to the patient.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when it happens, you should apply the flaubotomy to the patient, and let him rest so that the inflammation may subside; then the limb should be rubbed with warm water and oil, and reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb should be treated according to what its memory will bring it back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what precedes in fractures, from the uppermost part of the body down to the lowest.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure for dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The two jaws are dislocated if not chewed; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are beaten out of their joints by a little movement, and become soft a little; or they are completely dislocated and filled, so that they are softened at the joint where saliva runs from the patient's mouth, and he cannot hold it closed nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation of him is slight, then in the most dispositions it returns by itself for no cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is entire and filled, then the reduction of it should be administered gently, and not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should put his finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient' s mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should put both fingers in together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands be outside holding his cheeks; and he commands the patient to stop his jaws and open them in every direction; and the doctor should hold the jaw and push it back into its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of him is difficult, and especially if both jaws are both dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, so that the reduction of both be made gently and not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore when they are returned and closed, and the mouth of the patient is not softened, then apply powders of cloth with cerate, and let it be made of wax and oil rozat; and then tie it with ease by means of mild ligatures.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that he may not beat it to the right nor to the left; and do not force him to chew for any cause; having his food be lean lion meat, so that when the pains are beating and the jaws are numbed, then let him beat what he will.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that should be administered with ease, and do not labor over the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and yawning, so that the jaw may be numbed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any hour and not returned to their places, then many times it happens that fevers and constant sweating accde, and very strong colic is provoked in the belly of the patient, and very strong vomiting of pure colic.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is dangerous; and many times that person dies to whom it happens in six days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collar bone and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collar bone is not dislocated within by its continuity with the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer end, and that is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient yawns over his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then push the place with your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply ointment and powders and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which severs the collar bone and is continued with it, is not dislocated on any day; therefore let it be reduced and closed as we have said and as it is prepared for you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply ointment, and powders, and compression, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And by this medicine's cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the tip of the finger at the bottom part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and that is done quickly; and it is not dislocated at the sides behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and drawn out at the bottom parts behind the finger, and mostly in those of which the flesh is few, it is dislocated quickly; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is drawn out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And very often it happens to some men by blow or fall, and the muscle of him is inflamed by inflammation, and it is struck by that which has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore let you probe that while you are above him, and then proceed in the cure of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of him is known when it is at the bottom parts behind the finger; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, for you press between those two with manifest difference; and you press in the head of the muscle concave and below the finger from the touch of the head of the muscle as a thumb, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his shoulder, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the feet or ankles are dislocated, you will certainly feel it by touching, and it will not be hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation there is an easy reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister lifts up the patient's hand to the parts above; and then he puts his fingers under the patient's armpit, and lifts up the joint with strength towards its place, and the minister lifts up the patient's hand, and extends it upwards; and then he lets it drop quickly below.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return from that which we have said, and it has happened from the beginning that caused the dislocation, after several days, let the patient be bathed in warm water and given an ointment that softens and lines like so with comfrey, fenugreek, and mallows in water, and it is administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is reclined on his back and a cushion is placed under his armpit expectant of wool that it be both elevated and pressed, and then the doctor places his thumb on the ball, and lifts up the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not pulled to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it is not pulled to the parts below, for it will return to its place at once.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce it in this way: and let there be present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on that side, and insert his finger under the armpit of the patient and lift up the armpit to the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the parts below his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then let it be suspended by another cause, for the sake of gravity, for the dislocation will return at once.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this way as well: and let there be placed on the ground a post long at its head whose top is rounded in shape, like mortar, neither thick nor thin, and then let the patient be placed under it; after which, let drape lionskin be placed over the top of the post, and let the patient stand according to the length of the post, and then let his hand be extended to the parts below on the other side; and let his body be extended from the other side with strength, for the joint will return to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and let you take a post whose length is two arms, and its width is four digits, and its thickness is removed in the hollow of the armpit according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then on the rounded top are tied lionskin drapes so that the post does not press against the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then let the armpit of the patient be placed under it, and let his hand or arm be extended over the post to the parts below, and let the post be bound over the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then let the arm be placed over a step of a ladder according to its width, and let the hand be extended to the parts below, and the other body be suspended on the other side, for the joint will come at once.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of it is completed according to any manner that is possible for you, then let you place underneath the armpit a ball of wool of equal quantity; and then let ointment be applied prepared from miller's ash with honey over all the muscle, as if it were rolled over it, and then strengthen underneath the armpit with decent tightness; and let the bandage be rolled over the ointment, and the hand of the patient be tied to his neck, and he is released, and the hand of the patient must not be pulled for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And let the food of the patient be lessened a little while the member is being comforted, for it is more quickly healed.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then let food be given more after seven or eight days and exercise a movement; and therefore if it is firm and not soft, then it has healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times by moisture that befalls it or by another cause, then let cautery be administered to it with three cuts, according as it is said before in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and then after seven days the bandage is loosened and the joint is not firm, and the ointment and tightness are removed from it several times, and it is not firm and cats cannot be raised to the parts above, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are cut or extended or soft, and know that the joint will never return to its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation which is made to the feet and the breast or behind, the reduction is made by pushing and extension with the hands, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let the other tightness be applied to it and cure it while it is being healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if healing happens slowly in the member and there is delay in its movement, then let the patient bathe many times while that heaviness is removed and let it return to its first nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of cure of dislocation of the neck.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and most of all to the front part than behind, and its dislocation to you is not hidden, for when you adjust the neck dislocated in any way, it is declared to you manifestly, for the joint is hollowed out and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with it the muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And let you know that if it comes to the patient with an abscess cautery, then its reduction is difficult, and especially when it comes to it with an abscess cautery, for it is not healed at all; and most of all when it comes to the back part, for worse than all other species of dislocation, and more pain, and many times they die from it.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient be extended with two hands, and the arm of the patient be expanded, and the hands of the doctor be on the neck and under it, and he push the joint with his thumbs of his hands inwards, or with the hollow of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is to the front part, then it returns in this way that he bends the hand with his own hand, while he pierces the neck with the hollow of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and very hard.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And let two ministers extend the arm, and hold it tightly so that it is not pulled back from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then let the arm be rolled all around, since it is wrapped in a long folded drape or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that it be helped by all causes which help in lubrication of the joint with ease; and then push the joint with violent pressure until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of it is that it be placed on the ointment in which it is stiffened and dried with honey, and let it be bound tightly with a bandage and the arm suspended by the neck, and let him be released for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the ligament of it and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not to be stronger, then repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave it there for several days until it is strengthened; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if you see the patient become worse after the reduction of the joint, and the condition is in movement, then administer moistening baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or place a poultice on the joint, which is a mixture of grease; and then bind it, and leave it on overnight.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove the poultice, and place the patient in a bath; and when he is bathed, then rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat on that poultice, which is rosemary of oil, once, and the second time, and the third,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	corruption has already occurred in the brain through the instrument of bath water, so that it becomes thin.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place on that wound of the cow's udder wet and roasted with butter and tightened over it; and do this several times, because that is wet and reduced to its condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the elbow, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Elbow of the hand is sometimes displaced, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and in contrast to the other joints, however, there must be swiftness in its reduction in the hour when it is displaced, lest the joint become pustular or pus occurs in it.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the patient's elbow on a table and extend his hand, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the protuberance of the joint, and push it in until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, there must be consideration if the palm is already placed on the stomach of the hand, then the patient places his forearm on a table opposite to extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is prior to the forearm, then let the position of the hand of that be intrinically on the table, so that the doctor's hand lies on that protuberance of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore if it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then tighten that with plaster, yielding the pustule and leave it; and do not repeat this, because unless more than days pass over it.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint bends according to its tortuousness; and does not feel any cause in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen anything; then you know that the nerves are broken or cut, and therefore it does not have strength in it except when it is tightened with cautery near its joint and that is strongly applied.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the elbow is returned, then place on it plaster which we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for several days; and then loosen it and let it be left and the hand of him exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is hindered and there is any heaviness in him, then loosen that with warm water and friction several times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers are displaced entirely apart.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of those fingers is displaced on the back of the palm or on its belly, then you press the finger and drive the dislocation of it with your thumbs, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that over the part to which it is displaced, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that and extend that until it is straightened into that place on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the morning comes, loosen that according to that relation, and do not cease loosening that during the day and exercising it with movement, and loosen it at night; and do this for several days until it is tightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with that if it is displaced on the belly of the hand, and loosen that to that place and do with it your first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do with that when it is displaced in other places.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens to any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck and several vertebrae remain out of place, then there is no cure in that, because death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is outside his will, and he cannot retain it; and sometimes some of his members are softened or two of his legs or arms, or one of those; or one vertebra is displaced from its place, because sometimes it is displaced and sometimes the removal of those to four places.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore that is already displaced to the back parts and is called hunchback.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	However the cure of that is that you consider if the hunchback happens from childhood, because then there is no cure for that and there is no healing of that at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which comes from accident or from stroke or similarly to those, the Ancients have spoken of ways of cure with prolixous words, of which the most returned with profit; but I and you have abbreviated that of which the little excused of its excess, by my proximity to intention my exposition, which I have expounded and formed from diverse instrument of that, by which I show that and spread out that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in hunchback which happens from the front part in the feet, there is not healing of that; and similarly in that which is made to two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those are not cured except that which happens in the back properly with that which I have mentioned.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And let the patient be extended on his face over a pail, and be extended below him instrument moist so that his feet are not bound.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight post is placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the pail around the head of him, and another post in the air holding his feet at the other end of the pail.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister held the posts, and are not closed in a hole; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the head of the patient and hold it with a lion-skin strap; and extend the end of the strap to the post which is over the head of him, and loosen that in him; and then tighten the other strap on the loins of him, his knees holding his feet, and then adjust all the straps and loosen those in the other post which holds his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister extends the strap to the end of the post, and let the two posts not be displaced and the straps of their places in which they are placed, but however do not close them as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns, or he lies on a table, and then let him adjust his feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by that form, then take a table of which the breadth or length is in air for three arms, and hollow in the wall of which we have said it is close to the patient a place in which the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretch well until the spine is cramped and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open a turn which is wound around the hand; and it is that you place on the ground under the patient's head in the back of the knee two fists, the length of which is a arm, and under his head in the back of the heel also two fists; and let the length between each fist be a palm, and already in each fist there is made a pull in which the turn runs, and each is very firmly fixed to the ground so that it is not moved.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there is placed a round post in which the turn is wound, and it is wound around the two holes of the two fists.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And in its end there is a hole in which the post is made, the length of which is a palm where it is wound; and in the other two posts is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then stretch the ligaments which you have tightened in the foot of the patient in the hole which is under his head, and the ligaments which you have tightened in his thighs in the turn which is under his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then place each turn and have a minister twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor bends the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then when the spine is returned and the place is smoothed, then apply a paste of dried white lead and linen; and then place over the paste a wooden board of which the breadth is three digits or around that, and its length is the quantity that it takes up the space of the hernia, and over the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be bound with a ligament as we have said, and use subtle food for the patient until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any swelling remains in the place at the end of healing, then apply medicines that melt and smooth with administration of the table for a long time, which we have counted; and already is administered in that place a plate of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes an imminence happens in the back of the spine bones, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already imminent for which it is not possible to be made protrusion to him with this medicine, because quickly he will cause death to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not cause but dislocation only, and do not happen to those which happen to other joints of small removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four ways, because it is dislocated at the parties inside, or at the parties outside, or at the parties in front, or at the parties behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated at the parties inside, and seldom at the parties in front or at the parties behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of its dislocation at the parties inside is that when you bend the leg of the patient with the patient, it is longer and the thigh is more prominent than that of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot because of the language, and the location of the language is pustulated by pustule cauterized, so that the head of the hip joint has come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which happens to dislocation at the parties outside is that its accidents are contrary to these accidents.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that which happens to dislocation at the parties in front is that they expand their leg according to its compliment, but indeed they cannot bend it without pain that is in the thigh; and if they insist on walking and not being able to walk over those on the front; and their urine is retained and their groin is pustulated, and due to their walking on their heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that which happens to dislocation at the parties behind is that they do not expand the thigh, nor can they bend that in front that bends the groin, and their leg is shorter than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip joint is due to that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and antique, which has already been ancient by having you administered reduction to it and remained according to its disposition, then there will not be complete cure in that; and therefore it is not possible for protrusion to happen to him.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in that which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you are led to that which you want to turn the joint and extend it to the parties inside and to the parties outside, and from there to the right and left, because quickly it returns and does not need other cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then you prepare a strong minister and extend his leg from the lowest party, or with his own hands, or with ligament which is bound over the leg on top of the thigh; and another minister extends his hand over that below the nipples of him; and then stretch with ligament lion over the root of the hip, and hold the other minister the extremity of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And its extension is from the inside party to the groin at the party of the collar bone, or from the back party to the party of the breast.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And let the extension of all those in one go as the patient is elevated with his body from the ground and that he hangs bent.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is well; and otherwise, it is necessary in every species that I will tell of their own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In its own reduction, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the inside parties, let the patient be raised on his side; and then place the ligaments over the root of the hip in that place between the head of the hip joint and the party which is below the groin; and then extend the ligament from above the part of the groin to the highest party of the collar bone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister takes his arms, and presses the thick part of the hip joint and extends to the outside parties by violent extension, because that returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is the quickest cure with which that member is reduced more than other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if he is excused to you and does not obey the treatment with this species of cure in everything, then let his two feet be bound together with strong ligament, quickly, over both heels and over both thighs.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each of its parts be the quantity of four digits, and let the hip joint be extended but that the other by a quantity of two digits.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then let the patient be suspended over the head of the post, and that he is in the middle; and let its length from the ground be the quantity of two yards.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man that lessens the head of the hip joint, and let him be suspended by another young man, and the other young man lessening the hip with strength pushes, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in its own reduction, when it is dislocated at the outside party, let him lie over the hole according as we have recommended while having hibernated; and let the ligament be tightened over the hip joint properly and over the feet of him.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two sticks are placed, one at the feet and the other at the head; and then sticks adjusted to the waist, with a damp cloth wrapped over the area, so that the patient is not harmed by the stick between their thighs, so that when the extension of the legs is drawn down, it is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each assistant extends to their side, and the doctor has his hand ready to make the incision according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you see an obstruction, they will go away greatly; and if not, place it on top of them diligently in the way we have described in the herniation so that they are covered with a bandage.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Be sure that the patient does not lie on their side too comfortably.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in front of the legs, then let the chest be slightly extended and it is according to this narrative on the waist; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the armpit of the patient, and tightly presses that with his other hand, and with that grip he extends the leg at the beginning of the groin.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in back of the legs, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended at the front of the legs and raised from the ground; but let them be placed on a hard surface, just as the positioning when the arm is dislocated outward, as we have said regarding his lying down on two arms; and he should be on his side, and the joints extended, as we have said, with no difficulty.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And there should be a compression applied with a board over the location where there is pain in the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	And when the reduction is complete according to what you have seen — and if the sign of the reduction is hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs for the patient, and when you see these signs and the patient stretches their leg and lengthens it without excuse, then you should know that the limb according to what has happened is returned — and then you adjust two thighs and apply ointment and tighten with a bandage so that the joint is not damaged in any of its parts; and the patient must remain at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the ligament and the bandage, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see these signs in reality, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and therefore let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and tighten that according to the first extension, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then loosen that, and let that delay in walking over anyone for several days, until he is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outward, and inward, and downward but not forward; and backward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to lift their arm with their shoulder, and then you know that it is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its kinds is that you force the patient to straighten their arm, as much as possible; adhere two fingers to their face, and place their foot between your feet; and then have another assistant extend their leg while the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its restoration is that their arm adheres to their shoulder without laboriousness.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then plaster that and have the arm adhere to the shoulder, and then tie those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient of walking for several days until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if its reduction to you is excused, then administer strong extension by the ligaments of which in the cure of the hip there is preceding narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure for the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes dislocated by slight displacement and sometimes it is dislocated according to full, and its dislocation is done either inward or outward.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure for its displacement is slight reduction and is that it be extended with ease by hands and be covered while it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in its cure when it is dislocated according to full, you must force the patient straight, and have a strong and vigorous minister from behind his leg in the middle part of him.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you with your right hand hold the highest part of the foot, and with your left hand the lowest part of the foot in the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left twice, and then extend it with the left; and press the instep of the foot with the right because of the bandage of his labor.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that two times according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the instep of the foot to the ankle on the third occasion, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore if it returns in one or two according to this way, and if you see the foot swollen, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on it, because it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then let the patient lie on their back on the ground, and tighten a staff with a cloth in the ground, and that it lies between their thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around him so that he does not sweat.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister of it has his thighs, and another minister extends the foot by their hands or by the ligament that lies on the neck of the foot; and each minister extends against the extension of his fellow, and the staff is extended between the thighs of the patient, so that the body of him is not drawn to the front because of its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor holds the dislocation with their hands, and another minister has the healthy thigh at the front, because the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And therefore when the dislocation returns and you are told of its restoration, then apply plaster and tighten that with strong ligaments, and tie the foot to the ankle.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you must fear or guard against the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the ligament on it is not violent and lead that strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then let him be for two or three days; and if the ligament is softened, tighten that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then loosen it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he is forced to walk before that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation is not dissolved and ruined, and then it receives no cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if pustules occur to him in that place, then you must minister to the swelling of it where our narrative precedes, in another location of cure and fomentation while it is swollen.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	A cure for dislocated toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	First, let the one who is dislocated be anointed with a little oil; and what is not difficult, let it be lighter.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in any part of the toes of the foot, then let him have his foot cut off from under him on the ground or on a table, and let him stand like that.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you stand on your feet and put your foot over that which protrudes from the joints, and then press it with your foot with force so that it goes back in, and see if it has been anointed and there is no protuberance in the joint.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then put under his foot a table that covers the whole foot, which has two ends, and then tighten him with decent and firm tension for three days; and then loosen him and let him rest from walking for several days, until he is healed and his return is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the kinds of dislocation that are caused by a blow or by a fracture or by any other impingement.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When one of those causes occurs and you penetrate into the cure of that and into the restoration of him, many times death happens.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And because of that, you should not presume on the cure of him, but rather he who is wise in the art, with great compassion and pity, gently, not hastily or presumptuously, and who uses in the beginning of medicines which reduce swellings only so much, and let the patient be left to divine judgment, unless you hope for salvation from ruin, with alleviation of the illness, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to reduce him immediately at the beginning of the cause, before he suffers an impingement.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as we want, then administer treatment which reduces the swelling and heals the wound with that which is appropriate for him of the dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and it happens that the bones are separated, then you penetrate their joint, and do in that what we have said in the simple illnesses of those of which we have spoken earlier.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your ability that instrument in the ways of fear according to what has preceded my preaching; for he who is best to you owes you your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and healthier to your true self those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus end the words of Albucasim perfectly, of which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
