Said the author of this book when I have finished to you, my sons, this book which is a part of the science of medicine in its completeness and has reached the end therein of clarity and explanation, I saw that I should complete it for you with this article which is a part of work by hand.
For work by hand is improved in our country and in our time completely lacking until it was almost studied its science and the trace of it was extinguished. And what remains of it is but a few remnants in the books of the ancients; hands have turned its pages and errors and confusion have occurred, so its meanings have become difficult to understand and its benefit has diminished.
So I saw that I would bring it to life and compose it in this article on the way of explanation and explanation and simplification, and to come with images of hammers and other tools of work, for it is from the increase in clarity and what needs to be brought.
And the reason that there is no artisan skilled with his hand in our time today because medical surgery is long and its owner must train before that in the science of anatomy which described Galen. So that he can stand on the benefits of the organs and their structure, and their compositions and connections and separations, and know the bones and nerves and muscles and their number and exits and pulsating veins and slow veins and the places of their exits.
And for that is what Abuqoras said, that doctors by name are many and actually few, especially in the craft of the hand. We have mentioned from this in the introduction to this book.
For he who is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned above of anatomy has not to fall into error that kills people as I have seen a lot of those who imagined in this science and claimed it without knowledge or study.
And that is because I saw a ignorant doctor had split on a pig's hernia in the neck of a woman, so he cut some arteries of the neck which bled until the woman's blood fell dead between his hands.
I saw another doctor who advanced in removing a stone from a man who had grown old. The stone was large, so he became hysterical and removed it with a piece of the bladder's substance. The man died after about three days, and I was called to remove the stone. So, I examined the patient's bones and his critical condition to estimate what I would do.
I also saw another doctor who made a living as a physician for some local bandits.
A black boy who had a fracture near the ankle joint with an injury was rushed by the doctor's ignorance. So, he tightly bound the fracture with splints and casts without leaving any room for the wound to breathe.
Then he left him to follow his desires. He then left him for several days and ordered him not to remove the bandage until his leg and foot swelled up, and he was on the verge of death.
I called on him, so he quickly removed the bandage, and the patient gained relief from his pains. However, the damage had already taken a hold of the member, and I couldn't save him.
The decay continued in the member until he died.
I also saw another doctor who was slow and dull. He had a cancerous tumor that burst open after a few days, causing great harm to his patient. This is because when the cancer is pure black color, it should not be exposed to iron at all.
However, if it is in a member that can be completely removed, then it should be done.
For this reason, my son, you should know that there are two types of work: work that is accompanied by safety and work that is associated with harm in most cases.
I have warned in every possible place in this book about the work that is filled with danger and fear, so you should avoid it and refuse it.
So that the ignorant person won't find a way to speak or attack, take care of yourselves with determination and patience, and be gentle and cautious with your patients.
And they should take the best path that leads to safety and the praiseworthy outcome, and they should avoid the dangerous diseases that are difficult to heal.
And abstain from that which might lead you into sin, as a matter of hesitation in your religion and your world; for it is more lasting for your religion and higher in the world and your affairs.
For Galen said in some of his exhortations: "Do not treat a disease that is not sick; therefore, name yourself doctors of evil.
And this article has been divided into three doors.
The first door.
In the heating with fire and heating with sharp medicine, ordered from the end to the beginning and images of the tools, and the limits of the heat and all that is needed in the work by hand.
The second door.
In the split, the draw, the bleed, the leech, the surgery, and removing arrows and such, all of which are classified and arranged and images of tools.
The third door.
In the fixing and removing, and treating blindness, and such, classified and arranged from end to beginning and images of tools.
The first door.
In the heating.
Before we mention work, it should be noted that we should mention the benefits and harms of fire and the type of climate in which it is used.
I say that the talk about the benefits and harms of heating is long and accurate science, and a secret that has been discussed by a group of scholars.
They disagreed, and I have shortened their little talk to prevent the lengthiness.
I say that heating is beneficial in general for any climate with a substance and without, except for two climates: the hot climate without a substance, and the dry climate without a substance.
While others disagreed, saying that heating is beneficial in this case, while some said the opposite, that heating does not work in a disease caused by heat and dryness because fire's nature is heat and dryness.
It is impermissible for a disease of hot and dry nature to be treated with a medicine of hot and dry nature; but he who says the opposite says that the application of fire can benefit a hot and dry disease that occurs in human bodies. For when you add the body of man and his moisture to the temper of fire, you make the body of man cold.
And I say according to his saying because experience has revealed it to me many times; but it should not be conceived in this matter except by one who has been well schooled and trained in the door of fire with a thorough training. And he stood, regarding the different temperaments of people and the nature of diseases in themselves and their causes and symptoms and the duration of their time.
And as for all other temperaments, there is no fear of them on you, especially the cold and moist diseases; for all the physicians agreed upon them and did not differ concerning their benefit from fire-making.
And know, my sons, that if the treatment with fire is made by means of singling out the member to be treated and its action does not extend beyond it, nor does it harm an adjacent member in any great degree.
And fire treatment with a destructive drug may extend its action beyond the member to be treated, and perhaps will bring about a disease that is difficult to treat, and may kill; but fire, because of its honor and generosity of its essence, does not do that except by excess.
And this has been made clear to us by experience because of the long service and care in the industry and standing on the truths of the matter.
And for this reason I have spared myself the length of speech, and if it were not inappropriate to my book, I would have related to you in the fire a secret hidden and the manner in which its action is carried out in bodies and its elimination of diseases by philosophical and demonstrative reasoning that will puzzle your understanding.
Know, my sons, that they have differed in time which is good for cautery and made the best of times springtime.
And I say that cautery may mend in any time, for the damage that is done by the time before hand is paid out of the benefit that is brought about by cauterization. 特に if the cauterization is from very painful necessity that compels sharply and urges not to be delayed for what one fears might follow that is greater in trouble than the injury entered before time.
And do not imagine, my sons, what the general public and ignorant doctors assume that cauterization which heals a disease is never to be done again and make it a habit.
And not the case as they imagined that cauterization is like a medicine that changes the mood and dries up the moisture which is the cause of the occurrence of pain.
Except that cauterization prefers to the medicine for the speed of its success, the strength of its action and the severity of its power.
And the disease can return at some time of time according to the patient's mood, his disease's strength, and what is prepared in his body from a gathering of odd things therein and neglect of himself in acquiring them from food and so forth of causes.
Except that the disease which is used for cauterization is a mild disease in a member with few humors and moisture. Like cauterizing a tooth to relieve pain, etc., it may not return that pain, and this would be in the least.
And the saying of the general public, "cauterization is the last of medicine", is a correct saying as they believe that there is no treatment that benefits in the medication and none other after the cauterization has occurred, but the matter is not like that.
But the meaning is that cauterization is the last of medicine if we have used different types of treatments in a disease and those medicines were not beneficial, then we use the last thing, cauterization, which will be effective; so, from this place, cauterization is the last of medicine. This is a difficult concept for many laymen and even some incompetent physicians.
The first ones said that casting with gold is better than casting with iron, and they said that because gold is moderate in its metal and noble in its essence. They said that it does not suppurate at the site of the cast, but that is not always the case.
Because I have tried it and found that it only works in some bodies and not in others, casting with gold is better and preferable than iron as they said, but when you heat the cauldron in fire from gold, you will not realize that it has reached the required temperature for the color of gold.
And because it quickly cools down; and if you add more of it in the heat, it melts in fire and flows together, which causes the craftsman to fall into confusion, so the casting with iron among us is faster and closer to accuracy for the work, God willing.
I have organized this chapter on casting in sections from the head to the foot to make it easier for the student to obtain what he desires, God willing.
Chapter One.
Cast a single cast on the head.
This cast is beneficial for the excess of humidity and cold on the brain, which are causes of headaches and frequent falls from the head to the sides of the eyes and ears, as well as excessive sleep and toothache and sore throat. And in general, it is beneficial for any disease that is exposed to cold, such as paralysis, seizures, and silences, and similar diseases.
The image of this cast is to order the patient first to vomit with a laxative remedy that purifies the head; three nights or four, depending on the patient's strength, age, and his usual habits.
Then order him to shave his head with a razor; then set him down between your hands, having placed your hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your hand on the root of his nose between his eyes and where your middle finger ends, mark that spot with ink.
Then heat the surgical knife as shown in this diagram.
Remove bone to the depth of a corn or a sesame seed; then raise your hand, or else heat it again with the same iron or another if it has cooled. Until you see the bone as described above; then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and soak a cotton swab in it and place it on the site and leave it for three days.
Then carry a cotton swab soaked in butter on it and leave it there until the callouses are gone; then treat it with the quarto ointment until it heals, God willing.
They say that when the wound remains open, it is better and more beneficial.
Some say that the skin should be burned to the bone, and then the iron should be lifted so that it holds only to some of the thickness of the bone, and then it is treated with medicine.
Others say that you should be severe with the iron so that it affects the bone strongly until it falls off from the bone like a pea or a small fluke, and they claim that it vents the gases from that site and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then treat it until it heals, and in my opinion, these two types of iron should not be used at all except in certain people and by way of speculation and leaving it as it is normally connected; as we have seen in all organs.
Especially when the patient's head is weak by nature; the first type of iron is safer and better, in my opinion, and that is what I recommend using; do it and you will be saved, God willing.
Chapter Two.
In addition to treating the head, he also treated:
If chronic pain persists in the head and affects the patient for an extended period, treating it with various methods such as applied treatments, bandages, poultices, and ointments is unsuccessful. In this case, look at the following. If the patient's head is strong and not weak, and he experiences a very cold sensation, apply another kiya (a type of treatment) above that one a little bit. Then, apply a keia on each temporal region of the head until the thickness of the skin disappears and the bone underneath is exposed, following the description provided. Apply a keia at the back of the head, in the region known as the temple, and soften your hand in this area; do not expose the bone as the patient will find it very painful, which is different from the pain felt during most other head kiya. I will describe this keia in its specific location.
The keia used for the temples and back of the head should be softer than that used for the middle part of the head; here is a description of its appearance.
Chapter Three.
Treating acute headaches:
If an acute headache occurs and spreads to the eye, causing nausea in the patient, treat it with medications that remove impurities from the head and use all the treatments mentioned in the disease sections. If this does not help, there are two approaches to applying the keia: Either apply a sharp, irritating medication as a keia, or use iron.
The keia using a sharp, irritating medication involves taking a single clove of garlic, peeling and cutting off the sides, then inserting it under the skin in the temple area until it reaches the desired depth.
Leave the clove in place under the skin for around 15 hours, then remove it and leave the wound uncovered for two or three days. Finally, reinsert the garlic and keep it in place:
Upon it, a cotton pad soaked in fat until pus forms, then treat the area with the ointment until it heals, if God wills. If you wish, you can do this with some burning drugs that I mentioned in the eighteenth article about burning drugs.
As for scraping it with iron, on this feature: Heat the iron scraper which this is its image:.
It is called the 'mazar' grater because its head is like a screw with some bumps and there is a small hole in the middle.
Then you place it on the painful area and hold your hand while you turn the iron a little bit, and the amount that burns from the thickness of the skin is like half of it. And you raise your hand so that it does not burn the artery that is below, then you soak a cotton pad in salt water and put it on the area and leave it for three days. Then soak the cotton pad in fat and treat it with the ointment until it heals, if God wills.
If you wish, you can scrape this acute pain with the blade end of the iron and preserve cutting the artery in this acute pain, especially if it is non-chronic.
Chapter IV.
In treating chronic headaches.
If you have treated the headache as we mentioned above, and what we mentioned in the categories of the disease has not been effective, and you have seen from the disease that which does not stand without the first treatment with medicine or scraping with fire. It is then necessary to heat the blade iron until it turns white, after having marked the area of pain with a line one-half inch long or less, and leave your hand for a moment while you pull it so that it cuts the artery and reaches the bone.
However, you must be careful not to touch the jaw that moves when chewing so that it burns the muscle or nerve that controls it, causing spasm.
Be on your guard and watch out for the flow of blood from the artery that you have cut, for there is danger in cutting it. Especially so for one who does not know what to make or has not become accustomed to doing it and leaves work at the first sign of trouble.
And it will come up to mention the treatment of bleeding that arises from the artery on its face in its book if God wills, if you see a disease that does not stand up for this wound.
And I have seen the body of the patient tolerating a wound in the middle of the head as we described and treating the wound until it heals, God willing.
And if you want to use the ki that we mentioned in the door of slashing the artery with the iron knife having two blades, because this ki is better and more effective.
Chapter V
In ki for headaches.
If a headache occurs due to cold and is treated with expectorants and all the treatment we mentioned in the division has not gone away, heat up the iron knife that is called the point which this image is.
Then drop it on all around the ear as it rotates or all of them if the pain is in them. And keep away from the ki from the origin of the ear a little after you have learned the place with ink, and the ki is the size of ten points in each ear or towards it, then treat the places until it heals, God willing.
Chapter VI
In ki for arthritis.
The ki that is treated with the knife, it is of the type that happens from phlegm as I mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
And avoid ki for the type that occurs from dry skin and nerve spasm.
When you have treated this type of joint pain with oil enemas, saline douches and gargles, and your treatment has not been effective, then it is appropriate to burn the patient with three ki. One at the origin of the ear; the second, slightly below the vertex; and the third, at the meeting of the lips.
And place your fist on the opposite side from the sick side because relaxation only occurs on the side that appears healthy.
And the image of cauterization is to burn cauterization in front of the top ear under the cranium a little and another in the temple, and its length is on the level of the thumbs.
Bring down your blade so that you burn half the thickness of the skin; and this is the image of the cauldron, and it is a type of knife that I have previously described with her, but it is slightly milder than that. It should be a little thicker; and then treat the site with what has been mentioned above until it heals, God willing.
Chapter VII.
In cauterizing the chronic scar.
If the scar has become chronically entrenched and you have treated it with what we mentioned above, but your treatment has not been successful, and there is no fever or cold, then burn four cauterizations. On each of his ears a cauterization, and another in the middle of the head as we mentioned above, and a cauterization at the back of the head according to what was mentioned.
Formula for cauterization according to what has been mentioned above, and it may also be burned on the stomach; that is more effective, and then treat with what was mentioned.
Chapter VIII.
In cauterizing amnesia.
That which is caused by phlegm; it is necessary to first treat the sick person with large diuretics and blood-purifying herbs.
Then he should shave his entire head, and a patch of mustard written in the article of remedies be applied to the back of his head; it is a form of cauterization.
And do this on the level in question that I mentioned here, because it will heal; otherwise, burn three cauterizations at the back of his head, which are collected from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
And make the length between each scald and scald be a finger's width; then treat the burn with what has been mentioned above. If you wish to increase it, and the patient is likely to withstand it, then pierce the middle scald.
If you wish to increase it, then pierce it above the nipples, and treat it until it heals, and the caustic should be a small round ball.
Chapter IX.
Treating a herniated disk and relaxing the entire body.
The head should be purified with the methods and considerations mentioned above, then the patient's hair should be shaved, then a scald should be made in the middle of the head, one on each nipple, and one at the back of the head.
and three on the vertebrae of the neck; if, however, you need to treat a case of general relaxation of the body and the patient is likely to withstand it, and the disease is persistent and severe, then pierce four scalds on the spine of the back. Report on the burn so that most of it is burned on the skin, and raise your hand, then treat it according to what has been mentioned above until it heals, God willing. The caustic should be a small round ball.
Chapter X.
Treating epilepsy.
The brain of the epileptic patient should first be purified with the large ergot methods and all other treatments mentioned above if the patient is large and likely to withstand the medication.
If, however, he is a boy who is not likely to withstand the medication, then he should use the gargle and toothpick to clean his brain several days before, along with improved nutrition.
Then shave his head, then pierce a scald on top of the head as mentioned above, and another at the back of the head. And a scald on each nipple of the head, if the patient is strong and likely to withstand it, then pierce the caustics I mentioned in the case of a herniated disk and relaxing the body on the vertebrae of the neck and spine, and the caustic should be a small round ball.
If the patient is a child, make the ironing hot on this form.
Chapter 11.
In treating mania.
If the cause of mania is corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then treat with the cauterisations we mentioned for the patient with paralysis.
If the cause of mania is a bias towards blackness and the body of the patient is wet and putrid, it will not benefit from the treatment mentioned earlier for the patient with a fever.
Then shave the patient's head, then make a cake of linen tight like a circle and place it in the middle of his head. The patient sits seated holding onto all sides, then take a pound of sheep fat.
Then heat it on the fire at a moderate temperature until the tip of your finger feels warm when inserted into it, then empty it in the middle of the head in the circle and leave it to cool down, do this for the patient once a week with all his other good treatment until he recovers, God willing.
If you wish, cauterise it drop by drop, a small amount at a time, without holding your hand over the iron, but rather let it sizzle. This type of cauterisation moistens the brain gently.
Then carry on with a cotton pad soaked in fat or in chicken fat.
Chapter 12.
In cauterising the water that drops into the eye.
If you see the initial signs of water dropping into the eye mentioned in the previous chapter, then quickly treat the patient with a fat-removing treatment and make him sweat in the bath over several days.
Then shave his head and cauterise it in the middle of the head, then cauterise two spots on the temples, if the initial signs of water dropping into both eyes, or one spot if the water is dropping into only one eye.
Then cut all the veins and arteries under the skin with the iron; let the caustics be long in length and wide in width on the cheeks, and preserve from bleeding.
If you see anything of it, cut it on the spot with any possible remedy, and we will come to wisdom in tying the arteries and cutting them and preserving from bleeding.
And it may be cooked in the nape under the two bones with two powerful caustics.
Chapter 13th:
In Causing a stop to chronic دموids.
If the eye's tear is chronic and persistent, and if it comes from veins and arteries that are on the outside of the head near the base, and you have determined that this is due to an excess of thick, sluggish humors, then cauterize with fire as described above in relation to the descending fluid. A caustic in the middle of the head, and two more on either cheek, and one under the bone at the back of the neck; if necessary, add a caustic on each side of the eye on the edge of the eyebrow with a small iron.
Chapter 14th:
In Causing a stop to a stinky nose.
If he is treated as we have mentioned above in relation to the division, and if the treatment does not work, then hasten to cut off his hair on the third night, and cauterize the middle caustic with the olive iron. Then cauterize with the iron that has a hole in it, two caustics above the eyebrows, just below the hairline, and preserve from the artery; this is the image of the iron with a hole.
Chapter 15th:
In Causing a stop to eye lid drooping.
If the eyelid sags due to disease or moisture, cauterize it with this half-moon-shaped iron.
If you wish, cauterize above the eyebrows slightly, two caustics in each direction, and separate from the cheeks; let each caustic be as long as the eyebrow.
Do not overheat your hand with the fire, but rather only to the extent that a third of the skin burns, and let the iron take this form.
Chapter XVI.
On burning the eyelid.
If the eyelids turn inward, so as to damage the eye, two types of burning can be applied. Either burning with fire, or burning with a caustic agent; if with fire, you order the patient before that to leave his eyelids if he is one who plucks them, so that they grow long and even out;
If it is burned while the hair is still growing, you bind the eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until the hair has grown back; and when the hair has grown back and reached evenness, place the patient's head on your lap, then mark the eyelid with ink to form the shape of a half moon.
The beginning of the mark should be near the eyelids; then place a cotton wool pad soaked in egg white or babypowder paste under the eyelid; and finally heat the iron to this form.
Then, in multiple places, burn slightly on the marked form in many times until the surface of the skin burns; all of it appearing like a half-moon shape, a special sign and symbol of your work is that you see the eyelid shrivel up and the hair rise from the eye socket.
Then, when you have finished, raise your hand and leave it for three days; then place a cotton wool pad soaked in oil on it to remove the crust; then treat it with the ointment until it heals, God willing; and if hair grows back after some time and the eyelid droops, apply a cream.
Reapply the burn to that spot as you did before; if the hair in the lower eyelid turns inward, order the patient to leave his eyelids alone until they grow long and even out.
Then make an image of paper from paper and a paste from the usual soap and unlit lime of each, weighing a dirham or something like that; then grind them both together well and do this quickly so that they don't dry out. Then spread it on the paper you've made like an aş paper and put it on one or both eyelids and place a cotton ball soaked in egg white and raki on your eye lid(s) and place a head of garlic in your palm.
And place your index finger on the medicine and squeeze it a little while moving it whenever the garlic stings the eye because it will find the sting like fire, as long as it finds the sting, leave the medicine and move it with your finger, if the sting subsides, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the eyelid rise as it does when burned with fire or cut, otherwise repeat the medicine on the site that has not been affected by the medicine and has not turned black until you have finished your work and the eye has been stung then put the cotton ball in oil on it so that the burn stops.
Then treat it with the olive ointment or something else until it heals, and you should be extremely careful when working so that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid has dropped after a few days and there is something like hair in the eye.
Then repeat the medicine on that part of the eyelid that has dropped especially as you did first, then treat it until it heals, and this is the image of aş paper.
And know that people's eyes may vary in size, small and large, so let your stinging be according to that, and the path to correctness is not hidden from those who have experience with this industry.
Chapter 17.
In the kay-naser that is displayed in the crease of the eye.
If you treat nasour with what we mentioned in the treatment of diseases, your treatment will not be effective, so it should be burned in this way.
Order the patient to put his head in your lap and have a servant hold his head still in your hand, holding it steady so he doesn't move or hit his head.
Then put a wet cotton ball in the white of the egg or in the lather of the berberjet on his eyes and then heat the iron, which looks like this.
It should be hollow like the neck of a peacock from one end, which is the end that will be burned; and if you want it to have an opening at the other end, and prefer it to be solid like a rod; however, this hollow shape is better for your surgery, God willing.
Then squeeze the nasour if it is open, drain its pus and dry it, or if it is closed, open it and remove its pus, and then put the iron on it while it's very hot, holding it with your hand until you reach the bone.
And remove your hand a little away from the eye to the side of the nose so that your hand doesn't go astray or disturb the patient, and so that the iron doesn' t ruin the eye if it falls into the fat around the eye; if it reaches the bone in the first burn, otherwise put the iron back on again if you need to do that.
And leave it for three days, then put a cotton ball with oil on it and treat it with the drying ointment until it heals, and if it has passed forty days and hasn't healed, carry out the sharp, caustic treatment until the bone is exposed, and skin it as mentioned in the section on this disease, God willing.
Another way of treating nasour is mentioned by some earlier scholars; cut the nasour open, then put a thin cup-like shape in the same place. Here is its image:
And pour into it an amount of weight of a lead diluent and grip the bucket firmly with your hand, tightly clamped; and the patient will not move at all so that the dissolved lead does not flow to his eye; and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye a cotton wool soaked in egg white or water.
For lead burns the place of the naso-pharynx and heals it miraculously, for if it heals with what we have mentioned above of stabbing and treatment, otherwise one must use the piercing of the nose and returning the naso-pharynx to the course of the nose as will be mentioned in its special place.
Chapter 18.
In stabbing a split in the lip.
Is often a split in the lip, called a hair, especially in the lips of children, as it often happens, when you treat this split with what we have mentioned in the section, and if the treatment does not succeed, heat a small iron kettle on this image.
It should be hollowed out like a knife, then place it on the fire in the same crack until the stabbing reaches the depth of the crack, and then treat it with the cauldron until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 19.
In stabbing the naso-pharynx that occurs in the mouth.
If it is exposed in the base of the gums or in the tongue or in the bases of the teeth and swelling then dried up and broke out pus as a naso-pharynx, then treated it, but did not succeed, it should be heated iron on the amount that fits in the naso-pharynx.
Then put it on fire in a hole in the naso-pharynx and grip your hand, until you reach the iron to its full depth, and do this once or twice, then treat it after that with what we have mentioned above of treatment until it heals, God willing.
If the material has stopped and healed, otherwise it is necessary to examine the site and remove the rotten bone according to what will come in its door God willing.
Chapter 20.
In fixing loose teeth and decaying molars.
If the gums have become loose due to moisture and the teeth have moved, treated them with medication, but if they do not respond, place the patient's head in your lap then heat the iron according to the illustration that follows after placing the pipe on the tooth.
Then, with a heated iron, enter it into the gum gently and hold your hand for a moment so that the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth, then lift your hand and repeat the process as many times as you wish, and then let the patient fill his mouth with salt water.
And he should hold it for an hour and spit it out, as the loose teeth will become fixed and the gum will tighten and the damaging moisture will dry up.
Chapter 21.
In relieving toothache.
If the toothache is caused by cold or there is debris in it, and if the medication does not help, then the tooth can be treated with oil or fire.
Regarding treatment with oil, you take raw cow's milk fat, heat it in a metal cup or shell, then take a cotton wool ball and wrap it around the handle of the rod, then dip it into the hot fat and place it on the tooth that is aching, with rapidity and hold it until it cools down.
Then, you can dip a woolen ball or cotton into cold milk fat and place it on the tooth that is aching, and if you wish, you can put a heated iron ring on top of it until the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
Regarding treatment with fire, you shall take a copper or iron tube, and it should have some thickness so that the fire in it does not reach the mouth of the patient, then heat the iron according to the illustration provided, and place it on the same tooth, holding your hand to prevent the patient from feeling the heat of the fire until it reaches the root of the tooth, then you can repeat this process as many times as desired.
If the pain goes away on that very day, or another day, it is necessary to put fat in the patient's mouth for him to swallow at intervals and hold it in his mouth for a while, then spit it out; this is the image of the caustic.
It can be burned with any part as much as possible, and this is the image of the tube.
Chapter 22
In burning pigs.
If the pigs are sticky and cold and do not yield to treatment, and if you want them to yield quickly, heat the hollow iron cauldron that has both ends exposed, like this:
Let the smoke come out of the cauldron through the other end when you burn it, and place it over the same lump twice if it is necessary to do so in order to reach the depth of the lump; if the lump is small, make the cauldron according to the size of the lump.
Then leave it for three days and carry on with him a pad soaked in fat until what is burned by fire goes away, then treat him with the ointment and poultices until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter 23
In burning due to a hoarse voice and difficulty breathing.
If the mucous secretions prevail in the lungs, especially if accompanied by a cold constitution, it is necessary to make the patient vomit first with remedies that induce vomiting, then burn him with a caustic scar in the hole of the throat at the base of the tongue:
Be careful not to reach the larynx with the caustic, and do not burn it from the skin except for half its size; then apply another caustic scar at the joint of the neck in its last half, using a cauldron shaped like this:
Then treat him with what has been mentioned earlier until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter 24
In case of a lung disease and cough.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold, moist air, and there is no fever or consumption of the body, and the disease is chronic, then cauterize two points above the collarbones in the soft, empty areas, and another cauterization point in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And let the cauterization be in the form that I have mentioned, and if you wish, then let your cauterization be by droppings with the cauldron called the point, and I have mentioned its image in the dropping of earache, and let the points be thirty towards it or near it.
Then treat him as I have mentioned until he recovers, and you can make a cauldron with three prongs on this image, and hurry up with the cauterization because you cauterize with it in one cauldron three cauterizations, and this is the image of the cauldron.
Chapter 25.
In the cauterization of the nipples.
If the head of the humerus has become detached due to slippery moist air, or has not remained in place while attempting to fix it back until it becomes a habit for him to do so, then it should be fixed first. Then the patient should lie on his back or on his right side, and then you raise the skin that is inside the armpit with your fingers from your left hand, if the joint has become detached inwardly.
Then heat the cauldron with two prongs, which is this image:
Then heat the skin with it until it passes through to the other side, and a form of cauterization is four cauterizations, and if you use a cauldron with three prongs, then the form of cauterization would be six cauterizations, and the prongs on a soft part of the supply.
This is the image of the cauldron with three prongs:
And it may be increased by one, so that the cauterizations are eight, and then carry on the club-foot with ground pepper and salt then bind the patient so that he does not move the member at all until he is strong, and if the dislocation is upward and rarely is that.
So a single cauterization above the shoulder, a good nail-like cauterization or many drops of cauterization, for then the joint will harden and moisture will go away and the patient will heal.
Chapter 26.
In a cauterization of the stomach.
If there is a cold and a lot of moisture in the stomach until it takes away from its constitution, and many withdrawals to it, and it is treated with various treatments, but it does not benefit - then the patient should lie on his back and extend his legs and hands, and then cauterize him three times. A cauterization under the breast of a capacity of a finger with a nail-like cauterizer, and two cauterizations below the sides of a single cauterization, until the shape of the cauterizations is triangular and farther between them so that they do not come together if they are scarred, and the depth of the ki should be half the thickness of the skin, and the shape of the cauterizations.
On this image and on this amount without further.
And if you want to cauterize it with a single large cauterization in the middle of the stomach on this image.
And the iron that is used to cauterize the single cauterization should be in the form of a circle on this image.
And the stomach can be cauterized by drops for those who are wounded from this ki - that is, to draw a point on the capacity you want with ink, and then cauterize it with a drop-like iron, and then treat it with the treatment that has been mentioned until it heals, and.
Chapter 27.
In cold cauterizations of the liver.
If there is pain in the liver due to cold and moisture, or due to a bad wind, until it has come out of its natural state excessively, and the patient has been treated as mentioned in the division, it has not been successful. The patient should lie on his back and mark with the calamine three knots on this shape and this exact amount directly on the liver below the flexors where the human elbow ends.
And let each knot be as thick as a finger, and the blistering should be done along the length of the body straight, do not grip your hand with the hot blade.
Let it be as much as half the thickness of the skin burns, and the patient stands on his feet, if he is not standing, he lies down, stretching his legs and raising his arms, and this is a picture of the hot blade.
And you may be able to blister these knots with the blade if you have it and are skilled in the work and careful not to blister too much so that you burn all the skin, which will reach the intestines, for the skin is thin there, so be careful.
Chapter 28.
In the case of liver and stomach tumors, blistering should be done.
If there is an outbreak in the liver and you want to know if that tumor is in the liver meat or in its membrane, if it is in the liver meat, then the patient will feel a weight and pain without being sharp.
If it is in the membrane of the liver, then there will be sharp pain with it, and you will see that it has exceeded the ability of doctors to treat it, so the patient should lie on his back and mark the blistered area with calamine.
Then heat the blade in fire, which is a blade similar to a mill, and this is its picture. And blister it with one blister, until the skin burns completely and ends up at the membrane with a hot blade, then treat it with leech treatment to cure the outbreak.
And this kind of cauterization should not be used except by one who has been trained in the art of medicine for a long time and has experienced these diseases many times; then he should go ahead with such a job and leave it to me is better.
Chapter 29.
In cauterizing the shoo.
The earliest mentioned the cauterization with the roots of the zeraوند for cold shooes in this way: taking one root of the zeraوند, dry and long by origin, as long as you find it, and making it like the thickness of a finger, then dipping it in oil and burning it in fire. Then cauterize it with one scarification between the connection of the collarbone to the neck and two small scarifications below the hips a little inclined towards the side of the beard, and two great scarifications above the breasts between the third and fourth ribs.
And two scarifications between the fifth and sixth ribs inclined slightly towards the back, and another scarification in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach, and three scarifications behind: one between the shoulders and two on the sides of the spine below the level of the armpits.
And your hand should not go deep into the cauterization, but it should be slightly inside the skin, blowing it up. Some of the earliest mentioned that some people used to use a kind of iron cauldron, similar to a mil, and heated it and inserted it between the ribs until it reached the same spot as the tumor.
And the thread comes out as we have mentioned in the liver tumor, and in this case, the cauterization with iron may result in death immediately or may leave a scar that cannot heal.
Chapter 30.
In cauterizing the spleen.
If you have treated the spleen disease with what we mentioned in the division of treatment, and your treatment has not been effective, then cauterization is done in three or four places along the length of the spleen, all of which are correct.
On the Form of the Liver Cuts: The form they take should be such that, between each cut, there is a thickness equal to or slightly greater than the thickness of the finger, and the character of the cut should be the same as that which we mentioned for the liver cuts, whether it is a cut from above or from below. Do not insert your hand into the cut; and the patient lies on his back.
The reverse side, in the elbow; and lift up the skin that is opposite the spleen, where the elbow of the patient's left arm ends. You should lift the skin on the width of the body so that the cuts fall along the length of the body.
Then, enter the two blades very carefully until they pass through the skin on the opposite side; then remove the blade and you will have made four cuts. If you wish, you can make them with the other blade that has three blades.
Then, treat the site of the cut after you have left it to drain pus for a few days; this is more effective than any of the other treatments mentioned earlier.
Chapter 31.
In the cutting of ascites.
The cut only benefits in ascites, especially when you treat the abdomen with the treatment methods we mentioned in the classification; if your treatment is not effective, then you should make four cuts around the navel and one on the stomach.
A cut on the liver; a cut on the spleen; and two cuts behind the back, between the shoulders; one facing the chest and the other facing the stomach; the depth of the cut should be almost equal to that of the skin; then leave the cut open so that it drains pus for a long time.
Do not neglect the treatment after the cut to accelerate the healing process; the shape of the blade used for cutting the back is the same as that which we mentioned earlier, and the color of the blade used for this cut is olive-colored.
Chapter 32.
In the treatment of feet and legs.
If they swell in the shin and turn yellow, it should be burned on the back of the foot at the knuckle between the thumb and the index finger.
And hold your hand with the iron, do not turn it then lift your hand do not bring it back again for he will discharge yellow water and the iron will be on this image.
Then two ki's on the legs, each with a ke'sh-shaped iron, and one ke'sh on the back of each thigh, one below the knee and the other lower down towards the middle of the leg, and two ki's on each hip.
And leave the ki' open without treatment for a long time for it to discharge water and then treat it with all that we have mentioned.
Chapter 33.
In the treatment of diarrhea.
If diarrhea is caused by cold and moisture, until it weakens the muscles that hold and digest in the stomach and intestines, and this treatment with various treatments has not improved, and you see the patient still suffering from diarrhea, then apply a large ki' to his abdomen and back, with great strength. On what has been mentioned above, a ki' on the stomach with an iron ring, and four ki's around the navel, gentle with the iron ring, and one ki' on cotton above the hips, large or two ki's.
If you see a lot of moisture and the patient is still struggling with it, then apply a ki' to the genitals and a ki' to each hip, and two small ki' near the large one on the stomach, because this treatment is successful and will not miss its benefit if God wants.
Chapter 34.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids of the anus.
If there is chronic hemorrhoid of the anus, a lot or one, and it is of thick, cold, or foul-smelling moisture, and has been treated with what we have mentioned in the treatment section, but the treatment has not been effective, then apply to the patient three ki' on the lower part of the hip, just below the perineum, a little above the table, shaped like a triangle.
Suture the skin under the mattress with two stitches, or more if necessary, because if you see that his stomach has cooled and he is unable to digest food, and you notice that his face is swollen, sutured a large stitch in the stomach, as mentioned above, and another in his liver. Another, with a nail-headed awl, on his abdomen and leave the burn open for some time, then treat it so that it may heal by the will of God.
Chapter 53.
In burning warts.
After cutting them, if you cut a wart, heat the awl mentioned above and insert it into the same wart that was cut, and continue to press your hand so that the awl reaches the opening of the sweat that it drips with blood, do this once or twice.
If the warts are numerous, suture each one as described above, then treat them with appropriate ointments until they heal, and if you burned it with a large burn on cotton, it would be more effective in healing.
Chapter 56.
In burning the skin tag that is in the anus and its surroundings.
If the patient does not respond to the incision and the work described above in its location, or if they refuse to do so, perhaps it will heal by burning. If a skin tag develops and becomes infected with foul drainage, first measure it with a thin awl.
Then, using the same awl, determine its depth with the probe, heat the nail-headed awl mentioned above and insert it into the same skin tag at the same level as the depth of the skin tag and the probe, and perform the burning once or twice, or three times, depending on your needs.
And be careful not to burn a nerve or a great sweat if there is one, as the skin tag may open into the bladder or the intestine.
Preserve these places altogether, and do so only if the nasum is in a tender spot and you have estimated that it is not penetrable, then treat the spot until it heals, for if the spot has closed up and the materials have been removed from it and it has remained like this for some time, then know that it has healed completely.
If the materials have not been removed from it, then know that it is penetrable or that there is rotten bone or something like this, which will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter 37.
In the kidney.
If a pain occurs in the kidney due to cold or harsh wind and it has decreased because of this, the group of the ill should be cauterized on both bones on the same kidney, cauterizing one kidney with the caustic iron tool mentioned above, and perhaps cauterize it three times at the same table, giving three cauterizations stacked up, which is more beneficial in terms of healing.
Chapter 38.
In the bladder.
If a person's bladder weakens and becomes relaxed due to cold and moisture, so that the ill person cannot hold their urine, they should be cauterized in one place at the base of the scrotum on the bladder, where hair begins, and another cauterization to the right of the scrotum and another to the left.
And it should be after the cauterization on each side, at the length of the thumb, and one cauterization in the lower back or two if needed, and the caustic tool should be iron as mentioned above.
Chapter 39.
In the uterus.
If a person's uterus has become blocked by cold and moisture, causing the cord to deteriorate, becoming brittle and difficult to deliver, then three cauterizations around the scrotum should be performed as we mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder. The scar should be made on cotton beneath the back or two and be done with a hook-shaped iron.
Chapter forty.
In removing the hip.
It may happen that incorrect secretions are deposited in the hip joint, causing it to dislocate; this is indicated by the leg becoming longer than the other when measured next to each other, and a depression will be found at the site of the dislocation. The patient should then be sewn up on the hip joint itself using a half-circle stitch.
After having traced the outline of the hip with a pencil so that it is in the center of the circle, and using the same hook-shaped iron shown in the illustration for the stomach stitch, if you do not have this type of iron, then sew three stitches with the large hooked iron.
Leave a depth on the wound that is equal to the thickness of the skin and then treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter forty-one.
In stitching the vagina.
If pain occurs in the hip joint and is due to stiffness and sticky secretions, and you have treated the patient with what was mentioned in the section on hip dislocations, but the treatment was not successful and time has passed, then it is necessary to soften the excessive secretions with black seed oil or jellied ochre.
Then sew it up and make three angled stitches on the front of the wound, either with burning medications or with fire; the fire stitch should be made in several places.
It should be of an appropriate depth, and the distance between each stitch should be about the thickness of a finger; use a hooked iron as mentioned in the illustration for the stomach stitch. If you wish, you can make one stich in the middle of the hip joint using the same circle shape described earlier for the hip dislocation.
To make the circle surround all of the hip and burn through all of the thick skin, this is the characteristic of cauterization in the nerves if the pain is necessary for the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh or leg.
If it extends to the thigh or leg, then cauterize two kees on the thigh at the point that the patient indicates pain and a kee above the sciatic nerve by four fingers towards the lateral side slightly. The kee should be in the form of a knife, and the depth of the kee should be only as thick as the skin.
If it indicates that the pain extends towards the direction of the toes of the leg, then cauterize at the point where he indicates with a knife-like kee three or four or more times if necessary. If it indicates pain under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize there one kee in the form of a knife.
And be careful in all of your kees that they do not reach the point of burning a nerve or an important artery, so that you cause the patient a minor injury or a wound.
I have seen one or two people who cauterized above the sciatic nerve and went too deep with the kee, which resulted in gangrene of the leg up to the foot, perforating it all, and ruining the entire leg. Then, diarrhea and death occurred afterwards. If the pain is in both sides, cauterize them with this very characteristic.
Some of the wise scholars from among the الحكماء mentioned in the surgery of the hip kee with this very characteristic; a bowl is made from iron, its diameter being half a cubit, and its mouth being as thick as the kernel of a date or slightly thinner. Inside this bowl there is another bowl and a third.
It should be between what is between each bowl the distance of a fist, and the bowls should be open from both sides; it should have a handle made of iron that is firmly fixed in the bowls. This is its picture:
Then, it is heated in the fire until it turns red and spits, then placed on the right hip and the sick man leans on the correct side so that he cooks him three times round in one pass, then he leaves it for three days and wraps it in fat, leaving the wound open for a few days.
Then, he is treated with a ointment until it heals, said the author of this book This type of burn is rarely used due to its horrible appearance and the lack of those who can bear it. However, it is a good burn for those who endure it and are injured in its place.
And as for burning with medicines, it is that you make two half-circles of the size that the door ring comes out of it of brass or iron.
It is in the edge of them both a height of two palm-widths or less, and between them there is a thickness of the thickness of a finger, and it is open at the bottom, open at the top, and it has held some of them together on this form.
Then, you lower it on the right hip and the sick man lies on his correct side and握紧你的右手，然后在火上加热一阵子，并把它放在两个半圆之间，让它们稍微粘在一起，如上图所示。病人的手会感到强烈的疼痛和烧灼感，就像火一样。
until the burn subsides, then you lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away the sharp water from the hip entirely with sweet water, then leave it for three days and carry fat on it until the blackness of the burn disappears, and leave it for a few days to drain the pus, as this is more beneficial.
Then, he is treated with ointments until he recovers, if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, you make a mold for it in what holds water according to what you have made on the hip, this is the nature of sharp water, and I have proven it in the article of repairing medicines.
Take a part of salt and of unquenched lime from each, grind them, and put them in a new vessel which has been pierced with one small hole at the bottom on the scale of what enters the tube; and place under the base of the vessel another jar that is stirred.
Then pour on the salt and lime as much fresh water as covers them; after having tightly clamped them with your hand and left the vessel until the sharp water has settled at the bottom of the stirred jar, gather up all that water again, and then throw it on another lime and another salt, also repeatedly.
For it will then be extremely sharp, capable of performing many surgical procedures and of burning out the entire body because it acts like fire itself, and there are among the medicines those which burn with it such as syphilis, and myrrh mixed with soap crushed up.
And Galen claimed a tale of an ancient man as a cure for joint pain and sciatica, he greatly emphasized its importance and claimed that it is all that is needed as a treatment and that it heals with one application only.
Perhaps he could enter a portable bath and come out healed; or, if the green shittar is not available, the recent dry one should be ground up with some fat and applied to the hip where the pain is, or in the leg or thigh.
And tie it up and leave it for three hours, or for as long as the patient feels the burning sensation; then let him enter the bath; and when his body is damp, put him in a tub; because the pain will subside and he will be healed by God's will; and if he does not heal, repeat the wrap ten days later.
For he will be healed if God so wills; and know that it is not appropriate to use these burning treatments on anyone without first emptying their bowels, and Diaceorides mentioned that goat hair when burned and applied to sciatica provided relief.
And the caustic should be of this quality; take wool, and soak it in old oil, and place it on the deep place which is between the thumb of the hand and the forearm; and then take a dry goat's hair.
And light it with fire until it becomes a lump, and then place it on the wool and leave it until it goes out, and then take another one; do this again and again until the pain subsides by the will of God; this kind of cautery is called goat's hair cauterization.
Chapter 24.
In cauterizing back pain.
Back pain may be due to various causes, such as a fall, a blow, excessive vomiting, and so on; and cauterization is appropriate in this case only.
If a patient has vomited, it is appropriate to cauterize on his back where the pain is; three rows on the width of the table itself, each row with five or more caustics according to what you see as the patient's likelihood and strength.
The cauterization should be done with a point iron; if you prefer, you can do three or four caustics with an average nail-shaped iron.
Chapter 34.
In cauterizing the beginning of a hernia.
This condition often affects young children; the sign of its beginning in a child is that he experiences difficulty breathing when he stands up or moves around, and you will find that the last vertebrae of his back have a swelling that protrudes and tingles on all the other vertebrae.
If you see this and want to stop it, cauterize it with an iron in the shape of a circle. Take the caustic on each side of the vertebra evenly; if you prefer, cauterize around the vertebra with a point iron in two or three rows and make the spots close to each other; then treat the site until it heals as mentioned above.
Precautions: You must not use cauterization in the hernia which is caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
In cauterizing gout and joint pains.
If the joint pains are due to cold dampness settling in any member of the body, then if the pains occur in the legs, it is the custom of physicians to call it gout specifically.
If the cold-cause gout (i.e., the symptom) is treated with the remedies we mentioned in the above division, and the pains do not go away, then cauterization will get rid of them; that is, after vomiting, apply numerous cauterizations around the knee joint using a oil-based cauterizer on this image.
If you need to pierce the face of the leg, do so with a puncturing cauterizer; for if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, often they will then show up on every knee with three or four cauterizations from each side using this very oil-based cauterizer.
If you need more than this cauterization, do not pierce deeper with the cauterizer; only pierce up to the thickness of the skin, for if the pains ascend to the hips or the back, then use what we mentioned above about cauterizing in its own section.
If the pains are limited to the hands only, pierce around the forearms as you would rotate two pages, and if the pains persist in the fingers, pierce each knuckle and the palm of the hand; for if after a few days the pains ascend to the elbows or shoulders, then use what we mentioned above about cauterizing in its own section.
Pierce them from each side, and there is no illness that does not respond to careful treatment and taking drugs; if one eats well and vomits up the phlegm, he will recover with this cauterization, God willing.
Chapter 54.
On the treatment of hernias.
If a hernia occurs in the groin and some of the intestine and mesentery drop into the testicle, and this is starting to happen gradually, then the patient should be ordered to stop eating for that day and to use laxatives to pass the stool from his gut.
Then he should lie down on his back in front of you, and order him to hold himself until the fluid or intestine comes out, and then you can push it back with your finger. Then mark with ink under the hernia on the pubic bone a shape like a half-circle, the edges towards the top of the body.
Then heat up an iron to this shape.
So that it comes out white and sparks, then puts the intestine or fluid back into his gut, and a servant places his hand on the spot to prevent the intestinal contents from coming out again, and another servant stands with his leg over the patient's legs, and a pillow is placed under him.
And another on his chest, holding his hands, then the iron is lowered onto the same mark, and you hold it in place until it reaches the bone, or you repeat it if it doesn't reach the first time.
And conserve your efforts so that the intestine doesn't come out while you are suturing, or else it will be a great disaster for the patient, and know that if you don't reach the bone with the iron, your work will not succeed. The iron should be light for children to fit their size and for adults to fit their size.
Then treat the sutured area after three days with oil to get rid of the scar, and then treat it with all kinds of ointments until it heals. Let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound closes.
And make his diet during the treatment something that softens his stomach so that the intestine doesn't come out when he defecates, and then after the forty days, a tight belt should be used for another forty days, reducing exercise, eating, drinking, and shouting.
If one employs this measure thus, he will be healed completely by God's will; I shall describe the treatment of hernias by incision in their own section, God willing. As for the hernia that occurs in all parts of the abdomen and is just beginning, if you do not wish it to increase, you should cut a round piece from it of its size. And let what you burn of the skin be like two-thirds thereof, and then treat it as we have described; for it will not increase, God willing. Some of the early scholars mentioned burning the hernia with an iron triangle in this manner.
After you have taught yourself to mark the hernia with ink, and the line in the upper part of the hernia is on one side, and the other line down below it, and you lower your hand in the middle with a single round knife cut. The first burn is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter 64.
In burning the hernia.
If it happens in some organs from a fall or blow, and this pain lasts for a long time and does not respond to treatment with drugs, then it should be burned with an iron point, and the burn of each organ is according to its size, large or small, weak or strong.
And if the pain and swelling subside after the first burn, then it has been cured; otherwise, you should repeat the burn, for such pains usually move from one organ to another nearby. Therefore, you should follow up with more burns until the patient recovers.
Chapter 74.
In burning leprosiness.
As for the lepers, they may benefit greatly from burning; especially the type of leprosy that is caused by putrid phlegm and blackness.
If you are examining a case of leprosy, and if it is just beginning and has been treated as we have described in the previous section on treatment, and it has not deteriorated or stopped improving, and you are afraid that فساد (destruction) may spread to all parts of the body, then burn it on the head five times. The one in the center of the head is known, and the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on the temples, and one behind on the notch of the skull. Hold your hand slightly burned to have a slight effect on the bone.
And from it, scales are removed to facilitate the passage of thick fumes through it and to burn it too on the same scald on what has been said, and if the leprosy has persisted on the patient and has appeared clearly, then it should be burned with these scalds that we have mentioned on the head. A scald on the tip of the nose, two scalds on the cheeks, two on the vertebrae of the neck, and one large one at the sacrum at the end of the tail, and another above it in the same table, and two on the hips, each hip with one. Two on the knees, each with one, two on the shoulders, and two in the elbows, two on the breastbones, and one on each wrist and ankle, and also a scald on each toe of the hands and feet.
And beware of the nerve that is behind the heels so as not to burn them, and you can also burn a scald on the bone of the perineum, and another on the mouth of the abdomen, and another on the liver; know that the more you increase the burning, it will be more useful and beneficial.
And know that the patient does not feel pain from burning because his body has been numbed, and it should be that the scalds are of a size and weight appropriate to the members and joints as mentioned previously with regard to the attributes of knives.
Then treat the burning with fine cream, honey, and other treatment until he is healed, God willing.
Chapter 84.
In burning the numb member, as it is treated with medications, ointments, and bandages, and it has not healed, treat the same member by burning, at a depth appropriate to the member's bone size or smallness; let your hand be slightly burned so that it affects the bone just a little.
Then treat him with ointment until he heals, and sometimes he burns some of the numbness that affects the hand and foot in the vertebrae of the back at the exit of the nerve that moves that member, so the numbness goes away.
And he does not do this unless he was able to see the anatomy of the members and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
Chapter 94.
In treating leprosy.
If leprosy has persisted and not responded to any medical treatments, then it should be cut into with a knife at a depth slightly greater than the thickness of the skin until the white part disappears and the color changes.
Then treat it with a paste made of sorghum, with rosewater and linden leaf, or blood of pigeons or the linefish, each part separately, and then mix them all together and apply them to a cloth, and bandage the affected area until it heals.
Chapter 50.
In treating cancer.
If the cancer is just beginning and you want to stop it from spreading, then burn it with a hot iron in the shape of a circle around it; some wise men have mentioned burning it with an intense fire in its middle, but I do not agree with this because I expect it to ulcers, and I have witnessed this happened sometimes.
The right thing is to burn it with a circle of iron around it as we mentioned, or with several burns.
Chapter 51.
In treating syphilis.
If a person has syphilis and it is slowing down in progressing, either because the patient is elderly and has less blood, or because of the time of year (assuming you are referring to climate), and you want to accelerate the progress of the disease, then burn several small circles around the affected area with a hot iron.
Then leave it alone, as it will speed up in progressing; if you want to slow it down, then cool the iron first.
And lower it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the skin, and let the cautery be from below so that it facilitates the drainage, then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
Chapter 52.
In cauterizing the abscess.
The abscess is a corruption that travels through the member, consuming it as fire consumes dry wood. If you see an abscess in a place that is suitable for cauterization with fire, hold a small and large iron awl, according to what suits the location of the abscess.
Then cauterize it from all sides until the corruption is completely eradicated, leaving nothing at all, then leave it for three days and apply sulfur powder mixed with oil to the burned areas so that the skin peeling occurs and all the corruption disappears.
Then treat it with ointments that promote tissue growth, if after three days you see that the flesh is growing healthy and without corruption, otherwise, repeat the cauterization process on the remaining infected areas. The abscess may also be treated with harsh medicines.
For it does the same thing as fire, but is quicker in its benefit. It has already been mentioned that it can be treated with harsh medicines. Take it from there whenever you need it.
Chapter 53.
In cauterizing reversed and non-reversed nails.
It often occurs at the bottom of the feet, and it is a rough and painful condition for the foot to have. The cauterization of this condition has two aspects: cauterization with fire or cauterization with sharp water.
The cauterization with fire is done by heating up a hollow, bird-like iron screw, made of iron, to the size that surrounds the nail from all sides, and making the edge of the iron thin, then lowering it onto the nail and turning your hand with the iron around the nail until the iron reaches the depth of the nail.
And let him leave it for three days to drain pus, then bind it with wild molasses seasoned with salt and leave the dressing on it for a night, because it will come off its roots, then treat the wound site with the nourishing salve until it heals, if the nails are not inverted.
Often it occurs on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet; therefore, one should take a tube of copper or iron or bird's feather and insert it into the nail or wart, then pour a little sharp water into the tube.
And hold your hand while you rotate it slightly so that the edge of the tube affects the root of the nail, and the sharp water finds a way to sink into the root of the nail; and the patient should be patient for a little while on the sting of the sharp water.
And then leave it alone, because the nail will come off with its roots; thus, you do one after the other until you finish all of them in the body, and then treat the sites after they fall off with the nourishing salve that grows flesh.
Chapter 54.
In Kii of the scalpel.
If a slashing from the cold in the nerve, or from a quarter fever, or something else, it is necessary that you scorch it with four or five caustics on the spine between each caustic and in his chest scorch one. And on his belly, a caustic with the olive caustic, because the slashing calms and accelerates the healing of the cold disease.
Chapter 55.
In Kii of the boils that occur in the body.
It may come out in the body with ugly boils that are made of cold, thick, rotten materials; when it first appears, one should scorch the tip of a mild caustic stick with fire, or with a long zra'und hair, or with an olive caustic.
The lumps may be burned in their first surge on this feature and do not increase and the performing favor for them disappears from it and recovers from it the patient unless it is necessary that this be after the patient has been drained by cauterization.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of bleeding when an artery is cut.
Frequently, blood flows from an artery that has been cut when a wound is exposed on the outside or when a tumor is split or an organ is cut, and so on, making it difficult to cut it.
If any of this occurs, quickly put your hand on the artery's opening with your index finger and squeeze it gently so that the blood is kept under your finger and does not come out. Then, place several small and large olive oil wicks in the fire and blow them until they are very hot.
Then, take one of them, small or large, depending on the wound and the place where the artery has broken open, and lower the wick onto the same spot after you remove your finger quickly and hold the wick in place until the blood stops.
If it bursts when you remove your finger from the artery's opening and extinguish the wick, immediately take another wick from those that are on fire and still hold it in place, one after the other, until the blood stops.
And be careful not to burn a nerve that has an opening in it, for bleeding is a difficult matter, especially if the artery is large. unless it is cut with cauterization as we have mentioned, or, if it cannot be cut by cauterization, then it must be amputated, provided it has not already been amputated. If it is amputated, its ends will shrink and the blood will stop flowing. Otherwise, you can bind it tightly with thread or place medications on it that are designed to stop the blood flow and tighten the bandages.
And whereas he attempts to cut it with a ligature, or with pressure from a cloth, or with burned things and so forth, he will not be cut at all except by rare occasions; if he experiences any of these without the presence of a physician or medicine, let him quickly put his thumb on the mouth of the wound as we have described.
And let him tighten it very much until the blood stops and drips from above the wound onto the artery, and the thumb is not removed from it with cold water always so that the blood freezes and thickens and stops. And during this time, consider what needs to be burned or medication.
The second door.
In the case of incisions, punctures, bleeding, and surgeries, etc.
He said: We have mentioned in the first door that every disease for which fire-burning is appropriate, along with medicinal drugs that burn, their causes, reasons, instruments, and images of the burning irons, and I have made that a chapter from the past to the present.
And I will follow in this door the same method with great care so as to facilitate for the student his requirement.
Before I begin, you should know, my children, that in this door there are dangerous errors above what is in the first door regarding burn-burning.
And for this reason, caution should be greater in it because the work in this door often leads to vomiting of blood that supports life when opening a vein or incision on a tumor, or poultice, treating an operation, removing an arrow, or cutting on a stone, and similar things that all include dangerous errors, and fear falls into most of them. death.
And I advise you to avoid falling into what is a doubt on you, for it may happen to you in this industry, various types of people with different diseases, and some of them are discouraged by their illness, and death seems cheap to them.
Due to the severity of what he experiences from his illness and the length of his suffering, and the disease that causes it to collapse, some of them give you their money and hope to improve your health, so it is not appropriate for you to accept help from those who have this description at all.
Be cautious, more so than your desires and hopes, and do not move forward with anything until you have certain knowledge that will benefit you. Use knowledge and warning in all of your patient's treatments to achieve the desired outcome.
For this will aid you in acquiring praise, glory, ذكر, and praise; may Allah inspire you, sons, with wisdom and not deprive you of guidance and favor; for that is in His hands. There is no God but He.
I have arranged this section in chapters according to what was mentioned in the chapter on branding from the past to the present to make it easier for you to achieve what you want from it, God willing.
Chapter One:
In the treatment of water that collects in the heads of children.
This illness often affects children at birth when the midwife presses the baby's head without compassion, or it may result from a hidden condition that is unknown.
I have not seen this condition in anyone but children, and all those I have seen die quickly. Therefore, I left work on it, and I saw a child whose head filled with water; the head increases daily. The child could not sit by himself due to the size of his head and the increasing moisture, until he died.
This moisture may collect between the skin and bone or underneath the bone on the scalp. The work in this case is to make a single cut across the middle of the head, about the length of two fingers, to let the moisture out. This is a picture of the scalpel.
If the moisture is greater and the swelling larger, make two intersecting cuts on this head:
If the moisture is underneath the bone, and you can see that the scalp is open from all sides and water drops when you squeeze it with your hand, then you should make three cuts in the middle of the head like this:
And after the incision, all moisture is removed and then the wounds are tightened with gauze and splints and covered with ointment and oil until the fifth day, and then the bandage is removed and the wound is treated with sutures and ointments, and the head is not tightly wrapped and the patient is fed with any dry food that is little moist.
until the member strengthens and heals, another prescription for the incision that you look where the bone of the tumor appears and the water gathers because it may be in the back of the head more or in the front or on the right or on the left.
so you intend by the incision where it appears to you the tumor and the water fills so you cut it on what you can and preserve that you do not cut a vein so blood flows and the patient dies from this bleeding with throwing moisture.
the second chapter.
cutting the two arteries behind the ears known as حسيسين.
When a sudden severe attack occurs in the eyes or chest, and this has not been effective with drug treatment, so treatment is effective in this case by cutting these two arteries.
So if you want to cut them, you should shave the head of the patient with a razor then rub the area with a rough cloth to make the artery appear then tie the patient's neck with the edge of his clothing then look where the pulse beats and the two places that recede behind the ears and what is less hidden except in some people.
Then you learn on them with the marker then cut them with the tweezers cutting into bone, and this is done by the width of the head, and if you want you can enter the tweezers from under the artery and pull it up to above with the cutting and the length of the cutting is about two fingers.
If the pulse stops, blood comes out rapidly and moves forward and is repeated, so if the artery does not appear to the sense of touch, you should estimate from the ear after three fingers then mark with ink and cut to the bone, and what should be done is that.
He sends forth seven vessels (arteries) in the middle, and perhaps he sends forth more or less; all this depends on what you see of the patient's condition and the filling of his arteries. Then look at the wound; if there is still something of the serosa attached to the bone, cut it off.
To prevent a hot tumor, then tighten the wound with a cotton thread and then treat it with ointments until it heals,.
Chapter III.
In cutting the arteries which are in the temples.
If a person has had chronic bronchitis, or acute respiratory illnesses due to moist heat in the temples or chronic headaches and other similar ailments, and has been treated with medical therapies without success, then we have tried to cut the arteries in the temples or to cauterize them as described.
The method of cutting the arteries in this case is to shave off the hair from the temples, and then to expose the artery in the temple which is most prominent; for it will be evident by its pulse, and there is hardly anything hidden in an individual person..
Or, if there is severe cold, and it is not evident to you, then the patient should tighten his neck with a cloth, or dip the area in hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible and easy to see.. Then take the scalpel which looks like this. Then, with a gentle stroke of the scalpel, peel off the skin until you reach the artery; then insert a hook and draw it upwards to pull it out from under the skin and cut it away completely.. Then cut a piece from it according to the distance between its ends; it will not start to flow, and there will be no bleeding; then vomit blood from six vessels to three..
If the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong double knot of thread. The thread should be either from silk or from guitar strings so that corrosion does not reach it before the wound heals and bleeding occurs.
Then, cut the excess between the two ties. Do this at that time or another later on; if you wish, sew it to the bone with a hot knife so that its ends are severed and it serves the same purpose as the previous method, or even better as we have said.
But if the patient is feverish or has a hot mood, because cutting is one of the things that aids in eliminating the fluids, and it should be stuffed with old cotton and put on it the well-tightened strips. After untying, treat it with dry drugs that promote the growth of meat and suturing until it heals, God willing.
If a hemorrhage occurs from the artery during your work, quickly cut it off with fire or fill the place with vinegar and tighten your hand until the blood stops. If you don't have any of these things, just put your finger on it until the blood stops.
And rinse the area with very cold water until the pain subsides and tighten it as much as possible, and among the lighter and easier things to do than cutting the artery is to burn the sweat with this hot knife with two blades after you have marked the place with ink.
And lower it very quickly until it reaches the bone and stops at two points so that it does not stick to it with this fire, and this is a picture of the knife.
It should be sharp, like two small knives, but less sharp than a knife because if they are as sharp as knives, the fire will reach them quickly and the meat will not stop bleeding quickly; if there is some thickness in it, the fire will hold on to it firmly.
Cut the flesh quickly; this work is better than all other works and lighter and easier, and let there be between the two blades a space no thicker than the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four.
In the treatment of a constant, hot discharge of tears to the eyes.
If the tears are constant and the discharge is from the veins that run over the skull from the outside, and nothing benefits from treating it with medical treatments or medicines, and you see the patient's face turn red. And he feels a buzz in his forehead, like the buzzing of ants, and his eyes are wet, his eyelids droop, and his eyelashes have become frizzy due to the tears; therefore, you must order the patient to shave the hair from his forehead. This treatment is called "treatment with the sword," which means that one orders the patient to shave his forehead as a form of treatment.
Then, make three parallel incisions on the forehead, each as long as two fingers, alongside the nose in the middle of the forehead, and another one slightly away from the muscle that moves the eyebrow, and a third one on the opposite side.
And make sure not to cut the arteries on both sides, and keep your hand away from the jaw bones' connection; there should be three fingers' distance between each incision, and have many prepared sponge pieces or dry rags to stop the blood.
Then, insert the sharp probe into both sides of the opening, as shown in this image: [Image of a sharp probe being inserted into both sides of an opening]. Take the probe from the incision near the jaw to the middle incision and peel off all the skin between the incisions, including the fascia over the bone; then, do the same from the middle incision to the third incision. Finally, remove this probe. And also enter the first incision with another tool called a "scein-knife" from one side, and a smooth non-sharp knife from the other side; see this image: [Image of a scein-knife and a smooth non-sharp knife].
And make the sharp side upward toward the flesh attached to the skin and the smooth side toward the bone and push it until it ends up in the central incision And cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without the cut reaching the surface of the skin.
Then do the same in the central incision as in the other incision, and after the blood has flowed the moderate amount, squeeze the places from the dried blood قطع then become in each cut a thread of cotton with sutures and place on it a rag wet with wine or oil or vinegar and oil.
So that a hot tumor does not occur, and on the third day you remove the bandage and use a lot of water to warm it up Then treat it with basilicon ointment with rose water and all that is treated with surgery until it heals, God willing.
Chapter V.
In the treatment of tears and drops to the eyes from the inner side of the head.
When one of the many acute, hot, persistent drops has occurred and is seen to make the eyes weak small, and their vision weak, and the eyelids wounded and falling eyelashes. And be in the depth of the head a sharp pain, painful and continuous cough, then know from these signs that those substances and drops come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for them is this treatment, which is that you order the patient to shave his forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead.
And be in the depth of the head a sharp pain, painful and continuous cough, then know from these signs that those substances and drops come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for them is this treatment, which is that you order the patient to shave his forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise it a little from the side, and begin the incision from the left temples to the right temples, and let the incision be on the bone, and remove your hand from the temple muscles that move when chewing until, when the bone is exposed, all the blood has dried out with sponge.
Then separate between the sides of the incision with cotton that has been bleached or a thread of linen, then tighten the bandage above with bandages and wet the bandages with drink and oil so that a hot tumor does not occur, and when you remove it and see that the hot tumor has fallen in place on the bone until it begins to grow meat again.
Then treat it with a drying remedy that promotes the growth of flesh; for instance, take two parts of barley flour and four parts of aloes and prepare a paste to be used in promoting the growth of flesh in such wounds.
Chapter VI
In the treatment of what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a metallic stone or شبه-الحجر such as iron and glass; or a plant seed such as hamza and kernel; or a fluid thing like water and vinegar.
And if an animal falls into the ear, a stone or a species of stone that does not grow in the ear, receive it with the ear towards the sun, and if you see only the stone, try to remove it by moving the head or blowing with a kondos. And plug the nostrils when sneezing after placing a strip of cloth or wool around the ear and extending the ear upward; often, this treatment will help to remove it. If it doesn't come out, try to remove it with the gentle movement described here.
If it came out with the probe, but not completely, try to use a small, blind, flexible instrument, almost like a tiny tube, and insert one end into the ear hole; perhaps. If it still doesn't come out, make a small copper pipe and insert one end into the ear hole.
And plug the end of the tube with a wax-like substance smeared with oil to prevent wind from entering through anything other than the tube; then, try to remove it with a strong gust of wind. Often, this will help to dislodge it. If it still doesn' t come out after what we've described, or if you don' t have any wax, take a small amount of natural gum used by birds (gnat) and put it on the end of the hook.
After wrapping it tightly with a cotton ball, then inserting the hook into the ear hole gently after drying the ear; if it still doesn' t come out with all of our descriptions, don' t delay cutting before heat and swelling occur or muscle spasms.
The recipe for the incision is to strap the patient firmly in place, then insert a needle into the jugular vein and draw out blood according to the strength of the patient. Then sit the patient up and turn their ear towards you. Make a small incision at the base of the ear, where the flesh is thinnest, and near the bottom of the ear.
The incision should be in the shape of a crescent, reaching all the way to the stone. Then, remove the stone using appropriate tools. Sew the incision closed quickly and treat the wound so that it heals properly.
If the object dropped in the ear is one of the seeds that grows and swells, try to remove it using the methods mentioned above. If it doesn't come out, take a thin, gentle scalpel.
Try to cut the seed if you're sure it's moist from the ear vapor, making it smaller and easier to remove with a dull hook or a gentle tweezers.
As mentioned previously, it is easy to remove, but the water that has entered the ear should be treated. Let the patient cough up while wearing a cotton pad in their ear. This will help drain the water and relieve any pain or discomfort.
If the water is not removed with the above method, take several small, smooth stones and heat them slightly with fire. Let the patient put one in their ear and walk on their tiptoe to hit the stone in the ear with another stone.
Continue this process with a cotton thread or a feather. Take one end in the ear and heat the other end with fire until it burns.
If the object is small, like a bedbug, treat it as mentioned in the previous section. However, if the object is larger, use the methods mentioned earlier for small objects and try to remove it carefully.
If the corpse is large, it will be visible to the sense, so try to remove it with pliers and tweezers, and it is easier than all that entangles in the ear, but if you treat the ear with what we mentioned in the division in the article of the ear worms, and your treatment did not work.
You should look at the ear in the sun, and if you see something of the worms, remove it with tweezers or soft pliers, for if nothing appears to you from them, take a small tube like this one. [Insert image of a small tube here]
It should be narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and you should put the thin end into the ear as much as the patient allows, and then suck it strongly several times, until all the worms come out, for if it does not come out for you, plug the ear with wax as I have mentioned to you in the case of the stone.
If not, use the ear worms we mentioned above, which have been tried by the first ones to kill the worms, and you will find that in our article on ear worms, and when pouring oils and medicines into the ear, do so with this tool. [Insert image of a tool here]
As you see, it is made of silver or copper, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, wide at the top; if you want the bullet in the hollow of the tube to be of copper and firmly wrapped, take a piece of thread and tightly wrap a cotton ball around one end.
Then throw the oil or juice or whatever you want of these medicines into the tube in the ear, and then insert the thread with the cotton ball from above, and squeeze it gently with your hand to let the oil flow into the ear, and feel it.
With the patient lying down, and let what you pour into the ear be slightly warmed in the fire, and be careful that the thing that drips in it should not be very cold or very hot, because the ear does not bear such a thing.
Chapter Seven.
In the Treatment of an Obstructions in the Ear.
Some children may be born with their ears unpierced.
And for some people, there may be a blockage in the auditory canal due to an injury or growing tissue; this blockage may be located deep within the ear hole, invisible to the eye.
It may project slightly outside the hole and be visible to the eye; in more cases, it remains hidden deep within the ear. For those that are visible, one should place the patient's ear towards the sun. And if you see the blockage visible, open it gently with a delicate instrument. This is its appearance:
It has a slight projection on one end, limited by some of the instrument smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear. If the blockage is caused by growing tissue (ear wax) in the auditory canal, grasp it gently with a delicate hook and cut it carefully with great caution so that all the tissue is removed.
If the blockage is deep within the ear, take a gentle, smooth angle and warm it slightly in fire then insert it into the auditory canal. If you feel the blockage along with the patient's sense of hearing loss, carefully remove it.
Be careful not to injure the auditory nerve, then insert a cotton swab into the ear. Make several attempts and keep the ear in place for as long as it takes to ensure the wound doesn't heal over. Alternatively, dip a cotton swab in water and sprinkle some acid on it, then apply it to the ear.
And use it, if you see the ear swelling and becoming hot, then remove the cotton swab and replace it with another one that has been dipped in rose oil. This should help soothe the swelling. Then treat it until it heals completely.
If a bloody discharge occurs, dip a sponge or rag in cold water and apply it to the ear. Then use all the treatment that cuts off the mentioned discharge in the article of the cataplasms.
Chapter Eight.
In the treatment of warts that appear in the eyelids.
These warts that appear on the eyelids may be moist and dry, so they should be grabbed with a forceps or hook and cut at their roots with a scalpel. Then carry them to the spot with powdered vitriolic acid.
If blood flows from them, put them under a small lens-shaped iron and burn them more effectively after cutting. They often come back if some roots remain, and when burned with fire, those roots are destroyed and never return.
Chapter Nine.
In the treatment of a cold that occurs in the eyelids of the eye.
Often, something like a cold appears in the eyelids, as strong and tough as the cold itself.
Therefore, it is called "cold," which is the union of a thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids. The treatment is as follows: If the cold sore is exposed on the surface of the eyelid, it moves to all sides; order her to cut it horizontally.
Then peel it off gently from all sides until you get rid of it, and then tie it with a hook and cut it. If cutting it is not possible except by cutting the eyelid, do not let the patient suffer any harm; if the cut is large, sew it up and treat it so that it heals.
If it is small, there is no harm in it, as the ointment can adjust and heal it; if the cold sore leans towards the inside of the eyelid towards the inner surface, flip the eyelid and tie the cold sore with a hook without the need to cut and cut it from all sides.
If you cut through the eyelid, it does no harm. Then wash the eye, after cutting the patch, with salt water and treat the area to close the wound so that the patient recovers.
Chapter ten.
In the treatment of the sore that appears in the eyelid of the eye.
The "sharanag" is fat that forms in the layers of the eyelid and is most common in children; it weighs down their eyes and causes them to develop eye infections, preventing them from seeing well in the sun. To prevent tears from reaching them quickly.
For this reason, you will notice the  "sharanag" visible when you press your fingers on your eyes; and when the patient puts his head in your lap, you can feel the  "sharanag" between your fingers. The treatment is as follows:
Then take a  piece of cotton and make a wick of it, making it the size that surrounds the   "sharanag" on all sides; then place it on top of it and press with your fingers on all sides to gather the   "sharanag" in the middle of the circle.
Then cut across the moisture in the center with a sharp needle; the cut should not be larger than that made during bloodletting. As for the depth, it should reach the  "sharanag".
In most cases, the   "sharanag" will protrude from the cut in the form of a piece of fat that is white on top; handle it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your fingers and pull it out completely while turning your hand right and left to ensure complete removal, and be careful not to increase the size of the cut so that the needle does not damage the eye.
If the   "sharanag" does not appear in the first cut, you should make a slightly larger cut carefully until it appears, and then remove it as mentioned above; some people grind salt.
He places it in the cavity of the incision to dissolve what remains of that moisture, and then treats it until he heals; if a hot, effective swelling occurs at the site, he treats it with soothing compresses until it heals.
Chapter 11.
In the chapter on eye poultices.
If it grows in the eyelid, there are excess eyelashes that grow below the natural eyelids and become rooted; this will damage the eye and cause various diseases such as constant tearing, drooping eyelids, white spots, and thickness until it becomes a cause for the blindness of the eye.
And eye poultices have four ways: either by burning with fire, or by sharp medication as mentioned in the chapter on cauterizing; or by stitching and sewing, or by padding as I have already described.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your lap, and then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, or otherwise, insert a needle with a thread from below the eyelid, and pass the needle through from above; this should be near the hair itself; and draw the thread up with the eyelid.
And turn it with a stick; and then split in the inner part of the eyelid, without the excess eyelashes, with the extracting needle from the larger orch to the smaller; then tie the thread and put a small cotton pad or cloth under the eyelid; and finally mark on the eyelid with ink.
Like the shape of an olive leaf, except that the shape should be to the extent that you want it to raise the eyelid, because people may differ in this; some need to cut a piece from the eyelid as much as it relaxes the eyelid.
And some need to cut less; all of this is according to the extent that the eyelid relaxes, and then split with the extracting needle on the two lines you have marked, and start from the larger orch to the smaller, and each split should be near the natural hair; and the thickness of the stick should be like that.
Then the awl is inserted into one of the corners of the skin, and then it is all peeled off; then the lips are sewn together with a fine wool thread using an needle, and the blood is wiped away and what remains of the threads on the eyebrows is stuck together with some sticky things.
Then you should do that or else you don't care, then the stitching and threads remain for about three days or four, then treat it; if you want, you leave the wound without stitching and treat it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid rises when the wound is sewn and closed, and stitching is better.
This is the way of the tightening mentioned by the early scholars except that it saves the patient effort and is one of good work and no danger; and another way in tightening that is to teach on the eyelid a shape like an asp's leaf as we have described. Then the eyelid is raised with three awls that are scattered or gathered in this way:.
Then cut what remains of the eyelid with a small scissors on this image cutting it moderately:.
If you can't keep the awls in check and it doesn't suit you to sew with a needle, then take an awl with a thread in it and insert it into the center of the shape, and another thread near the larger eyelid, and a third thread near the smaller eyelid, and gather the threads between your fingers moderately, then raise them by this moderate raising.
Then raise the marked eyelid all together as we have described, then stitch the wounds closed and treat it until it heals; if it swells or burns when you cut or pierce it, calm that swelling with kheerati' and similar anesthetic salves.
And the lower eyelid may also be exposed to turning its eyelids, so it should be used in that which we mentioned of cutting, stitching and tightening with fire and sharp medicine; or tightening with fire or sharp medicine is more beneficial and easier on the patient than cutting and stitching, and what is more beneficial.
The application of a swathe should be done in this manner: the eyelid is flipped over and an incision is made from the inside, as described above. Then, two thin staves or wooden rods, whose length corresponds to that of the eyelid and whose width is less than the width of an eye blade, are crafted.
These rods should be carved out at the ends on both sides where the threads will grip, and then these two rods should be gathered gently together on what is left of the eyelid, tightening them from both sides. They should be left for a few days; the skin that is stretched will die, darken, and rot.
Until it falls off on its own; if it takes longer, he should use a scalpel and then treat it until it heals. If the eyelid healing results in the eyelashes growing higher up, this is an indicator that the eye has healed. These rods should be crafted to correspond to this shape and size with regard to the lid, and their width
The second chapter.
Lifting fallen hair from the eye with a needle.
If it is one or two hairs, the work in this case is to take a fine needle and insert into it a smooth, delicate silk thread about a palm long. Then, gather the two ends of the thread and tie them together with a very loose knot, like a knot in a lasso.
Then, attach another fine silk thread to the first one, shorter by a palm length, and tie its ends together if you wish; then place the patient's head so that it faces the sun so that the work can be seen clearly; for this is delicate work. Then, insert the needle with the string into the base of the excess hair.
And then, run it through the eyelid with a quick stroke so that it comes out above the natural hair. Then, pull the string up to the top of the thong, and insert that same hair into the thong; if it is one or two or three hairs only.
Then, pull your hand with it so that the hair comes out of the eyelid along with the thong, among the natural hair. If you don't get the thong out through the upper hole, pull the string down with the thong to force it out of the top hole until both come out along with the hair.
Then reinsert the hair into the wound and draw it up into the upper hole so that you can see it clearly, so then cut the strap and thread and remove them, tighten the eye and leave it tight for two or three days until the hair is firmly in place and the flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, either add a long hair from natural hair and it will rise with it, or leave it until it grows after some time, so at that time raise it.
Chapter 13.
In treating the spurt that occurs in the upper eyelid of the eye.
Which exposed this wart is called anrabia, and this wart may be either natural or accidental. An accidental one is one that is caused by a wound or scar or something similar.
And the way to treat it is to make an incision in that union and separate its lips and put a thread between them and tie it up so that it heals, and it is not appropriate to use in treating it things that dry out and constrict.
If you do that, the wart will return with more strength than it was before, so instead, use things that relax, such as a ring and a string made of boiled linseed and a paste of diathermal oil, which has been dissolved with a bit of fat, and smear it on the thread, and treat it.
And the essence of treating it is that it should not heal in the same shape as it was before, and this work we mentioned is just a part of repairing the wart, not that the place returns to its previous shape.
Chapter 14.
In treating the warts that occur in the lower eyelid of the eye.
This wart, which is from a scar, is called in truth anwart, and it may be either natural or accidental. An accidental one is caused by a wound, a cut, or something similar.
The method of performing this procedure is to take a needle with a bent thread and sew it into the flesh, and insert it from the left jaw to the right jaw until the thread is in the ends of the flesh; then stretch the flesh upward with the needle and cut it with a wide scalpel.
If the shape of the eyelid returns to what it should, or not, then take a screw and place it on the site of the cut and rotate the eyelid with it and make two cuts on the inner side of the eyelid and the ends of the cuts are from the cutting corners which you cut until they meet and form a corner. Until if it is gathered, it becomes a shape similar to this shape:
Is a Greek letter, and then take off that flesh to the extent that the sharp side of it is below what follows the eyelid, then gather the scattered parts with two stitches, sewing with sheep's thread, and then treat it as mentioned from drugs relaxing and threading until it heals.
And if the thread has spread from a cut or sewing or burning, it is necessary to make a simple cut without hair of the eyelids as well, then separate between the eyelids with a thread as mentioned above.
And the saying in treating strabismus if it is from above or from below that you carry out the work according to what is convenient for you of the shape of strabismus, as it may differ a lot in shape, and the skilled person makes the device with whatever is possible for him.
Until the shape returns to its natural shape or approaches it, and the same disease guides you on what is suitable for him from work and machine in most cases, .
Chapter XV.
In the adhesion of the eyelid with the lacrimal or the corneal.
May cause this adhesion for many people that the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye, preventing it from smooth movement and obstructing it from its natural actions, so it is necessary to insert a screw tip under the eyelid.
To raise it up or to extend it with a hook, and then cut the adhesion with a delicate scissor that does not have the sharpness of cutting scissors but is a little dull so as not to disturb the patient when working and so that the scissor slips and hurts the eye with its sharpness; and your cut will be as if you were peeling off that adhesion.
And expect until, if it returns the eyelid to its natural shape and heals all the adhesion, you will pour at that time in the eye a saline water to wash it or sprinkle it with the zanjani solution dissolved in water, and then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a cotton thread.
And you place over the eye a wetted flannel with egg white, and after three days you use the bandages to heal, .
Chapter XVI:
In cutting the cicatrix and nipping the neck of the nipple.
If the cicatrix is of two kinds, either it is nerve tissue and is similar to thin solid skin, or it is non-nerve tissue and is similar to a rigid white mass, when it comes into contact with iron or is caught with a hook, it will be cut.
And a hook is not fixed in it, and both kinds begin from the larger eye socket and slightly spread little by little until they cover the viewer and prevent light and the movement of the eye; The work in cutting it is that the patient puts his head on your stone.
Then he opens his eyes, and you raise the eyelid with your hand, then you catch the cicatrix with a slightly flexible hook, and extend it upward, then you take a needle and insert in it a hair from horse or cow, and a strong thread, and bend the end of the needle a little, and pierce it into the middle of the cicatrix.
And run it through with the needle, and tie the thread to the cicatrix, and extend it upward, and peel off the side of the cicatrix that is next to the pupil as if you were spreading it with the hair, until the whole cicatrix is cut, and leave the natural skin of the pupil.
That there may not be a constant shedding of tears from the part cut off, and the eyelash is extended by the hook alone or by the thread as we said, and then the blade is peeled off with the smooth edge which this figure shows:
And be careful that the blade does not touch the cornea, otherwise it will cause a hernia and the pupil will become clouded; then, after cutting, put something of powdered salt or of hyoscyamine in the eye and leave it for another day, then treat it with what should be done until it heals.
If the eyelash is not nervous and cannot be inserted into it or a hook cannot be fixed in it, then this type of eyelash is often treated with drugs and heals as described in the section on treatment; if you want to cut it, then open the patient's eye.
Take a soft, smooth blade of small size which this figure shows: And peel off the eyelash gently; if you see that it falls out and crumbles, just cut the eye with a hook from the hour glass of زنجbaric hyoscyamus or red hyoscyamus or powdered salt and leave the eye for another day.
Then repeat the work on it until it is all gone, unless you encounter a hot lump in the eye; then leave it and treat the hot lump until it heals; then repeat the work on it until it heals, and as for the thickening of the eyelashes with flesh, it has been mentioned before.
If this hair causes severe pain in the eye, then fix it with a hook and cut some of it off, and do not cut too much to prevent the shedding of tears; then drop hyoscyamus or زنجبارic hyoscyamus in the nasopharynx until it heals.
Chapter 17
In cutting the eyelids and what grows out of meat in the eye.
This may grow in the eyes of some people red flesh, until it covers the viewer or is close or overflows the eyelids and maybe turned the eyelids to outside and resembles the rose of جلنار.
And the work in it is that the patient puts his head in your stone, and then opens his eyes, and grab all that red flesh with the pincer suitable for that.
Or you hold it with a pliers or pair, and then cut the first meat one after another until you finish all of it by cutting and preserve the eye so that you do not hurt it when working, and your cutting of it is either with the mini knife we described in cutting the nail or. As if you grab it with a pincer as per the image that comes in the door next to this door.
If your cutting is finished and all the waders have gone, fill the eye with ground salt or sprinkle red powder and other drugs that cause the burn and carry on the eye from outside cotton soaked in egg white to ensure swelling.
If there is anything left of the waders and blood has dominated you and you are afraid of the burning swelling, then leave the eye and treat it with what calms the swelling, then return to the work until it heals, as well as doing with the excess meat that exhibits in the eye from this kind.
However, you should avoid treating any weak eye by nature or by display work with iron and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this organ is suitable for such work.
Chapter XVIII
In picking the eyelashes from the eye.
The eyelashes are red veins that intertwine on the eye, preventing vision, and the eye weakens with the passage of time, so you should first look to see if the eye containing the eyelashes is strong and there is no other disease except the eyelashes.
When then the lancing, which is to order the patient to put his head on your lap and then hang those arteries with a hook or two according to your skill. The hooks should be flexible to this form:
or two double hooks in one body on this picture:
Then snip those arteries with a fine pair of scissors carefully and wipe the blood little by little at times until you see that eye went from it those arteries and the blood has stopped, keep your attention on the eye do not hurt it with the tips of the scissors and be your work in the middle of the day facing the sun.
And secure your work very much so that you do not cut anything but those arteries, then when you finish your work just squeeze the green or red eye to eat with its keenness what is left of the vessels, if it cannot be cut all in that time so wrap the eye with what calms the pain of the eye.
And leave it for days until the pain subsides and you are sure of the swelling heat, then return to work on this image with that eye until it heals this is the pair of scissors.
And leave it [and the patient's head in a student's lap and another student drips blood and looks at the front of the eye and the back, and the base is the root of work to open the eye with a fixed screw or triangle. A student catches it]. The origin of work is that you open the eye with a fixed screw or triangle. A
A sharp and be the patient' s head in a student' s lap and another student drips blood and looks at the front of the eye and the back, and the base is the root of work to open the eye with a fixed screw or triangle. A student catches it. Squinting and having the patient' s head in a student' s lap, another student drips blood, and looks at the front of the eye and the back, and the base is the root of work, to open the eye with a fixed screw or triangle. The choice is yours whether to begin lancing at the top of the eye or the bottom, and it is better to lance with two hooks on the upper side, one at the end of the eyebrow and the other at the beginning of the acrid taste.
Take it between the middle and index fingers, then attach hooks from under the tips. Take it between the ring and middle fingers and slightly lift your hand so that you can see all of the finger joints. Cut with scissors or a delicate forceps.
The sutured should be tied on the needle and the finger joints should be seen completely so that they rise on the margin, and do not cut the tendon because the tear will cause blood and tears to flow.
Then cut with scissors what is left above and below until there is no remaining thread except in the knuckle, and if you can lift it from the knuckle, peel it off with the needle, because it is better to peel it off and sometimes it may be prepared in some people.
And if you cut it, it will hurt the place where it is, for a few days to ease its pain and reduce the hot swelling, then prepare to continue the work on it.
Chapter 19
In returning the feather to the nose.
The doctors call the feather a nostrum if they treat it with burning or sharp and bitter medicine as described above, and if it does not heal, the only trick is to cut it out when it has ripened and extract all the moisture or pus that is in it.
Until the bone is exposed, so if the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackening in it, polish it with a tool.
And it is called the head of a chisel made of Indian iron; its head is rounded like a seed and has been engraved with a file to make it smooth. You place it on the site of corruption in the bone, then rotate it between your fingers while slightly squeezing your hand until you feel that the corruption has been removed.
And you do that several times, then you bandage the site with drying and astringent medications that stop bleeding if the site is closed and the flesh has grown and stopped bleeding after 40 days, and no incident has occurred there, and no injury has occurred.
And know that he has healed, otherwise there is no way except to return the nose to the hole of the nose on this feature which is that you uncover the bone again with iron or with sharp medicine. If the bone was exposed, take it bent as follows:
The iron's tip should be triangular and its shank conical, curved towards the end, as you see it. Then place it on the bone itself, which is near the septum [of the nose] and a little away from your hand, then rotate your hand with the tweezers until the bone passes through and can be felt by the patient.
If he feels the wind exiting from his nose when he holds his hand on it, then force the place with the cauterizing medicine I have told you about. If the flesh grows back and hardens, the material which was coming out to the outside returns to the nose, so that this is lighter on the patient, God willing.
Chapter 20:
Healing the Eye:
If the eye has completely lost its sight and there is no damage or loss of vision, then heal the patient first, then ligature the eye in the orbit, then place a plug in the nostril without condition and drain it slowly.
Then place on the eye a poultice made of mutton fat, syrup, and gum arabic, and tie it tightly to the wound with many strips of gauze. The technique for making the gauze is that you take a hot flame and bend each piece of gauze into four folds, thus making many.
Then place them one on top of the other, according to what the eye needs, then tighten it with a sturdy cloth and drain again with a slow suction, without a plug. Then remove the plug and leave the eye tightened for a day and a night.
If the bandage loosened during that time, then tighten it again, and remove the bandage after a day and a night as we mentioned. If you see that the eye has healed, great! Otherwise, continue with the dressings, tightening, and using the plug and suction.
Chapter Twenty-One.
In Cutting the Ankle Bone.
If a hernia appears in the temporal lobe and protrudes outside the eyelids, resembling a grape and disfiguring the human shape, and you want to cut it, the procedure is as described.
This is done by inserting a needle at the base of the grape (hernia) from below to above, and then inserting another needle with a bent wire from the opposite side, passing it through and leaving the first needle in place.
Then cut where the bent wire bends, tying some of the grape around the needle with it and tightening it firmly. Then remove the needle and place a wet pad covered in egg white on the eye to help it heal. Let the threads and grapes fall away. Finally, treat the eye to strengthen it.
Until the wound heals, you may tighten the grape with a string in a circle to increase tension and keep the eye wet. Continue this process until the eye heals properly.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In Treating Congestion.
This condition, known as congestion, is caused by the accumulation of fluid in the eye, resembling water that has accumulated but not drained. The treatment involves having the patient sit upright on a chair and then taking their head in your hands from both sides.
Then move them until you see the congestion (fluid) lower down in their eye, and then it will remain fixed and not dissipate. The light will be seen clearly by the patient, and if the congestion does not lower as described above, we know that it is fluid.
Unless you sit the patient between your hands, then take a small, sharp scalpel and make a small incision just above the cornea where it meets the eyelid in the crown area to drain the fluid.
If the patient has a discharge from the eye, then prepare hot water with honey or boil milk and honey together and then treat it with all the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 23.
We have mentioned the types of water in the classification and which ones are suitable for pouring with a detailed explanation, so you should take it from there on health. So at that time, the patient should sit between your hands, facing up towards the light, near the sun.
Bind and tightly tighten the healthy eye, then raise the eyelid with your left hand if it is the left eye or with your right hand if it is the right one.
Then place the tip of the pitcher near the eyebrow with a thick, bent rod in the same white part of the eye, then push the pitcher with strength and turn it with your hand until it penetrates into the white part of the eye, and you will feel that the pitcher has reached something empty.
It is necessary that the pitcher goes into depth the same distance that the pupilla reaches to the last of the black, which is the eyebrow of the eye, for the cornea membrane is clear, then the pitcher should be directed above to the place where the water is.
Then pour it down slowly, once after another, and if the water has dropped from his eye immediately, he will see what has opened his vision from that time, and the pitcher is in his eye, and then rest a little, and if the water rises again, do not remove the pitcher from his eye.
If it has settled and did not rise, remove the pitcher carefully with your hand twitching a little, then dissolve a little pure salt in the water and rinse it inside the eye, then place it outside the eye completely wet.
Bind with it the correct eye, and as for us and our time, we put on it ground cumin mixed with egg white; if the washout does not go into the eye to harden it because some people have very hard eyes. It is necessary that you take the tool called the curette which this image shows:
Then you make a small hole in the same place where the curette is placed, and gently tap on the washout; then you introduce the washout as we have mentioned, and when you finish your work, you prepare for the patient a comfortable bed to sleep on his back in a dark house.
And he abstains from all movements and coughing, and make his food whatever softens his nature, and does not move his head to the right or left at all; and the bandage remains as it is until the third day, then you remove it in that dark house and test his vision.
And you show him objects, and then return the bandage to the seventh day; it is not appropriate that you do this during the time of treatment or after the washout from your timing, but it is necessary that you avoid this before the water rises quickly due to intense vision.
If there is a hot swelling, then you should remove the bandage from the eye before the seventh day and repair that which soothes the swelling until, when it is calmed, then you release his vision and put on his face a covering cloth to train his vision from under it for days while he is in that dark house.
He leaves the house gradually and acts in his affairs, and know that the washout cannot do without observation several times, so then it is appropriate to move on to the work, and I have heard from some Iraqis that he mentioned that he makes a washout in Iraq that absorbs water.
And I have not seen anyone in our country make that, nor has it been mentioned in any of the first people's books, and this image shows different types of washouts so that one who does not know it can stand on it: [Image: Various types of washouts with labels]
Make of copper a special kind and have the end made so thin with a specific triangle shape pointed at the ends.
Chapter 24.
In Treating the Protruding Flesh in the Nose.
It may protrude in the nose different kinds of excess flesh; some of it resembles a scorpion with many legs, and some is like hardened flesh color, and some is soft flesh not colored.
If any of this flesh is soft, not infected or malignant, the patient should lie down with his face towards the sun, and open his nostril and insert the forceps into that flesh, then pull it out from inside, then cut what you have recognized with a delicate sharp scalpel from one side.
Until you know that all the flesh has gone, if there is anything left that you cannot cut with it, you will peel it off gently with one of the delicate tools with care so that nothing remains. If it bleeds or causes a hot swelling.
Then face it with what is appropriate, or if it is a malignant tumor, hurry to caute it so that the blood stops and all the flesh goes away, then throw into the nose after cutting it with water or drink, if the nose has opened up and the moisture has flowed into the throat.
So know that it has healed, if the moisture does not flow as it should, know that inside it is protruding flesh at the top of the shattering bones that the tool did not reach with the cut, so at that time you should take a piece of cotton cloth that is slightly thick.
And tie it with many knots, and make each knot the size of a finger or less, and the patient should insert the end of the string into his nose with a stick or whatever he can manage to do, making it like a seed, and then pull it out, until it reaches the nostrils.
And take the ends of the string, one from the mouth and the other from inside the nose.
Then, you use the tissue with knots in the thread. You do this until you know that the meat has been cut by the knots of the thread. Then remove the thread and let it enter the nose after wiping the blood. A thread that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment. You do this for three days or more.
Until the ointment eats all that is left of the meat, and then the last thing in the nose becomes a tube of lead for days until it heals, if it needs treatment, it dries out, you use it.
And this is a picture of the nasal catheter that drips with oils and medications in the nose:.
puts silver or brass, a little pendant, open-ended, oiled, and its conduit as well..
And if you want, you make the tube closed like a trachea, oiled the catheter, flat.
It has a handle at its end, as you see it, you hold it when you heat it with oil or whatever liquids or flowing things you want..
Chapter 25
In warts growing from the end of the nose.
Often, a wart grows at the end of the nose, it increases and becomes larger with time until its appearance is ugly.
For that, you should cut it when it first appears and completely remove it, then carry out the site either by cauterization or by a burning drug that performs the function of cauterization, if you miss it, until it becomes hard and stiff like the color of the nail, little sensitive.
Do not expose it to iron, for it is a cancerous tumor; I have often seen that cutting this tumor causes a great misfortune for the owner, and if the tumor is soft but not like the color of the nail, I think that cutting it in its entirety is possible. So make the patient vomit and cut it without caution or carefulness, and treat the site with what dries and tightens until it heals, and
Chapter 26.
In stitching the nose, mouth, and ear. If the connection is separated due to a wound or something similar, know that when a connection is separated in one of these cartilages, there is little that can be done to repair it, except in some people.
So, when one of these things is injured, you should look to see if the wound is still fresh and bleeding. If so, gather the edges of the wound together with stitches, and then treat it until it heals. If, however, the separation has caused the cartilage's two halves to part, and each half is intact, you should peel off a layer of skin from each side, until it bleeds.
Then, gather the two halves together with stitches and tighten them. You should also apply a mixture of shea butter and lanolin as a powder, and place a plaster of olive oil or other balm on top. Leave it bound for two or three days, then remove it.
And change the treatment and leave it until the stitches fall out by themselves, then treat it with the balm until it heals. The method of stitching is to gather the separated parts together as we described in the stomach surgery, or with a thread as you have explained there, .
Chapter 27.
In removing nodules that occur in the mouth.
This may sometimes happen to many people inside their mouths, in the form of small hard lumps, some resembling a love pimple and others being larger or smaller, you should flip the lip open and cut each lump off with the scalpel, and attach it to the hook.
And cut it from all sides, then stuff the wound with a powder of lime to stop the bleeding, and gargle with vinegar and salt, and treat the wounds with a contractant until they heal.
Chapter 28.
In cutting away excess flesh from the gums.
Often, excess flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients called "abulas." It should be caught with a hook or grasped with a tweezers and cut at its root; then the wound should be left to drain or bloody and then powder of zinc should be applied.
Or one of the astringent powders that dry up; since that flesh often returns after treatment, it should be cut and burned (with fire); for that flesh seldom returns after burning.
Chapter 29.
In grinding the teeth with an iron.
May gather on the surfaces of the teeth, inner and outer, and between the gums; it may turn black, yellow, or green; and this degradation can reach the gums and disfigure the teeth; therefore.
The patient should sit in your lap, with his head resting on your knee; then you should grind the tooth that has the dirt or the thing similar to sand until nothing remains of it; do the same for black, green, yellow, and other colors.
If it disappears after the first grinding, otherwise, you will have to repeat the process another day, and then again; do this until you achieve your goal. And know that the tooth requires different types of files depending on what suits your work.
For the file that grinds the tooth from the inside is different from the one that grinds it from the outside, and that which grinds between the molars; there are several types of files, each suited to a specific task.
Chapter 30.
In pulling out teeth.
It should be treated to relieve the pain of the tooth, and you should refrain from pulling it out, as there is no harm in leaving it alone; however, if it cannot be helped, pull it out.
If the patient has decided to have the tooth pulled out, you should set it firmly in place so that the tooth can be corrected. Often the sick person is fooled by the pain and thinks it is in the healthy tooth, so he pulls it out then the pain does not go until the sick tooth is pulled, we have seen this many times from the action of butchers.
If the painful tooth is healthy, then at that point you should cut around the tooth with a sharp scalpel so that the gums are loosened on all sides, and then move it with your fingers or gentle clamps little by little until it rattles.
Then, secure it well with two large clamps and position the sick tooth between your knees so that it is firm and does not move, then pull out the tooth on an even line so as not to break it, and if it does not come out, take one of those tools and put it under it from all sides gently and gently twist it as you did at first.
And if the tooth is broken or stuck, you should fill that hole with a cloth and plug it tightly with a thin rod so that it does not open up while you are holding it with clamps, and you should investigate with the scalpel around the gum on all sides Yes.
And preserve your effort so that you do not break it and it remains some of it, which returns to the patient from its pain is greater than the first, and do not do what butchers make in their bridges and their impatience to pull it out without using what we have described.
This often causes people great hardship, the least of which is that the tooth breaks and its roots remain, or some of them. Or that it falls out with some bones of the jaw, as we have seen many times, then rinse after pulling with a drink or vinegar and salt, if bleeding occurs from the site, often happens, so at that time crush something from the ale and rub it into the site.
And if the poison does not benefit you, then take a gentle mallet that moves the tooth first. It should not have long sides and a short handle, it should be thick so as not to bend when you grab it with it on the tooth, and this is the image of the large mallets:.
It should be as you see, thick-handled so that when you grab it, it does not break or bend, and short-sided, and let it be of Indian iron or hard steel, tightly trimmed at the ends and with teeth on one side that fit together, so that it is firmly gripped.
And the ends may be made like a file, so they are also strong in control.
Chapter thirty-one.
In removing the roots of teeth and extracting the bones of broken jaws.
If the root of a tooth stays when it is extracted, then you should put a cotton pad with oil on the place for a day or two until it relaxes, and then insert the mallet or pliers. Which are like the sides of a bird's mouth which is called a بلرجة, and this is the image of the mallets:.
It should be made like a file from the inside, or like a chisel, and if it does not come out with these pliers, you should drill into the root and remove all the flesh with the probe, then insert the small mallet-like tool which this is its image:.
Be short-sided, slightly thick, and not trimmed so it does not break, and if the root comes out with this, otherwise, use these other tools which this is their image, the first is triangular in shape, with some thickness:
Another triangular, gentle image:.
And we can also use this double-bladed tool which this is its image:.
And other tools and iron that have been mentioned in the inventory of teeth, and we can also use this large hook which this is its image:.
The angle of the bent point should be slightly thicker so as not to break, and it should not be treated, and know that the teeth appliances are many, as well as other devices barely count, and the skilled manufacturer by his craftsmanship may invent himself appliances according to what prompts him work and diseases themselves.
For some diseases do not mention them the ancients appliances for their different types, if a bone from the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth broke or rotten, look for it in its place with what is suitable for it from these devices and claws mentioned in removing the roots.
And we rely on this pair of this picture:
be slightly thicker to hold the bone in place so that it does not slip until it is extracted, and we will repair the site with drugs suitable for this, if the bone is rotten a little, we will peel it off its decay and color it until it heals.
Chapter 32.
In spreading the teeth that grow out of place.
Teeth if they sprout out of their natural path it distorts the smile, especially when it happens in women and slaves, so it should be examined, if the tooth has grown behind another tooth.
And could not spread it or mend it, so remove it, and if it is attached to a tooth let him cut it with this device that this picture:
It is similar to a small beak, and let it be of sharp Indian steel, very sharp at the end, and let your cutting be in several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and if it has come out because of its coolness, sharpen it with an Indian cooler; this is its image.
It should all be of Indian steel and its inscription is very fine, like the cooler used to make needles, it cools the tooth slightly in several days with care so that it does not vibrate and fall out, then polish it a little and scrape it with some metal wire.
If a tooth has broken off, and it hurts the tongue when talking, then it should also be cooled, so that the roughness of that break goes away, becomes smooth, fills up, and does not hurt the tongue or spoil speech.
Chapter 33.
In joining the movable teeth with silver wires or gold wires.
If the front teeth shake and move due to a blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite into anything without fear of them falling out, and if they have been treated with medicinal remedies that do not help, then treat them with a binding medicine.
The trick is to bind it with a gold or silver wire, and gold is better because silver rusts and corrodes after a few days, while gold remains unchanged forever; the wire should be of medium thickness, appropriate for fitting between the teeth.
The image of binding is that you take the wire and insert its bend between two healthy teeth, then twist the ends of the wire together between the movable teeth until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
Then, repeat the process on the other side, starting from the same point and gently tightening to ensure it doesn't move at all; tie the ends of the wire where they meet the roots of the teeth so that they don't come loose, then cut off the excess wire with scissors, join the ends together, and hide them between a healthy tooth and a movable tooth.
To prevent damage to the tongue, it should be left bound in this way for as long as possible; if it comes loose or breaks, bind it again with another wire, and this will endure for a long time; this is how teeth are joined when there are two healthy teeth and two movable teeth, as you see:.
One or two teeth may fall out and return to their original position, and they can be bound as described, and they will stay in place; this is done by a skilled blacksmith who shapes the bone of a cow into the shape of a tooth and places it in the place where the tooth was missing. And he tightens [the wound] as we have said so that he remains and enjoys it.
Chapter 34.
In cutting the ligature which is displayed under the tongue, to prevent speaking.
It may be that this ligature which is displayed under the tongue is either a natural one with which the human being is born, or one that has become attached accidentally from a wound that has healed.
And the work in it is that you open the mouth of the patient and his head on your block, and raise his tongue then cut this nervy ligature transversely so that the tongue is released from its grip, if it has some rigidity and complexity and if it is a matter of an healed wound, then make a hole in it and split it transversely so that the ligature falls off and the contractile
And be careful that the cut is not in the depth of the flesh so that it cuts a blood vessel there, which would cause bleeding, then rinse with rose water or vinegar and cold water, and then put a cotton thread under the tongue for the patient to hold onto every night.
So that it does not stick again, if bleeding occurs, apply powdered zak (a type of mineral powder) to the spot, and if the blood overwelds you, steam the site with a lens-shaped iron that is suitable for that. Then treat it with all the treatment until it heals, .
Chapter 35.
In removing the frog that has developed under the tongue.
It may happen that there is a swelling under the tongue resembling a small frog, which prevents the tongue from doing its normal work, and perhaps it has become bony so that it fills the mouth; the work in this case is to open the patient's mouth towards the sun and look at the bump from the wound.
If you see it as a patch of color or if it is hard and black and the patient does not feel anything when he touches it, do not expose him to it because it is cancer. If it is inclined to white and has moisture in it, then make a hole in it with a gentle scissor and extract it from all sides.
If the blood overpowers you while you are operating, put on it powdered salt until the blood stops, then return to your work until you bring it out completely, and then gargle with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with all the treatment appropriate for that until it recovers, .
Chapter 36.
In treating tonsillitis.
And what grows in the throat of all kinds of tumors may be inside the throat glands that resemble the glands that are exposed outside called tonsils, if you treat them with what I mentioned in the division will not heal.
Then look, if the tumor is stiff like the color of rust little حسّ so do not expose him with iron, and if it is a red color and its origin is thick, do not expose him also with iron out of fear of bleeding blood but leave it mature then either slow it down or burst from itself.
And if it is white color round and its origin is thin, this is what should be cut, and the work on it that you see before you act whether your tumor has settled down completely or decreased some of the decrease.
Then let the patient sit opposite the sun and his head between your legs, and open his mouth, and take a servant in your hands, so that he presses his tongue down with an instrument like this its image:.
You make it of silver or copper, it should be thin like knives, so that when you press it with it the tongue and the tumor comes to your eye, then take a hook and insert it into the tonsil and pull it out towards the outside as much as possible without pulling any of the palate.
Then cut it with an instrument like this its image is that it is similar to the scissors except that its two ends are curved, and each of its two ends is sharp very much, you make it from Indian iron or Damascus steel: .
If you do not have this instrument, then cut it with a scissor: [This is] his figure:.
A sharp single-edged blade, not sharp on the other side; having cut one of the lobules you should cut the other in this manner then after cutting wash with cold water or with vinegar and water.
If it bleeds, gargle with water that has been boiled with pomegranate rinds or آس leaves or something similar to stop the bleeding and then treat it until it heals; another lump might grow in the throat other than the tonsils which you would cut as mentioned in cutting the tonsils.
And I have treated a woman of a lump that had grown inside her throat, hitting the epiglottis just a little, it was about to block the throat; she couldn't eat or drink water.
And she was about to die if she had stayed for a day or two, and the lump had grown two roots that had come out through one of her nostrils; so she rushed and inserted a hook into one of them then pulled it back and a good piece came off with it.
Then she cut it where she caught up with it from the nostril hole and then did the same for the other nostril hole, then she opened her mouth and pressed her tongue down and then inserted the hook into the tumor and cut some of it off and a little blood flowed out.
So the woman's throat opened up and she rushed to drink water and eat food; we kept cutting away some of that tumor over a long period of time, and the tumor would grow back after being cut, until it had been cut many times and had lasted with her for a long time.
She turned pale, and the tumor inside her throat stopped growing; then she traveled to a different place and I don't know what happened to her after that.
Chapter 37.
In cutting and removing a tumor of the soft palate.
The type that is called "aamr" when it descends as a slope to the soft palate and swells and is white and elongated, then it is called a "post", and if it is thick at the bottom and rounded, then it is called "aamr"، If treated with what we have mentioned in the division, then the treatment was not effective.
I have seen the hot tumor calm down, and it has become thin, so it should be cut, and if it was gathered together roundly without length, and it was bloodless or the color of rust or there was no feeling to it, then it should be left alone.
There are risks when operating on the patient, so if you see it in the description mentioned above, that is, if it is white and elongated, then you should make the patient lie down facing the sun and press his tongue with the instrument described earlier, then insert the hook into the  "aamr".
And pull it down and cut it with one of the two instruments mentioned in cutting the tonsils, and it is necessary that you do not cut more than what is beyond the normal condition, because you would damage the voice and speech.
Then, after cutting, use what we have described in cutting the tonsils and treat it until it heals. If the patient refuses to undergo surgery, then use a trick to draw it out without fear or caution, and the purpose of the trick is to place the patient's head on your lap.
Then, using the instrument mentioned earlier, press the tongue and take some sharp water from the one mentioned in the chapter on ki, make it a thick or thin paste, and fill this device with it.This is its image: [Insert image of the device described]
The end that you place the medication in should be shaped like a spoon, and the device should be placed on the soft palate itself while the patient lies on their side, so that saliva flows from the mouth due to the position, so as not to harm him.
Then hold the medicine in your hand and squeeze it onto the tonsils for half an hour until you see them turn black and the sting of the medicine subsides. If you want to take a cotton ball, wrap it around the end of a stick and dip the cotton ball into the medicine.
Then insert the stick with the cotton ball into a tube from above so that the cotton ball sticks to the tonsils. Repeat this several times until you have achieved the desired amount of burning. Then leave it, for it will dry up and fall off after three or four days. If you need to repeat the medication, do so.
After burning, wipe the area around the tonsils with a cotton ball soaked in fat and dry it off. Then rinse your mouth with cold water and gargle with it from outside and swish it from inside until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and less scary.
The tonsils can also be treated with something softer than burning and cutting; they are treated with incense for this purpose. Take aniseed, wormwood, hibiscus, sage, marjoram, chamomile, and other herbs, and collect them all or some of them in a pot and immerse them in vinegar.
And boiled, with a hole in the middle of the lid for a hollow instrument. It is made of silver or copper.
Then insert the end with the cherry into the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to the tonsils on the tube until they become swollen. Never perform this treatment when the lump is first forming.
If you don't have this instrument, take a straw and assemble it with an egg shell at one end so that the patient's mouth doesn't burn.
as it prevents the steam from burning the mouth and is a safe treatment.
Chapter 83.
In removing splinters and other objects that have become lodged in the throat.
Often a bone or splinter of fish, or other object, will become lodged in the throat. It is therefore necessary to remove it with forceps when it is apparent and visible.
To make what is in the throat visible, and to ensure that something that has become lodged does not get digested and pass into the stomach, it may be necessary to induce vomiting in the patient before food is digested. This could help remove the foreign object or it might be swallowed whole.
Or it might swallow a piece of dry bread or take a piece of spongy sea-weed, bind it with a thread, and then make the patient swallow it. If this reaches the place where the splinter is, pull out the sponge quickly—do this several times.
Often a splinter or bone will stick to it and come out, but if it doesn't, use a hook:
Be thicker than an awl, and have a hook at the end; let the patient insert it into his throat gently while keeping his head raised so he doesn't cough, and push it upwards to remove the splinter or bone, or let the doctor do it with his own hand.
And inserting it is better, since he knows where the foreign object is; he pushes it down or pulls it out with the help of the tool, all this while taking care as to what is most convenient for him until it comes out.
Chapter 89.
In removing leeches from the throat.
If you have treated the leech as mentioned above in the section on treatment with medicine, and it has not responded, look then in the patient's throat under the tongue with a pair of forceps;
If you are able to see the leech, use a small hook or a pair of tweezers to grab it; if you cannot reach it with these, take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient' throat near the leech, then insert a piece of heated iron into the tube.
The patient should avoid water for several days, and then take a bowl of cold water, pour it into his mouth, rinse with it, and not swallow any of it; he should move his hand from time to time to cool the wound.
If the wound is sensitive to water, it will fall off if left alone; if it does not come out with what we have described, then steam the throat with urine and halit (a substance made from burning urine) using a device we have mentioned in our discussion of mouth washes. Repeat this several times as it will fall off.
The treatment with steam is as follows: You should take a pot and heat it on fire, then cover it with a lid that has a hole in the middle; attach one end of the instrument to the hole, then add the incense and place the other end in the patient's mouth; close the patient's mouth so that the steam does not escape until you are sure that the steam has reached the throat.
If the wound does not fall, repeat the steam treatment and make the patient endure thirst; eat salty food and garlic, and avoid drinking water; this will surely cause it to come out with these measures. Here is a description of a device that can be used to remove wounds from the throat if they are present.
They are similar to hooks as you see them, except that they have this projection that enters the throat; and their ends are similar to the mouth of a bird, smooth like a file when pressure is applied to something.
Another device is used to press the tongue; it is a wide ring of iron, about the size of the mouth, placed on top of the tongue and pressing against one side; the patient cannot remove it by himself and will have to remove it forcibly.
Describe the device that opens the mouth with this specific size:
Chapter 40.
He makes a cut in the membrane covering the gums and cuts it open.
Worms are numerous and varied, as will be discussed one by one in this book. They differ in their swelling and splitting from two aspects: one is the type of the tumor itself and what it contains of fluids.
The second type is due to the places where they occur in the body, because a tumor that occurs in the head is not the same as one that occurs in the rectum, and a tumor that occurs in a soft part of the body is not the same as one that occurs at a joint. Each has its own judgment in terms of treatment.
Some tumors should not be incised until the pus has fully matured and been completely formed, while others should be incised while still immature, as in the case of tumors that are close to joints.
This is because a tumor that occurs near a joint and persists for a long time until it becomes putrid can corrode the surrounding ligaments or nerves of that joint, which would lead to the dysfunction of that body part, or a tumor that is close to a vital organ could be the cause of its early decay.
This is because you should not delay the incision of a tumor until it has fully matured, as this could damage the main organ or, if the tumor is near the rectum, incise it while it is still immature to prevent the infection from spreading to the inside of the rectum and causing a rupture.
It also becomes necessary to know the time to incise tumors that have fully matured, which is when the pain in the tumor has subsided, fever has disappeared, redness and swelling have diminished, and the head of the tumor has flattened out, along with other signs.
The incision should be made at the bottom of the tumor's location if possible, to facilitate the flow of the fluid towards the lower part of the body, or in the thinnest part of the tumor and the most prominent bump. The incision should extend along the length of the body if the tumors are on the hands or feet.
Muscle, tendon, nerve, and arteries; in short, all of them at flat sites that do not bend, and as for those that bend, then go with the knuckle according to their site. If it is a mass in muscular locations, then leave his knuckle alone.
Until it is fully mature We have said: so that if you flatten it before that, the pus will flow from it a lot, and it may be sticky and dirty, and his lips may stiffen, and some tumors may stick to the width of the body when necessary or according to what the member needs.
And it is appropriate to use in small tumors one knob, and in large tumors a wide knob or many slits according to the size of the tumor; and some tumors may need to squeeze the skin and cut if it has become like a rag.
And has become, to a certain extent, dead like what is presented in many DLLs and caches; and some of them are split into a three-angled cut, and some of them are cut from it like an الآس leaf, as is the case with Arbi's worm.
And some of them are used with a round cut and a lunar cut and similar cuts, and what does not have a head like smooth flat tumors, it is appropriate to use a simple knuckle only, and it is appropriate if the tumor is large and has been جمعت for a long time, and you have flattened it, that you do not rush out and release all the pus at once.
Yes, take some of it out then tighten the tumor for another day and then take some pus out again do that repeatedly on a scale until you release all of it.
Especially if the patient is weak or a woman or a small child or an old man, because the animal spirit often breaks with the release of pus all at once, so he may die while you don't feel it, so be careful with this door very carefully.
After you have cut out these tumors, you should scrub the wound and examine it; if the tumor wound is small or the incision is simple, use old cotton or cotton thread; but if the tumor is large and the incisions in the buttocks are many...
You should insert a twine into each incision so that some of them meet, and if the tumor has been partially cut from the skin or depressed... you should stuff it with old cotton or with torn cotton cloth, without moisture, and tighten it on the third day.
Then take it off and treat it with the necessary ointments until it heals, and if blood has been discharged during your work, use cold water and vinegar, after soaking a cotton cloth in them and carrying it on the affected area several times.
If the bleeding doesn't stop, you should use the remedies and treatments and herbs that we have mentioned in many places in this book from the division, if you are in wintertime and the site of the tumor has a lot of nerves, you should soak the bandages in warm juice or oil.
And place it on the site, and if you are in summer and the sites are fleshy, you should carry the bandages soaked in water or oil or juice and oil, all of them cold, until on the third day as we have said, it is necessary to cut off the tumor and scrub it.
And use for its treatment what is similar to it until it heals, this is what you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general, and as for the detailed way, I have mentioned every tumor and how to treat it concisely, summarized:
Chapter 41.
In the incision on tumors that are exposed in the scalp.
Are small tumors exposed in the scalp, which are of the types of goods contained in sheaths, like a hen's gizzard, and their types are many, some are fatty, and some contain water similar to dung.
And some contain moisture that is similar to dal and soup and so on, and some are hard and stone-like, and all of them are safe to cut and remove except when you encounter a vein during the incision.
And the work in cutting them is that you first explore them with the instrument that comes after this, which is called a probe, until you know what they contain. If what they contain is moisture, cut it in a long direction with a simple incision on this image: .
And begin the cut from line ~B~ to line ~C~; if the moisture is drained, peel the sac that used to contain that moisture and cut it all off, leaving nothing at all because often it will return if you leave any of it.
Then dip a gauze in the antiseptic ointment if it is available, or else in salt water, and fill the wound with it and leave it until the next day because it eats what is left of the sac, then repeat the application of the ointment on it twice or three times if you need to do so.
Until you are sure that there is nothing left of the sac, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. And if the swelling contains adipose tissue, cut it as follows: .
Cut it diagonally and clamp the hooks in the edges of the wound and peel it off from both sides and try your best to remove the fascia that contains it; if a vein stands in your way, do what I have described above and also do the same on the tumor if it is stone-like from the incision.
The treatment is what I have described, and the incision on the stone-like tumor is easier because it has little blood and moisture, and sometimes some of these tumors in the head do not contain any moisture at all because I have made an incision on a tumor like this:  .
The head of an old woman was found to have a tumor like a hard, coarse, white stone that could not be broken even if someone threw it against a wall. As for the other tumors that occur on the head, they were all like this one, except for those that occur on the heads of children.
At the bases of the ears, he split them all simply and made their bases from their lower ends in order to facilitate the flow of the substance down. Then he treated them with what suited them of treatment.
Chapter 42
In the split on pigs, which is exposed in the neck, these tumors are often exposed in the neck and under the armpits and in the ribs and may occur in the rest of the body. The one that is exposed in the neck is usually a single one, and it may be numerous, and some of them develop from others.
And each pig has an inner membrane that is specific to it, as is the case with pig bladders and head tumors, which we have described. There are many types of these pigs; some are calculous, some contain fluids, and some are malicious and do not respond to treatment.
I did not find any that were in good condition in terms of touch, and their appearance was similar to that of the skin. They moved in all directions and were not attached to any nerves or veins or arteries of the neck, nor were they deep. It is appropriate that you split them simply from the top of the body to the bottom, following this line from point A to point B:
And you should skin them from all sides and use a hook or two or many hooks if needed, as we have mentioned in relation to head tumors. Take care not to cut any veins or nerves. The blade used should not be too sharp.
So that your hand does not get tired from cutting, and the patient does not become troubled; if you cut a vein or an artery, it will prevent you from working. Put powdered acetic acid or some particles that cut blood in the wound.
Suture the wound and leave it until the swelling subsides, the wound relaxes, and it starts to rot. Then stop bleeding and return to your work until it is finished. Then examine with your index finger if there is any left, then cut off another small pig and clean it.
If there is a large vein at the root of the pig, it should not be cut from its root but should be tied with a strong thread and left until it falls off on its own without causing any harm. Then the wound should be stuffed with old cotton that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment and then treated.
If the pig has been cut entirely, the wound edges should be brought together and sutured immediately after you have confirmed that there are no remnants of fat. If you notice that some fat remains from the pig's bone.
It should be aimed at the root and origin of the pig, using suturing as mentioned earlier. What is important is to identify the place where the fat ripens, and make sure that the bandage is from below as we mentioned.
Then, after the bandage, use thread and Egyptian ointment or similar to eat what is left of the decay until the wound heals, using medicated ointments that promote healing.
Chapter 34.
In splitting the neck to remove a tumor that occurs inside the throat.
The early scholars mentioned this operation in the neck to remove a tumor, but I have never witnessed anyone in our country performing it. This is consistent with their language, while those who perform sacrifices should avoid splitting the neck as it does not benefit them.
So that all the vessels and lung are healthy, and as for those who have a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils, if there is no obstacle in the air passage, it is necessary to use a herniotomy to avoid death due to suffocation.
It is necessary, if we wish this, that we should make an incision in the neck below three circles of the trachea or four small incisions across between two circles as much as the incision is in the peritoneum not in the cartilage This place is according to the incision.
For it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels are distant from it, so if the surgeon is timid, he should stretch the skin of the neck with a hook and then make an incision in the skin until he gets to the trachea. He should deviate the blood vessels if he sees any.
Then he should make an incision in the peritoneum that we have described, and he should know that the incision of the trachea is from the mucus that comes out with it, as well as from the loss of voice and leaving the wound open for a time. And when the time that he used to be afraid of choking has passed, the edges of the wound are collected from the skin.
And his line alone without the cartilage, then the drugs used to heal the flesh are used until it heals, said the author of this book, The explanation of this sentence that we have mentioned is that if they see the patient who has closed his loop with one of these tumors that they mentioned.
And the patient is on the verge of death, and his own life wants to cut himself, so they went to cut the larynx for the patient to breathe on the site of the wound a little breath and be saved from death. But they ordered to leave the wound open until the surge of illness passes and its period is three days and something like it.
So they commanded to stitch the wound and treat it until it heals, and what I witnessed with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and sent it on her throat, cutting part of her trachea. I was called to treat it; I found it corroding as corroded slaughtered animals.
I found the blood that came out of the wound easy, so I knew that she hadn't cut a vein or a windpipe, and the air comes out of the wound. So I sewed the wound and treated it until it healed, and the servant didn't suffer anything except for a change in voice, no more than that.
And after a few days she returned to her best state, so from here we say that cutting the throat carries no danger.
Chapter 44.
In the incision on the lump that appears in the larynx from the outside and is called a laryngeal tumour.
This tumor, which is called a laryngeal tumor, is a large tumor on the color of the body and is common in women, and it has two types.
Either it is natural or it is secondary, the former has no remedy and the latter has two types: one is similar to adipose tissue and the other is similar to a tumor that arises from the complication of an artery; there is danger in incising the latter. It is not recommended to expose it to iron at all except for what is small of it, if you examine and investigate it with a probe, you will find that it resembles adipose tissue and is not connected to any arteries; cut it as you cut a lump. And remove it with what it contains of the bag if it is in a bag, and otherwise thoroughly investigate all of them, then treat the site as required.
Chapter 54.
In the incision on types of adipose tissue.
The adipose tissue has many types, and I have mentioned all of them in the classification; we should mention here the difference between adipose tissue and abscess, as the latter is complex: let me say that an abscess is accompanied by fever, heat, and painful symptoms until the swelling subsides. And the abscess will be completed, so the fever and intensity will subside; adipose tissue is not accompanied by fever or heat or pain, and it contains a mesothelial bag that is special to it, and its color matches the body's color, and its beginning is like a pimple and becomes larger and smaller.
It has two types: adipose or containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are numerous as mentioned in the classification; therefore, when you come to treating adipose tissue, you should probe and investigate it first with the tool called a probes on how its image appears in the book after this.
Measure the size of the tumor, then remove the probe and look at what comes out in its place. If it is moist and fluid, any color, make a simple incision as mentioned in other tumors. If there is no moisture coming out in the place of the probe, know that it is adipose.
Cut it in the shape of a cross as I have taught you, and hang it on hooks and peel the skin off gently from all sides while preserving the bag intact if you can manage to do that.
If the bag tears during work and you cannot get it out whole, often that is the case. Take it out piece by piece so that there is nothing left of it, because if there is anything left, no matter how little or how much, the product will be affected more.
If you are overcome and only a little remains, rub the wound with some sharp, acerbic grits when you have finished. Put something to soothe the hot tumor above it, and treat it with all the treatment until it heals. If the product is large, sew its edges and treat it so that it heals
If a sweat obstructs the wound, or if blood is flowing. Hurry and rub the site with crushed astringent and leave it strained for two or three days until the wound heals and stops bleeding. Then return to cutting what is left of the product.
Chapter 64.
In the image of the tools.
There are three types: large, medium and small.
Image of a large probe:
Image of an intermediate probe:
Image of a small probe:
It is made of steel, square-ended, tight to facilitate rapid entry into tumors. This is a description of three types of probes: large, medium and small. Image of a large probe:
Image of a needle and thread.
Image of a smaller needle.
These needles are suitable for examining tumors, wounds, fistulas and hiding places to see what is inside them. It is made round, polished and smooth like calques made of copper, brass, steel or silver; the best ones are made of ebony.
And it can also be made of black lead and is suitable for examining fistulas that have a curve in them. It will bend with this curve, and these are three types because there are long ones, and there are medium ones, and there are short ones.
As much as is needed to reach the depth of each fistula, and its thickness is made according to the width and narrowing of the fistula, image of a needle made from large lead:.
Image of a needle made from medium lead:.
Image of a needle made from small lead:.
Images of the various types of needles because there are simple ones, that is, those that have a single hook, and they are three types large, medium and small, and there are blind needles, which are also three types, and double-hooked needles, which are also three types, and twisted double-hooked needles. These are three types, and all of these types need a specific one in its position, image of a simple large hook:. Image of a simple medium hook:. Image of a simple small hook:.
Image of a large blind hook:. Image of a medium blind hook:.
Image of a small blind hook:.
Image of a large double-hooked hook:. Image of a medium double-hooked hook:. Image of a small double-hooked hook:.
Image of a large three-hooked hook:.
Image of a medium three-hooked hook:. A small hook with three prongs:
This is a large scalpel:
This is a medium-sized scalpel:
This is a small scalpel:
The blades used to make incisions are limited, while the ends are not limited; they have been made this way so that one can use them to peel off the skin when there is a worry of cutting an artery or a nerve. This helps the patient feel less pain and offers some relief from the burning sensation caused by peeling off the tumor.
This is a large scalpello:
It is made from copper, which is almost as hard as steel. In the handle, there is a small hole through which you can insert a tiny blade; when you want to use it, you pull the blade out and use the tool like a scalpel. As you can see:.
This is a large scalpel:
This is a large pair of forceps:
It is made from brass or from silver (in the shape of a spiral) as you see; it should be thin because these kinds of forceps are used to cut through blood quickly in an emergency, and when you don't have any medicine ready.
However, it is not used to cut blood in every part of the body; it is only used in the muscular parts such as the leg and thigh, the arm, the breast, the abdomen, and the ribs, and so on from among the moist muscular organs.
And you can make other small machines from it that are like the shells of pistachios on this image:
It is used to stop blood flow from a bleed site, or when cutting a nerve or artery. And you can make other small machines from it that are like the shells of pistachios on this image:
Chapter 74.
In treating male breast disease.
The one that resembles a woman's breast may swell, and some people's breasts may remain warm and ugly until they reach the age of sexual maturity, so it is necessary to make an arc-shaped cut on the breast as shown in this image:
From line ~a~ to line ~g~. Then strip the fat completely, then fill the wound with a topical ointment, then stitch the wound shut and treat it until it heals, because the breast may droop and sag like women's breasts.
It is necessary to make cuts in the upper sides, resembling a half-moon shape, where each cut connects with the other at its end, so that the larger line surrounds the smaller one as shown in this image: From line ~a~ to line ~g~, then strip the skin between the cuts and remove the fat and use what we mentioned of stitching and medications and whatever needs to be done for it to heal.
If it doesn't absorb the required amount of cuts for the patient's well-being, or if the blood is flowing, then you should fill the wound with cotton dipped in the astringent ointment and leave it until it eats what is left of the fat, then treat it until it heals:
Chapter 75.
In treating lumps that are exposed under the armpit.
These lumps that are exposed under the armpit are of two types: some are solid and contain a sac, and some contain fluids; so if it contains fluids, you should make an arc-shaped cut on this image:
From the line ~b~ to the line ~c~ if all that is in the tumor has been vomited up, then saturate it with old cotton and leave it for another day then remove the cotton.
And treat with the appropriate ointment until it heals, if the tumor is of the type of pigs' knots split it as we have mentioned in the cutting on pigs, whether the wound persisted to extend the pus so use it on what has been mentioned above, [using] cauterization.
Chapter 94.
In the splitting of the tumor that appears in front of the artery or vein and is called anurisma.
If the artery is injured and the skin above it is wound up, this often leads to a lump, as well as the vein can also lead to a swelling and lump.
And the signs by which you know if the tumor and swelling are from an artery or a vein The tumor, if it is from an artery, is rectangular and gathered in the depth of the body, and if you press on the tumor with your finger, you feel it as though it had a click.
The tumor is round on the surface of the body, and cutting these tumors is dangerous, especially in the armpits, groin, and neck, as well as other large areas of the body; it is therefore necessary to avoid treating them with iron.
And what is not in the limbs or in the head should be avoided, and what is a swelling from an artery should be split open on the skin first, then cut open with scissors, then peel off the artery from the ligatures.
Until it is exposed, then insert a needle into the side and pass it to the other side and tighten the artery with a double knot as you have mentioned in tying the two arteries at the temple, then pierce the spot between the ligatures with an instrument called a trepanner until all the blood comes out.
And the tumor is broken down and then the treatment that generates pus is used until the ligaments fall off and then it is treated with the appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the tumor was caused by a rupture of the vein, then it should be grasped with your hand as much as possible from the tumor with the skin and then an needle is inserted below the location that you grasp with your hand and it is executed in it a double thread until it comes out from the other side. Then tie the tumor tightly as much as possible according to what I mentioned to you in binding the grape from both sides with the ends of the thread, if you are afraid that the threads will slip, then insert another needle with another thread under the whole tumor at the intersection of the first needle.
And tighten your threads in four places and then incise the tumor in the middle until, when it comes out, cut off the excess skin and leave what was tied, then put a bandage on it that I have immersed in liquor and oil. Then use the treatment that is by twisting and ointments until it heals, ..
Chapter 50.
In the tumor that exhibits from nerve twisting.
As the tumor exhibits in the vein, so it exhibits in the nerve as well; if a tumor occurs in the artery or vein, it is more likely to occur in the locations of the wrists and ankles.
And in every place that moves the joints, and it is a painful tumor; its color is similar to that of the body and is usually not found in depth in the body.
It is under the skin and moves in all directions, and it does not go forward or backward; what is in the joints should not be exposed to iron, as it may cause hardening, and what is in the head or forehead.
Surgery: "Make an incision in the skin with a scalpel. If the tumor is small, grasp it with a pincers and cut it from its root. If it is large, attach it to a hook, then slit it, remove it, and stitch up the wound. Treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter LXX: "The Fifty-First Chapter: Surgery
In cutting warts that are exposed in the abdomen.
These warts, which are common on the bellies and bodies of some people, are called "leprosy" due to their resemblance to fungi. Their roots are slender and their tops are thick. Some are small, while others can grow very large.
I have seen a man with two warts in his abdomen that resembled fungi. The roots were slender and the tops were thick, and they looked like small mushrooms. One of them weighed about eighteen ounces, and the other weighed around six ounces.
The work of cutting them involves examining the patient to determine if they are wet and their color is white and slippery at the root. Cut them with a wide scalpel, and have hot coals ready, as often as not, much blood will flow when you cut them.
If the blood overflows, cauterize it. If you see that the patient is frightened by the iron scalpel, take a piece of strong lead thread and tie the wart that resembles this description and leave it for two days, then tighten the lead thread.
Every time you affect the wart, let it fall off by itself without any effort. If the wart is thick, some caution and skill are required when cutting it, especially if it is in the abdomen, but it may be cut in half or even cut completely.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return, and treat the wound until it heals. Be careful not to expose a wart that has turned into a scar; it is of little color and has a slimy appearance, for it is a cancerous tumor, which I will describe in the following chapters.
Chapter 50.
In the treatment of hernia.
The hernia can be caused by various factors: either from a split in the abdominal wall, causing the peritoneum or intestine to protrude; or from blood emanating from a vein or artery, as mentioned earlier; or from gas becoming trapped and inflaming the hernial sac.
If it is due to a split in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of the peritoneum or intestine, then the tumor will be similar in color to the body's skin tone and will be soft and painless. It may appear as a swelling in a specific location. If it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, its appearance will be much more distinct, and it may make a grunting noise when pressed. It will become very hard when entering a steamy room or when exercising, and it will be soft when relaxed.
It will not recede when pressed with the hand, and its size will remain constant. If it is due to blood, then the color of the tumor will darken; if it is due to protruding flesh, then the tumor will be hard and stable.
If it is caused by gas, then it will be soft to the touch. The treatment should be avoided as it may lead to complications, as explained in the previous book that discussed tumors caused by veins and arteries.
If the hernia is caused by the intestine or the peritoneum, then the patient should be instructed to stand and stretch, and then mark the area around the hernia with a pencil. Then, order the patient to lie on his back with his hands by his side. With a large chisel, make an incision around the hernia at the marked area. Then, use a long needle and strong thread or silk ribbon to stitch up the middle of the hernia.
And the binding of the ligature is an adductor, then you open in the middle of the pulled tumor above the ligature and put your index finger in it and ask for the intestine if you find it has been taken by the ligature, relax the adductor and push the intestine into the abdomen. If you find a thymus, extend it with a hook.
And cut its余切，if a vein or an artery obstructs you, bind it securely and return to your work and take two needles and insert them in the stitches that you have made around the tumor, fixing them so that they have passed through، then tighten the tumor in four places on the needles.
If you want, remove the needles and leave the place until the stretched flesh falls off itself or cut it if it softens and rotten, then treat it with what should be of ointments so that it heals, if it is a sebaceous cyst from meat that has sprouted in it.
or from moisture, it is necessary to flatten the tumor as we said and drain the blood or moisture that you find in it, then treat it with what heals the place,.
Chapter 35.
In the treatment of cancer.
We have mentioned in the classification the types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines, and warned from treating it with iron so that it does not become inflamed, and we mentioned the cancer born in the uterus and warned from treating it.
The firsts said that when cancer is in a place where it can be entirely removed, such as cancer in the breast or in the thigh and other organs where it can be easily extracted, especially when it is small and just beginning, whereas when it is large and advanced, it should not be approached.
If, however, I could not heal anyone of it, nor have I ever seen anyone else reach that point, and the work in it is, as we said, to advance step by step until the black spot appears clearly, then to drain it if it is in veins;
Then he sets up the patient so that he can work, and then he places the loops that are suitable for him in the cancer and then covers it from all sides with the skin, taking care until nothing is left of his roots, and leave the blood running and do not cut it quickly.
Then he should squeeze the affected areas and drain all the thick blood with his hand or with whatever tools are possible, and if it hinders him in the work, let a lot of blood flow from a vein or artery; then treat it with all the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 45.
In treating syphilis.
We have been told in the division Of droppings And how water meets And the signs of each type and its treatment with drugs, and which is treated with iron alone; the droppings that do not approach iron are only the bilious ones and never the bleeding type.
Then that is a killer, if you have treated this type of syphilis with drugs and your treatment has not been effective, then look; if the patient has become extremely weak or he also has another disease besides syphilis, such as being
Cough or diarrhea, and so on, so you should not treat it with iron; this is a gamble; if you see that the patient is very strong and does not have any other disease besides syphilis, and he is not a child or an old man, then the treatment for him is to make him stand between your hands. And a server behind him squeezing his belly with his hands and pushing the water down towards the anus, then you take a surgical scalpel like this:
Limited on both ends, long and pointed like a scalp, except that it is slightly curved to prevent it from passing through when working on the intestines and injuring them, then look if the syphilis has generated from the colon
So it should be removed from the hernia by three fingers below it above the anus, if the syphilis has generated from the colon, then your incision should be on the left side of the scrotum by three fingers, and if it has generated from a liver disease, then your incision should be on the right side of the scrotum by three fingers.
And it is not good that the incision should be on the side which the patient wants to lie down so as not to run the risk of the curiosity flowing into that weak place, then pierce all the skin with the instrument and then insert the instrument into that incision and raise your hand.
Take the knife between the skin and the peritoneum as if you were peeling it, and be careful not to peel more than the size of a nail or less, then pierce the peritoneum until the knife reaches a empty place which is the place of water, then take it out and insert the instrument into this hole.
It is somewhat like a tube of thin tubes made of silver or copper or smooth ebony polished, which has a small hole at the bottom and three holes in the sides, two on one side and one on the other as you see.
And he may put the end prepared like the point of a pen on this image:
In its upper end there is a ring, so when the instrument reaches water it will drop down from its hour on the instrument, so you vomit out of water in an average amount because if you vomit more than what should be at that time then the patient may die by dissolving his animal spirit.
Or it may expose him to fainting that is close to death, but vomit on him according to his strength and what guides you about the patient's condition from the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his color, then take out the instrument and keep the water because it is kept from its hour.
Because of the skin that holds the hole which is on the peritoneum which I have told you to tighten it on this condition, then you can reinsert the instrument another day if you see that the patient is likely to suffer from that.
And you also come out of water a small amount do this days and you are on your back and preserve from the mistakes so that there is not left of the water but a little, if you fear for the patient and have left a lot of water then treat it by burying it in hot sand.
And the excessive sweating in the bath and the sun, and hold it back from thirst, and treat it with drying medicines until he recovers, and burn on the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the water on what I described above, .
Chapter 55.
In the treatment of children who are born with a non-perforated urethra, or if the perforation is narrow, or if it is in an odd place.
Some boys may come out of their mother's womb with their urine channel (urethra) not perforated, so one should hurry to perforate it as soon as they are born.
With a very thin syringe on this image:
Then you place a very thin pin of lead into the hole and tie it and hold it for three or four days, whenever he wants to urinate, push it away, then put it back; and if you do not use lead, the urine that drains onto the place may not close up.
And as for the one whose urethra is narrow, it is treated with lead as we have said for a number of days until it widens; and those who are born with the urethra in an odd place, that is, at the end of the penis, so they cannot urinate in front.
Until the penis is raised by his own hand towards the sky, and he does not have ejaculation until he reaches maturity, for semen cannot reach the uterus in its natural state; this is a very ugly disease. The treatment for this is: let the patient lie on his back.
Then you extend your penis with your left hand to the utmost extent, and clean the head of the urethra with a sharp blade or syringe like the tip of a pen, or as if you are carving something so that the hole is in the middle as it should be;  .
And be careful when you do this work from bleeding, for it often leads to that; cut off the hair around the urethra, and treat the wound so that it heals,  .
Chapter 65.
In the cyst that appears in the gluteus, the sac, the deformity, the foulness, and when the gluteal sack adheres to the sac.
This cyst often appears in the urethra; it is a soft, fleshy, malign mass and may be benign or malignant. If it is benign, it should be caught with a small hook.
And cut it all out, then carry a cotton wool dampened with the Egyptian ointment on it, and then treat it with the olive ointment until it heals, and if the cyst is malign and has a smegmas colour, you should use cauterisation after cutting and peeling it, .
If the cyst is in a gluteal sac and has not been removed, and some of the cyst is inside and some outside the sac, you should remove the part inside first so that when it heals, you can then treat it from outside.
For you will not be safe if you treat both together; the sac may burst, and there may also be darkness and decay in the ovaries and the sac; it is necessary to cut off all that is black, and when it seems that it might rot or has already rotted.
Then dip it in honey with ground pomegranate seeds and myrrh, and then treat it with all the treatment until it heals, and if it bleeds, use cauterisation with a round-shaped iron rod in this way:
Cauterisation is beneficial for both situations, namely bleeding and a burst wound; if the sac has completely gone bad and disappeared in a certain time, you should insert into the urethra a lead pipe that is smooth at one end to pour the medicine on it. As for the adhesion of the gluteal sac to the sac:
This adhesion occurs only in those who have a healthy gluteal sac and do not need to be circumcised; if the sac becomes attached due to a wound or tumor, you should strip it with an awl until the tendon is dissolved and the sac is free on all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them through inspection, then a small part should be removed from the peritoneum and the serosa; for the serosa is thin, so that it may easily burst due to its thinness, and then distinguish between the serosa and the peritoneum with a thin piece of cotton cloth that has been soaked in cold water so that it does not stick together.
Then treat with a tonic solution until it heals.
Chapter 75.
In purging the boys and treating what may occur to them of errors.
Castration is not something other than separating the connection as in all surgeries, but because what we do by our will and using it on boys especially requires that we should draw up the work of doing it in the best way possible.
And the easier way leading to safety, I say that the first did not mention castration in anything of their books because it was not used in their rituals; and it is what we have acquired.
By experience, because I found the general public of artisans and butchers using cleaning with knives and scissors, and using lacing and tying with string and cutting with nails; and I have tried all these methods.
I did not find anything better than cleaning with scissors and tying with string because, while cleaning with a knife, the skin of the serosa may often become attached to it as the serosa has two layers; so, upper layer may be cut, leaving the lower layer intact.
So, he is forced to cut the end and cause renewed pain, and cleaning with a ligature does not guarantee cutting off the tip of the penis because it might enter a hole, and cleaning with nails may cause the skin to peel and disrupt your work, or the boy's skin might be naturally short...
For often, they are born that way and do not need to be cleaned; I have seen this myself; but experience has proven the superiority of cleaning with scissors and tying with string because the blade of the scissor is proportionate to the cut, whereas the knife is like the upper layer of skin.
When you grip your hand between the blades, cut at a single measure and in a single time; so that the thread's slack becomes like a wall for the skin of the urethra from all sides; not at all does it make any mistake. The first face of work is to deceive the boy.
Especially if he is of those who understand a little that you are only tying the thread in his urethra and leaving him until another day; so that you cheer and delight him in every way possible what he accepts with his mind, then stop him between your hands standing upright.
And do not let him sit down and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot; the boy's eye does not fall on it nor on any of the tools; then you put your hand into his urethra and blow on the skin and lift it up until the head of the urethra comes out.
Then clean it of what has accumulated in it then tie the marked place with a double thread; and then tie a second knot below it by a little; and then grasp the bottom knot with your thumb and index finger firmly grasp; and cut between the knots. Then lift the skin up quickly and pull out the head of the urethra; then let the blood flow a little; it is better and less likely to swell the urethra; then blow on it with a wet cloth; then sprinkle on it of dried pumpkin ash, burnt; it is also excellent; or grain of chia; it is also superior.
Then lift the skin up quickly and pull out the head of the urethra; then let the blood flow a little; it is better and less likely to swell the urethra; then blow on it with a wet cloth; then sprinkle on it of dried pumpkin ash, burnt; it is also excellent; or grain of chia; it is also superior. Then carry on the dust of above in a cloth; and a yolk of cooked egg in water with rose water-based oil, fresh and fragrant; and leave it there until another day; then treat it with all the treatment until it heals.
And this is the picture of the scissors that is suitable for cleaning:
be a flat blade, cutting without any curve, with handles of the same length; and as for the mistake that occurs in cleaning; it might be that the skin inside is turned over; so you should extend it from your watch with your fingernail before swelling occurs.
And cut it on an even level, if you cannot hold it in your fingernail then draw it with a hook and cut it, for if it has passed three days and what is under the head of the anus remains swollen and warm, leave it until the heat swelling subsides and peel it gently.
And cut it to suit you, and be careful of the head of the anus, for if you cut something from the head of the anus, it will not harm that; so treat it with what we have described in the article of the dusters.
And if it is cut from the skin above the amount and shriveled up above it, it does not hurt much either; so treat it with what we have mentioned until it heals.
Chapter 58
In treating retene urination.
Retained urination in the bladder is caused by a blockage from a stone, dried blood, pus, or protruding flesh and so on; if you treat this with what we have described in the classification of treatments, it will heal.
And the urine did not come out, and I saw that the cause of its retention was due to a stone that had harmed the neck of the bladder; it should be that the patient kneel on his knees, then get up on one side and put his stomach towards the back, and the patient holds himself as much as he can.
So he will force the neck of the bladder to push the stone into the back, and the urine will come out; if it does not come out with what we have mentioned and the matter became difficult for the patient, then you should use the machine called a catheter that this is its picture:
It is made of silver and is thin, smooth, hollow, like a feather tube in softness and length of about two feet and a half; it has a gentle funnel at the end, and the way to attract urine with it is that you take a twisted string and tie a piece of wool or cotton with it firmly.
And insert the thread's end into the lower part of the cauldron and pound with a pestle if there is something from the wool to enter in the tube fill it up like a seed, then smear the cauldron with oil or lard or egg white and let the patient sit on a chair.
And let his bladder and urethra be wet with oils, or oil and lukewarm water, then insert the cauldron gently into the urethra until it reaches the base of the urethra then bend the urethra upward towards the scrotum and push the cauldron inside.
Until when the urethra is bent then push the cauldron inside until when it reaches near the rectum then tilt the penis downward and the cauldron inside it then push it until it reaches the bladder and the patient feels that it has reached something empty.
It is made on this rank because the course that the urine takes is curved, and then the thread is tightened slightly with wool so that the urine follows the wool, then remove it and drain the urine, and repeat the cauldron.
And take off what you do not do until the bladder is empty and the patient finds relief,.
Chapter 95.
How to inject the bladder with the cauldron.
And the images of the machines that are suitable for this are made of silver or ivory hollow with a long tube on a mỏng slience And I intended to pour into it water and medicines, so that this is the cauldron.
are made of silver or ivory hollow with a long tube on a mỏng slience All of it except the end, because it is empty inside three holes, two from one side and one from the other as you see..
And the hollow place that contains the cauldron is as much as it closes without any extra until when it is pulled to draw something of wetness it pulls and if it was pushed it pushes to a distance as what is done with the cauldron thrown in sea wars..
If you wish to drain the fluids from the bladder, you insert the tip of the cannula into the fluid and pull it upwards with the syringe; the fluid will be drawn into the lumen of the cannula, then inserted into the urethra according to what we have described in the cataplasms; then push the fluid with the syringe.
That fluid reaches the bladder in a state where the patient can feel it, and this is a gentle syringe that is also used to inject the bladder:.
It is made of silver or bronze; its top is like a small funnel and below it is a sleeve, then you take a camel's bladder and put the fluid you want to inject into the bladder, then tie it between two straps with a double thread.
And warm that fluid a little on the fire, then insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra and tighten your hand on the bladder with that fluid until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder, take a thin piece of leather and make it into a circle and punch holes all around it; then put a strong thread in those holes as you rotate; then gather the circle together as you would gather a slate after placing on it what you want of fluids, ointments, and water.
Then tie it to the machine and work with it as you did with the bladder by squeezing your hand until the fluid reaches the bladder, and this is a picture of an injection syringe:.
Chapter sixty.
Removing the stone.
We have mentioned in the classification types of stones and their treatment with drugs, and I mentioned the difference between a stone formed in the kidney and a stone formed in the bladder, along with its signs, and I mentioned the stone that is treated by hand work and the cut.
This is the stone that is formed in the bladder, especially the one that gets stuck in the urethra, and I will describe this with a clear explanation and a summary.
I say that the stone generated in the bladder is more likely to affect children, and its signs are that urine exits the bladder similar to water in its smoothness.
And it appears in it, and rubs his penis and plays with it, and is often suspended, then spreads with it the anus in many of them, facilitates the cure of boys from it until they reach the age of fourteen, and is difficult in the old, as for the youth, it is average between that.
And which has greater stones, his treatment is easier, and the smaller, the opposite. So, when we come to treatment, it should be first that the patient be injected with an injection that removes all the feces that is in his intestines, because it may prevent the existence of the stone during inspection.
Then the patient is taken by his legs, he shakes and shakes down to bring the stone to the neck of the bladder or stands up several times, then you sit him between your hands with his hands under his hips so that the bladder becomes all inclined downward, and then inspect it.
And inspect it from the outside, and if you feel the stone in the space, hurry up from your watch by cutting it on it, because it doesn't fall under your touch at all, so it is necessary that you wipe the thumb with the grease from the left hand if the patient is a child, or the middle finger.
If it is a complete boy, you insert it in his anus and inspect for the stone until it falls under your finger, a little at a time, to the neck of the bladder, then you press on it with your finger and push it out towards the place that you want to cut.
And order a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand, and order another servant to extend his right arm under the testicles towards the place where the cut will be made, then take the scalpel that this is its image:
And make the incision between the rectum and the vagina not in the middle but on the left side of the pubic bone, and let the incision be on the same level as the stone and your finger in the rectum while you press it outward with force, so that the incision is wide on the outside and narrow on the inside to the extent that the stone can pass through it.
Know that there may be some of the stones that have edges and corners, so it is difficult for them to come out.
And some of them are smooth like a nut and round, so it is easier for them to come out. And if they have edges and corners, then you should increase the width of the incision slightly, because if they do not come out like this, you should change them with an improved grip, the edge of which is tight and its end is like an ice pick.
So that it is fixed on the stone so as not to slip out of it, or put a small, curved tool under it. If you cannot do this, then widen the incision slightly, and if you see that there is any blood that has been obstructed, cut it with acid.
If there is more than one, first push the large one into the bladder mouth and then cut it, and then push the small one after that, and so do if there are more than two, and if it is very large, it is not appropriate to make a wide incision on it because it exposes the patient to two risks.
One of them is that he dies, or that his urine always leaks because it does not heal again and again, but try to push her until she comes out or change her by breaking her with clamps so that she comes out piece by piece.
And when you have finished your work, apply kiler and wait and wipe with a sponge dipped in oil and drink or apply ghee of rose water and cold water to soothe the swelling, and then let the patient lie on his back and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
If it has resolved, pour water and oil over the area, then treat with olive ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals, because if there is a hot, excessive tumor, inflammation, or something like that in the wound - such as blood congel
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, because if it stays, it will lead to the corruption and infection of the bladder, and then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and treat each type with its appropriate treatment until it heals.
And during all the treatment times, it is necessary to bind the hips together and bring them closer to ensure that the medications applied to the area are not washed away; if there is a small stone in the urethra and it has become lodged there and prevents urination, treat it with what I have described above before it becomes a
I often relied on this treatment alone without resorting to the incision, because I have tried that - its image is as follows:
a triangle-shaped sharp tip embedded in a stick, and then you take a string and tie it to the penis below the stone so that it doesn't return to the bladder, then you gently insert the iron hook of the pliers into the urethra until it reaches the same stone.
And you rotate the pliers in the same stone a little bit at a time while trying to pierce it until it passes through from the other side, and then the urine flows immediately, and then you clench your hand on what is left of the stone outside the penis, because it will break up and come out with the urine, and the patient will recover, and this treatment has been tested.
If this treatment is not available to you due to an obstacle that prevents you from doing it, tie a string below the stone and another string above the stone, then split the stone in half on the penis between the two strings, and then remove it.
Then loosen the knot and clean up the stagnant blood that has accumulated in the wound. The thread should only be tied under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder; and another knot should be tied above it so that when the thread is loosened after the stone has passed, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound.
Therefore, when you tie the upper thread, you should raise the skin to the top so that it returns to its place and covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter sixty-eight.
In removing stones in women's genitals.
Very few stones form in women, and when one does, it is difficult to treat and obstructs for many reasons: first, a woman may be a virgin; second, you may not find a woman who allows herself to be examined by the physician.
If she is chaste or from the close relatives, and third, you may not find a woman who is skilled in this art, especially when it comes to hand surgery. And fourth, the site of the incision on the stone in women's genitalia is far from the stone's location, so an awkward operation must be performed.
And in that danger, if necessity calls for it, one should take a woman doctor who is skilled and talented, and they are rare, so ask for a male doctor who is modest and gentle or engage a midwife who is skilled in women' matters or a woman who gives some indication of this art.
So bring her and order her to do everything you order her to do, from examining the stone first. After all, she should examine whether the woman is a virgin or not; if she finds a stone, she should press it under her finger.
So, at that point, you order her to make an incision; if she is not a virgin, and it is the case, then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and examine for the stone. After placing her left hand on the bladder, she should squeeze it vigorously.
If you find it, then it should be inserted from the mouth of the bladder down to its length until it ends with the root of the thigh; and then split on it when facing half of the vagina at the root of the thigh from any side it comes to her and felt the stone in that direction.
And her finger does not go away from the stone pressed under it, and let the cut be small at first then the rod is put on that small cut if she felt the stone then increase in the cut according to what she knows that the stone comes out of it, and know that there are many types of stones.
There are small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and with ridges. So know its kinds to guide you in what you want, and if blood prevails over you, pour in the place of crushed powder and hold it for an hour until the blood stops then go back to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and work that you count with yourself from the tools I mentioned in removing stones for men to help you in your work, if blood prevails over you and you know the pulse of the blood that it is from a vein that has stopped, then put the powder on the place.
And tighten it with bandages tightly and leave it and do not repeat it and do not remove the stone because it may kill the patient then treat the wound then if the pain of the blood stopped after days and the place became infected then go back to your work until you remove the stone,.
Chapter 26
In the cut on the urinary bladder.
The bladder is a moisture that meets in the white fascia which is under the skin of the testicles surrounding the egg and called the scrotum, and may be in a special membrane that nature prepares in one side of the egg..
Until he thinks that it is another egg, and is between the testis skin and the white fascia we mentioned, and it does not happen except in scarcity, and this bladder generated from a weakness that exposes to the women, so it shifts to them.
And this moisture is of many colors, either its color is to the yellow, or it is bloody red, or it is putrid black, or it is watery white, and it is most often the latter, and the signs by which they are known.
Wherever water collects, if it is in the white mesenteron which we have mentioned, the swelling will be slightly oval-shaped like an egg, and the testicle will not be visible because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
If the moisture is in a membrane that is separate from her, then the swelling will be slightly oval-shaped on one side.
For this reason, a person might mistake it for another egg, and if the moisture is between the testicle's skin and the white mesenteron, it will fall under the touch, and if you want to know the color of the moisture, you would probe the swelling with the square prodding stick which I have mentioned earlier, and whatever comes out in the effect of the prodding stick, you would judge it based on what is inside it.
So, if we come to the treatment with iron, it is necessary for the patient to order him to bleed him if he can, and you see his body full of blood, and then let him lie on his back on something that is slightly high, and you put many rags underneath him, and then sit on his left side.
And you order a servant to sit on his right side, extending his penis to one side of the scrotum towards the perineum, and then take a wide knife and make a cut in the scrotum from the middle lengthwise, close to the perineum.
And the cut should be on a straight line parallel to the line that divides the scrotum into two halves until it reaches the white mesenteron containing, so you peel and preserve him from splitting it, and your peeling should be from the side that adheres to the egg more, and you extend the peeling as much as you can.
Then tie off the peritoneum filled with water widely and drain all the water, then separate between the lips of the incision with clamps and extend the peritoneum upward without touching the scrotal skin that contains it and cut the peritoneum however you can cut it either all at once or in pieces.
Especially the thin side, because if you don't cut it all at once, you won't be safe from water returning, and if an egg breaks out of its shell while you're working, sew up the skin when you're done cutting the peritoneum, then put it back together again.
Then treat it like any other surgery to heal, if the egg has become rotten due to another disease, you should tie the arteries in the testicle to prevent bleeding, then cut off the testicle from the ligament and remove the egg, then treat it as we've mentioned.
If the water collected in both sides is the same, then you know it's a double hernia, so incise the other side as you did with the first one, and if the hernia is the same on both sides, then do the same operation, then wipe away the blood.
And insert a cotton pad that you've soaked in oil or rose water into the incisions, and make another from outside that you've soaked in wine and oil, spread it over the testicles, and put bandages on top of them. And tie it up with a six-sided ribbon like this: .
Then two bandages are taken, sewed and stuffed with fluffy cotton, the ends that are tied are made from cotton or wool and wet, gathered tightly into a belt, and one of the ends is placed on the back at the waist.
And the second is taken towards the groin, and the ends on the thighs at the bottom, and the two remaining ends are placed on the armpits, and all the tension is gathered into a belt, and this hernia can also be made with ironing instead of incising it with an iron.
And he should take a small, sharp knife and split the skin of the scrotum while it is hot as we have described until the white peritoneum that contains the water comes to light. Then he should take another iron on this pattern:
It is similar to the Greek eye, then sews it with sutures while it is hot until all the moisture comes out, and then stretches the peritoneum with hooks and peels it off by the iron according to what you can reach and cut it all according to what you are able, preserving the egg, do not touch it fire.
And know that this work is safer and farther from bleeding blood and better than working with the cut, if it obstructs you in the genital cut or at the time of ironing a hot tumor or bleeding blood or another thing, then you should treat whatever obstructs you of that with the treatment that is appropriate for it as mentioned above.
If the patient is feeble and cannot withstand this work due to its ugliness, then he should use the caustice as I have described it, and if it is correct with you according to what we have mentioned.
Since the adenoma is water-based, the patient should sit on an elevated chair, then split the tumor at its bottom with a wide scalpels, making the incision as wide as possible so that all the fluid comes out, and then place cotton on the site and tie it up.
And let him drain the remaining water, then treat it until the wound heals, and if the water comes out while you are treating it, that is because the white membrane is obstructing the mouth of the wound and prevents the water from coming out.
At that time, you should insert a feather of an ostrich or the tool used to extract water from the womb, which we have shown in the image, or increase the size of the wound slightly.
And know that water may return and gather after six months or something like that, so if it gathers, split it in the same way and treat the patient for a few days.
Chapter 36.
In the incision on the adipose uterus and its treatment.
Know that the incision on this uterus is one of the risks that can lead to death in most cases, so that is why we see leaving it and avoiding it, and I am recalling the work on it and the types of tumor.
I say that many tumors may occur in the bodies from which the structure of the uterus is composed, and this is due to a number of reasons: either from a loose dung that drains into the uterus, or from a blow, and the color of the tumor is the same as that of the body, and there is no water in it.
And the tumor may be stationary, and sometimes it may be calcified, its color like that of the soil, and there is no sense to it; and it may be due to the پیچچین of arteries and their swelling as mentioned earlier or from the swelling of veins; so whatever is the cause of arterial swelling, one can know that the tumor has disappeared.
If you press it with your fingers, it should not be exposed to it at all; and as for what is due to the swelling of veins, it does not disappear when pressed with fingers, and this type may be able to cause problems for him and all other muscles.
This is how: cut the skin of the testicles, then extend the egg upward and remove it from the peritoneal membrane, and get rid of the veins that are attached to the testes; tie the veins and cut the membrane after getting rid of all sides of the egg from the testes.
So it is necessary that the egg is removed and cut, and if there is any attachment between some of the membranes or between the veins, you should get rid of all this attachment and cut it into pieces of a circle.
If the plant of the muscle is in the attachment place that is behind, it should be cut completely and removed the egg as we mentioned; if your work is done, you should patch the wound with wool soaked in oil of roses and wine, and then treat it with all other treatments until it heals.
Chapter 46.
In the treatment of a hernia with a herniated disc.
The daliah is a twisted mass, similar to a cluster, with a relaxation of the nerves and difficulty for the patient in movement, exercise, and walking. In the treatment of this disease, it is similar to what has been mentioned previously.
But we should mention working on it as the first did, and I say that it is necessary for the patient to sit on a chair, then push down the testicular support, and then hold the scrotum with your fingers, with the blood vessels that are close to the penis.
And the servant should hold it and stretch it sharply, then cut it with a wide, sharp scalpel following the course of the vessels until they are exposed, and then strip them from both sides as I mentioned to you in suturing the arteries that are in the temples, and then stitch them with a double thread.
And tie it at the first places where the daliah occurred, and also tie it at the last one, and then cut it lengthwise in the middle of the body, and remove what has accumulated in it from the thick,腐んだ湿液.
And then treat the wound with other surgical treatments that you want to generate in it for a period so that the vessels nourish one of the testicles, there is no problem in that, because if the daliah presents in all the vessels, then one of the testicles should be removed along with the vessels so that the egg does not lack its food. before cutting the vessels, so they wither and do not benefit from it,.
Chapter 56.
In the treatment of a hernia with a intestinal herniation.
This type of hernia occurs due to a hole in the abdominal wall that extends towards the sides of the abdomen, near the armpits, and the intestine protrudes from this hernia into one of the testicles.
And this hernia is either from a tear in the peritoneum or from its extension. These two types of hernias have many causes, such as a blow, a sudden movement, a loud noise, lifting a heavy object, and so on. Its sign, if it is from the extension of the peritoneum, is that it occurs little by little over a long period of time.
And it does not happen suddenly, and the swelling is level towards the depth before the peritoneum squeezes the intestine. Its sign, if it is from a tear in the peritoneum, is that it happens with great pain all at once, and the swelling is different in appearance under the skin near the surface.
And that is when the intestine comes out and its fate is outside the peritoneum, and sometimes the mesentery comes out with it, so it is called an intestinal hernia or a mesenteric hernia. It may be accompanied by gas, and it may run in the intestine and be trapped there, causing the death of the patient.
Because it causes great pain and grating, especially when it is squeezed, and the treatment for these diseases with iron is dangerous, so you should beware of falling into it. The remedy is to order the patient to return the intestine to inside its cavity by hand if he is able to do so.
Then the patient lies on his back between your hands, and he raises his legs. You then stretch the skin next to the inguinal region upwards, and you make a incision in the skin of the scrotum as long as needed to open the incison. Then sew the sides of the incision with sutures.
The incision should be as long as the testicle can be removed, and then you peel away the skin below the scrotum until, when all sides are exposed, you can insert your index finger.
You should then release the attachment behind the testicle, and then you bend your right hand towards the skin of the scrotum while holding the testicle with it, while pulling up the spermatic fascia with your left hand, and lifting the testicle up towards the incision.
Command the servant to raise the egg above and release all of the adhesion completely from behind and inspect with your finger whether there is anything of the twisted intestines in the white, tough pericardium if you hit something push it into the belly below.
Then you take a needle with a thick thread spun from ten threads and insert it at the last of the pericardium which is under the skin of the testicles next to the incision then you cut the ends of the bending of the thread so that there are four threads. Then you assemble some of them on each other with a stiff strapping and tie the pericardium that we said is under the skin of the testicles with a strong knot from two sides and also wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly so that nothing can reach it. So that it doesn't exhibit a hot tumor and also form a second strapping outside the first strapping away from it less than two fingers and after these two straps leave a capacity of the pericardium which is under the skin of the testicles equal to the thickness of the finger.
So that it doesn't exhibit a hot tumor and also form a second strapping outside the first strapping away from it less than two fingers and after these two straps leave a capacity of the pericardium which is under the skin of the testicles equal to the thickness of the finger. And you cut the rest of it all over and remove it with him, then you make a incision below the skin of the testicles as it flowed blood and the duration as we described above, then use the wool dipped in oil and put it on the wound and use the strap that we described.
And the white pericardium which we said after cutting it with caution to prevent the blood from flowing, as often as this happens, and let the strap fall of its own accord if it fell slowly, then pour hot water on it and carry it what makes it sweat until it falls off.
Then you treat the wound with all the treatment of surgeries so that it heals.
Chapter 66.
in the الريحيّة adder This adder الريحيّة I have not seen anyone dare to treat it with iron, and the earliest mentioned that he makes what was described in the adder which is with دالية That you tie the vessels after the incision on it gently under.
Then make a incision in the middle and treat the tumor with what opens it up until the vessels fall and treat the wound on what we mentioned until he heals,
Chapter 67.
In the hernia which is in the ribs.
It may be that the hernia in the ribs, as we have said, will move to the side and nothing of the intestine will be seen, and if it moved down, it would be slight and would return in all times.
But if time passed, it would increase the incision in the membrane until the intestine and peritoneum fall into the corset, and this is what exposes that extension of the membrane which is in the ribs, as we have said. This is because the membrane extends, then relaxes and the place becomes loose and unsteady, and its treatment is by cauterization as we have presented its description.
It may be treated with iron on this basis, that is, the patient lies on his back between your hands, then you make an incision in the place of the swollen hernia width of three fingers, and then you close the membranes under the skin.
Until, when the white membrane that follows it is exposed, you take a tube and place it on the place of the hernia in the membrane, and press it into the depth of the abdomen, then sew the two places that come out on the side of the tube from the membrane and stick them together with the stitch.
Then take the end of the tube, do not cut the membrane at all, nor touch the ovary or anything else as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal hernia, then treat it with surgical treatments.
If the stitches come off, clean and mend the wound until it heals, because the membrane contracts and does not increase the hernia.
And cauterization is better in this place because it is closer to safety.
Chapter 68.
In the relaxation of the membrane of the testicles.
The hair of the scrotum often relaxes in some people without the muscles inside it relaxing, and this makes its appearance ugly. He who wants to treat this should lie down on his back.
He should cut all the relaxed skin that has relaxed on the thick skin, and then he gathers the two edges together, and if you want to sew first the loose skin with three or four stitches and secure the stitching then cut what is between the stitches.
Then he should treat it with other treatments for wounds until it heals and the stitches fall off.
Chapter 96.
In castration.
Castoration in our religion is forbidden.
For this reason, I should not have mentioned it in my book and yet I mentioned it for two reasons: the first is that it may be in the knowledge of the doctor if he is asked about it and knows how to treat those who suffer from it; and the second is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit.
As in sheep, goats, cats, and similar animals, I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting or by splitting, and the way it is done by cutting is that we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles relax, soften, and become limp.
Then he should hold the animal's testicles with his left hand until they are soft and difficult to feel, and as for castration by splitting and cutting, one should grip the animal's testicles with his left hand then tie the forepaws and make a single cut on each testicle.
Until both testicles come out, and then he should cut them after peeling them off; do not leave any of the wrappings except for the thin wrapping around the blood vessels, and this kind of castration is better than that which is done by sitting.
Because the wound may have left something of the female organs intact, the animal desired intercourse, and then the wound was treated until it healed.
Chapter seventy.
In the treatment of hermaphroditism.
The hermaphrodite may be in men of two types: one is that which appears as follows: a space or hair in the skin between the testicles, resembling a woman's vagina, and sometimes urine may flow from that which is in the scrotum.
And as for women, there is only one type, and it is above the genitals on the pubis, like male small buttocks emerging outside, resembling a man's penis, and both are female-like. The treatment of the three types.
The two types of men and the one type of women should have that excess flesh cut so as to conceal its trace, then treated with treatment like other surgical wounds until it heals. As for the second type of men, from whom urine flows in the scrotum, there is no action or cure, but it is left alone.
Chapter seventy-one.
In cutting the clitoris and flesh resulting from women' vagina.
The clitoris may increase in size beyond the normal amount, distorting its appearance and even becoming as large as a man' penis, and it may spread out like male genitalia, causing it to desire intercourse.
Therefore, the clitoris should be held with your hand or a hook and cut, without being too cruel, especially not cutting into the core, lest it cause bleeding.
Then treat it with surgical treatment until it heals. As for the flesh that grows in the mouth of the uterus, it fills it up.
And it may emerge outside, like a tail. For that reason, some early scholars call it the "tail disease." Therefore, you should cut it as you would cut the clitoris and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 72.
In the treatment of hernia.
Rteg is when a woman's vagina is unpierced or the hole is small and is either naturally born or accidental, the accidental being from a growth of excess flesh.
Or a thin or dense peritoneum, which may be deep in the uterus or in its sides or at the top or bottom, and prevents intercourse and the cord and possibly menstruation. Knowing this is by the examination of the midwife.
If the closure is visible and close, if it is not visible, inspect it with your fingers or a probe. If the closure is made of thin membrane and is close to the labia, make small slits in the labia like the shape of C's with your index fingers then place both of your index fingers together.
The woman lies on her back with her legs open, then she strongly pulls the labia apart to pierce through the thin membrane and the hernia will open up. Then take a cotton wool pad and soak it in oil and put it on the site and have intercourse every day so that the site does not heal again.
If the membrane is thick and dense, it should be cut with a wide razor blade like a paper slice, if the hernia is caused by excess flesh, attach it with hooks and cut it off, and have with you medications that calm down the bleeding without causing pain such as qaqa, shea nut, and gum arabic mixed with egg white.
Then use a wide syringe to prevent the wound from healing quickly, hold it for several days and use a cotton thread to treat the repair in all ways until it heals, and another hernia may grow in the uterus, so you should cut it on this basis.
Unless it is a tumor cancer, because the cancerous tumor that is in the uterus does not تعرض to iron at all,.
Chapter 73.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids, warts, and red blisters that appear in the vulvas of women.
While hemorrhoids are an inflammation of the veins at the anal opening, causing excessive bleeding, they can sometimes transform into warts and we have already discussed their types and symptoms in the previous book. However, we will mention here a few more points regarding them.
What can be treated and what cannot be treated, I say that hemorrhoids and warts, if they are deep inside the uterus and have not appeared through sensation, have no treatment with iron and whatever is like that is treated.
It is necessary for the woman to enter a cold house and then to extend the warts with an awl or a rough cloth, cut them from their roots, and then sprinkle them with something that stops the blood flow when it bleeds from one of the roots without being ground.
Like ghee, the teeth, and the lisan, and others, then hang them on a wall for an hour, then let them fall into cold water, if the bleeding continues, sit her down in a bath of thyme, pomegranate peels, and ferula, and then take wheat flour, knead it with honey and vinegar.
And bandage it on her back, if the blood stops, and otherwise, let it rest against pegs and breasts without a condition, and then take wool, dip it in the juice of thorns or the juice of lamb's tongue or the juice of oak leaves, mixed with ferula syrup, and then bind it to the affected area.
If the lump has calmed down, then treat the affected area with ointment until it heals, and as for the red blisters, they resemble the heads of female genitals, rough in appearance, so they should be cut from what appears on them according to what I mentioned in the warts, both of them, and treat them until they heal.
Chapter 74.
In the bag that drains from the womb.
It may exhibit in the womb various kinds of tumors such as cancer, the stony tumor, ulcers, leprous sores, consumption, hemorrhoids, fissures, warts, and the fiery tumor. I have mentioned all these diseases, their types and symptoms in The Classification.
We should mention in this article the fiery tumor that occurs in the womb if it is one of the tumors that gathers duration. How to drain it with iron? It should be examined. If the pain of the tumor at its beginning is severe, accompanied by pulsation, inflammation, and fever.
And I saw it red If it responded to the sense Test it immediately And deal with it with something that facilitates maturation until when these symptoms subside Then, at that time, it is appropriate for the woman to sit on a chair with two seats and lean on her back.
And she gathers her legs towards the bottom of the womb and her thighs are spread apart and her arms are placed under her knees and ties them with a ribbon that suits her.
Therefore, then the midwife sits from the right side and uses the tool that opens the mouth of the uterus which its image will come later, and it is appropriate if I want to use this tool that I estimate with a rod the depth of the woman's uterus so that what enters from the tool does not exceed the depth of the uterus.
It will hurt the patient If the tool is more than depth It should be placed cushions on the edge of the cervix of the uterus to prevent the whole tool from entering into the depth of the uterus And it should be that the pin which runs in the tool from the upper side.
And you hold the tool and the servant spins the coil so that the cervix of the uterus is opened, if the drain can be touched by hand and is soft and slimy It is appropriate to split it at its head with a wide tweezers Then, when all the fluid drains.
It is necessary that there be a soft thread, immersed in rose oil or green oil with some gripping, and the thread should come out of the cut in the neck of the uterus, and from outside on the uterus and on the groin, pure wool dipped in water that has been boiled with an embottler.
Then it is treated after two days with the ointment that is suitable for that until it heals.
And the uterus and wound may be washed by injecting water and honey, then with water that has been boiled with wood ash or long root, and then return to the ointment, if the abscess is hidden inside the uterus.
It is necessary that you refrain from treating it with iron, but it should be treated with what has been mentioned in the division.
Chapter 75.
In teaching midwives how to treat living fetuses if they come out not in the normal shape.
It is necessary for the midwife to know first the normal shape of childbirth, for its signs are that if you see the woman lower herself down and yearns to smell the air and her desire to breathe easily is reduced by what she is going through in labor.
And the baby's exit is accelerated, so know that this birth is on the natural shape and his exit is on his head with the placenta or hanging from his neck, so if you see these signs, it should be that you squeeze her stomach to make the baby come out quickly.
If he went down on his head, the placenta goes down with him and is cleaned of those impurities well, and except for this natural birth, it is undesirable because the baby might come out on his feet and his hands come out before his head and legs.
One hand or one leg comes out, or the head and hand come out, or it comes out folded, and perhaps it turns upside down, and other forms of deformity, so the midwife should be skilled and gentle with all these things and warn slipping and mistake.
And I explain each one of them and how the trick is in it so that you can learn from it and stand on it, if the baby came out on his head the natural way and became hard on the woman and was difficult for her to give birth and I saw her strength weakened, then I sit her on a chair and order women to keep her.
And I put a turpentine-soaked sponge on her uterus, and then the midwife enters between her fingers with a small scalpel and cuts it with it or she cuts it with her nail until what is in it of moisture comes out and she squeezes the woman's abdomen until the baby comes out.
If it doesn't come out, then the woman should drink milk with oil and then order her to cough and blow her nose with a wand and grab her mouth and nose, and the baby will come out in its hour, if one of the baby's hands came out first, then it should be gently pushed back little by little.
If it doesn't come out, then put the woman on a platform and raise her feet up and shake the platform on the ground and the woman holds onto a cloth so she doesn't fall over when it shakes, if the hands don't come out and the baby is still alive, then cut them off and pull the rest of the baby out.
Or tie his hands with a cloth and pull them gently, because the baby comes out on its feet, if the baby comes out on its feet, then you should push them up then turn the baby a little bit so that it is even, and then take one of its legs and extend it a little bit.
If both legs came out, then order her to cough and blow her nose with a wand, because it will come out, if it didn' t come out with what we described, otherwise, turn the baby a little bit until it is in its natural shape, because it will come out smoothly at that time, if it didn' t come out with everything we described.
Take the saliva of the chelem and the saliva of the mare, and oil from the sheרג, and a dissolved gum, and mix them well in a mortar. Then apply this mixture to the woman's vulva and lower abdomen. Let her sit in warm water until the scrotum feels relaxed.
If you see that he has become relaxed, make a support for him with tar and let him endure it. If the support holds for an hour, then sit her down in a chair. Then sneeze and block her mouth and nose, and squeeze her lower abdomen gently. For the baby will come out at that moment, coming out on its knees and hands.
If he comes out like this, then let him take a little hold of his hands. Then let the woman lie on her back and dangle her thighs down while lying on a bed, holding her hands. And squeeze her stomach gently. Then take away all the pillows that are under her legs so that she is raised up. If the baby does not come out, then take both of her legs and move them violently. Then squeeze above the scrotum a little a little until the baby rises up. And the midwife should then put her hand in and straighten the baby a little a little.
And tell the woman to lie in a position where the baby comes out, coming out with one of its hands raised. Take hold of his hand if you are able to do so. If you cannot do it, then let the woman stand up and walk. If she is not able to walk, then let her lie down.
Let her lie on a bed and shake her legs violently. Then use the tar mix that I have described. If he takes the treatment, then let her sit in a chair. Then sneeze and tell her to lie down.
The baby should come out on its back, with its hands extended and facing the back of its mother's womb. The midwife should then grab his hand, turn him a little, and gently straighten him. If he is straightened, then hold him in front of her face. All this while, you should use the oil and saliva mix that I have described.
Then let her move a little bit, and if she does that, let her sit in the chair and order her to lean to the right side then let her cough with the wand, for it will come out, like the baby comes out straight on the side.
If it has come down to the womb in this state with the placenta, then split the placenta with your fingernail so that it empties of moisture, for if it hangs on the face and neck of the fetus, cut it from the cord so that it doesn't choke and die, and then push the fetus inside until it is as it should be.
And order the woman to cough a few times, for he will come out easily, like twins or many babies, knowing that twins are often born and three or four can live, but this is rare, and five is something strange that doesn't live at all.
And they are surrounded by one placenta, and they separate with the fat barrier between them attached to each other’s umbilical cord, and sometimes it comes out like a single fetus comes out naturally and easily, and they come out in an abominable way as we have described.
If one of them is difficult to give birth to and turns into what we have described as an abnormal shape, then treat it as we have described, and let the midwife be gentle and do whatever comes to her mind with care and caution, transforming in a way that leads to safety.
Describe what is imagined in the womb of babies, and some may fall, one, two, three, four, five, and up to seventeen, and more than ten. It has been confirmed to me that a woman has fallen seventeen, and another has fallen fifteen, all imagined as such.
With the estimation of the All-Knowing, this is all what the midwife should know; perhaps it will fall on her one day, so she should deal with it as it deserves.
Chapter 67.
In removing the dead fetus.
If you have treated the dead fetus as mentioned in the division of treatment, and it did not come out, and the matter requires that you work with your hand, then you should look. If the woman is healthy in strength and there is nothing from the symptoms which is feared on her that damage will occur, she should lie down on a bed on her back.
And her head should be tilted towards the lower side, and her legs raised, and a servant should hold her from both sides, or tie her to the bed so that her body does not fall when the fetus is removed.
Then, it is moistened with the lubricants and saliva of the khammi and the henna and wheat seed, then the midwife coats her hands with these lubricants and salivas, then she enters her into the uterus gently, then she looks for a place to insert the hooks of the fetus, and the suitable places for that, .
Look, if the fetus is coming down on his head, he will be hooked in his eyes or in his back or in his mouth or in his jaw or under his beard or in his larynx or in the places close to the ribs or under the scapulae.
And if it is coming down on his legs, then in the pubic bone and the middle ribs, and it is necessary that she holds the hook with her right hand and makes a bend with her fingers between the fingers of her left hand, and she enters the hand gently and she inserts a hook into some of those places which we mentioned.
Until she reaches an empty thing, then she inserts a hook behind it, or a third one if it is needed, so that the pull is equal and does not lean towards one side, and then she extends herself equally, and it should not be on a straight line only, but it should be moved in all directions.
To make it come out easily, as is done with the tooth when it is trapped, and it is necessary to grease some fingers of the midwife with the lubricant, and she enters them from one side to turn what is caught, if some of the fetus came out, then she moves the hooks to other places.
She should raise [the instrument] a little, do this until the whole baby comes out, if a hand came out before anything else and couldn't be pushed back because it was compressed in [the instrument], then she should wrap a cloth around it and then pull it out until all of it comes out, then she should cut it off.
Either in the wrist joint or in the elbow, and so she should do in the other hand and in the legs, if the head of the baby was large and there was pressure on its exit or there was water gathered in his head, then she should enter between the fingers with a surgical knife.
And split it with it so that the water comes out or she inserts it with the machine which is called the mash'dakh which comes with the image of all the machines in the door after this.
So she should do if the baby's head was very large by default, it is necessary that she splits the skull or crushes it with the mash'dakh as we said then she should take out the bones with cleats, if the head came out and was compressed at the collarbone then split it until the moisture that is in the chest spills out.
If it is attached to the chest then he should cut on what you can, if it was lower abdomen and warm or there was milk in it, then she should loosen it until the moisture flows out of it.
If the baby was on his feet, then drawing him out is easy and making it go to the mouth of the womb is simple, if it was compressed at the abdomen or chest, then she should draw it out with a cloth that you have wrapped your hand, split the abdomen or chest until the water flows from them.
If she has taken out all the organs and the head came back and was stuck, then the woman should enter with her left hand, if the womb's mouth was open, she should enter her hand into the neck of the womb and ask for it with it and pull it out with her fingers to the mouth of the womb and then she should enter a hook or two hooks in it and pull him out with them.
If the mouth of the womb has joined with a hot wound, it is not appropriate to put pressure on it, but it is then necessary to use poultices of wet and oily things and bandages, and sit in water that relaxes and moistens.
If the fetus is on its side, and it can be adjusted, then use what we mentioned for the living fetus; if not, then cut it and remove it, and it is not appropriate to leave any of the placenta inside at all, so when you finish treating it, then use what we mentioned from the treatment of hot tumors that occur in wombs.
If there is bleeding, then let her lie in the water that constricts and use all the treatment; I have seen a woman who had conceived and then her fetus died inside her, and then she conceived again.
Then the second fetus also died, so she had a tumor in her uterine wall that swelled and opened and released pus; she was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal, so I put some strong remedies on it that draw strongly.
Then a bone came out, and after a few days another bone came out; I was amazed by this, as the uterus is not a bone-containing place; I thought that it might be bones from the dead fetus, so I examined the wound and took out many bones from the head of the fetus.
I continued following up on her until I took out many bones from it, and the woman was in the best of health; she lived like this for a long time, with pus that moved from the wound; I have brought this rare case here.
Because it contains knowledge and assistance for the doctor who tries to treat it by his own hands.
Chapter 77
In it are pictures of the tools that he needs to remove the fetus.
Image of a spiral that opens the mouth of the uterus:
This binding, which is equal in length to the books, has a roller at each end of the wooden blocks. However, this roller should be softer than the binding and made of either boxwood or pine. The width of each block should be the thickness of two fingers.
These two strings, directed towards the finger, should be of the same length as the wooden blocks. Their width should be that of a finger and their length should be half a span or more, and these two strings, which pass through the middle of the blocks.
These are the two strings that enter the mouth of the womb to open it when you turn the rollers, a machine similar to the one described above, softer and lighter: .
They are made of boxwood or pine in the shape of hooks, however, they have two strings at each end, as you see. The length of each string is about a span and its width is that of a finger. If you want to open the womb with them,.
Sit the woman on a bed, with her legs spread apart. Then, insert these two strings into the womb while holding the bottom of the apparatus between her thighs. Open your hand with the apparatus as you would with hooks, as much as you want to open the womb.. Until the midwife makes what she wants, a picture of another roller mentioned by the earliest: .'
A picture of a roll that rolls the baby out..
A picture of a hook that hooks the baby's head..
It is similar to a pair of scissors, with teeth at the end, as you see. It can be made in the shape of a rectangle, like a hook, so that it has teeth like the teeth of a saw, to cut and slice with: .'
A picture of a roll, a pair of scissors, or a hook?.
A picture of a fishhook..
This fishhook should be slightly thicker to prevent it from breaking when you pull the baby out with it. A hook with two prongs:  .
Two wide scissors for cutting the fetus:
These machines, all of which are numerous and varied, and each one that is more of its type and prepared by the maker will complete his work faster and be better in people's eyes for its merit; do not underestimate a machine that may be useful to you.
Chapter 78.
In removing the placenta.
If the placenta retains after childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold her breath then cough her up with a candlestick and tighten your hand on her mouth and nostrils if it comes out like this; otherwise, cut it off.
And pierce the cover with a hole in which you put dried grass for the mouth of the uterus, such as fenguing, thyme, mint, marjoram, caraway, and basil or some of them; dip it in water and heat it on fire, then place a silver tube on the hole in the cover and the other end in the uterus's mouth.
And hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the uterus, and then cough as we mentioned above; if the placenta still does not come out after this treatment, order the midwife to dip her left hand in sheep fat or line snot.
Then check for it with your hand and carefully examine the placenta if it is attached to the bottom of the uterus; if so, put the hand on what we described until you find the placenta; then gently pull it a little bit at a time.
So as not to fall out of the uterus when pulled too hard, but should be transferred gradually to the sides right and left, then increase the amount of pulling; for it will respond at that time and get rid of the adhesion. If the uterus' mouth is contracted, we have already described treatment with coughing and the candle, as well as grass.
If it doesn't come out with all we've described, never be violent with her; but rather, you should tie what has come out at the mouth of the uterus to the woman's thigh, and then inject the tetanus serum, as it will ferment her after a few days.
And are resolved and come out, except that if it becomes rotten, it rises from it an odious smell to the stomach and head, and this hurts the patient; so it is necessary to use smoke that suits.
Therefore, and some of the first tried smokeless charcoal and dried fig, image machine which evaporated by woman when zadrina and placenta and so on:.
صنع from lead like a cup or is made of copper placed the thin end in the face and the wide end on fire and incense made on the coals held until goes that scent and repeat it,.
Chapter 99.
In the treatment of the seat not punctured.
May be born many boys and their seats are not punctured may سدّه thin chytum in the midwife should pierce that chytum with her finger or else bind it with a sharp forceps and beware of the muscle do not touch it,.
Then put on him a blanket dipped in the drink and oil then treat with ointments until he recovers, if you fear that will close place in the hole a tube of lead for days and remove when wants the child to poop..
And may present سدّ seat also from melting wound or swelling in that case should be cut that merger then treated with what we have mentioned of treatment and the wax,.
Chapter 80.
In the treatment of ulcers which occur in the lower.
The ulcers which occur in the lower is a complication and thickness happens near the seat of outside or in the space of one of the sides and be one ulcer or more..
If this complication has lasted opened and ran from it moisture water white or pus thin and may be of these ulcers is passed to the navel and intestines be non-passed, the passed may know what is known by what comes out of her poop and wind when using patient pooping..
And perhaps from it will come worms, and may be there are vents if they are permeated into the bladder and into the urethra. And may be from them permeated to the hip joint and to the buttocks, and what is known as a vent permeated into the rectum also from non-permeated.
And put your index finger into the rectum and insert a fine probe into the anal canal if there is no twist in the anal canal, because if there is a twist in it, then insert a thin probe made of lead or iron. If there was a loop in the anal canal, then insert a thin probe made of lead or iron into it.
until you feel the probe or hair in your finger, because if you do not feel it at all and nothing emerges from the opening of the rectum, neither feces nor gas nor odor as we have said, then know that it is not permeated and hurry to treat.
and if the anal canal is permeated into the bladder or into the urinary tract, the sign of this is the emission of urine and its inability to adhere to the area with medications, while if it is permeated into the hip joint or the buttocks, its sign is that the probe reaches there.
if there is no loop towards the bone and there is pain in a particular direction, and it always emits pus, and cannot be treated with ointment or medication, these permeated anal openings do not heal at all.
and its treatment is futile, useless effort for those who seek it from ignorant doctors, and the one that is not permeated and is not chronic, it will heal with iron as I have described and as has been experienced. This is done by lying on your back with your hands beneath you.
and he should raise his legs up and tilt his hips towards his stomach, then insert the anal probe of copper or lead if there is a loop in the anal canal so that you know where the probe ends, and if the patient feels it towards the rectum, then you should insert your index finger into the rectum.
If you feel that the probe has penetrated your finger by itself, exposed without your noticing any callus or flesh between your finger and it, then be certain that it has penetrated and do not exhaust yourself in it, for there is no healing from it as we have said.
And they say that it heals in some people in the rarity, and from the treatment which is hoped for its benefit that you warm a thin iron on the size of the nostril as it was mentioned before and insert it heated in the nostril until it reaches about the anus then bring it back twice or three times.
until you know that it has burned all those excesses of meat that is twisted which resembles a bird's feather tube then treat it with a wet thread in oil until that burned meat comes out and then treat it with the paste which is welded, for it to heal.
Otherwise, it will not heal with anything else, and if you inserted the probe and it did not penetrate your finger in the anus, and there was a thick veil of meat or skin between it and the probe, and you saw the nostril just below the surface of the skin, then split the skin from the beginning of the nostril. And you go through the split with the probe while it is in the nostril until you reach where the end of the probe ends and the probe comes off and falls, then you clean that twisted meat which resembles a bird's feather tube and do not leave any of it.
Then treat it with the paste which is welded until it heals, if blood prevails and separates you from your work to cut off that meat, then the best thing you can do and the fastest benefit is to chop it with fire or a sharp medicine because burning that excess meat has two good effects.
And cut the blood and dry up the moisture, then treat it with a wet thread in oil or burned powder with oil until the place suppurates and that burnt meat comes out in the pus, and then treat the wound at that time with the paste which is welded for hard meat.
The medicines that have constriction and drying: if he has recovered, there is no return, because if the naser [a surgical instrument] has reached the depth of the anus and is distant from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
If you sense a barrier between your finger and the anus, as if there is a veil of fat or meat between them, and it is close to the entry point, then the work on it is only on the path of hope and desire, that is, you use one of three methods: either you sew it as we mentioned.
Or you tear it until you reach its depth so that you can secure the use of threads and treat it from close up, and do not overdo the tearing so as not to cut the muscle that surrounds the anus, causing the patient to defecate without his will, and then treat him with what we mentioned above, perhaps he will heal as we said.
Or you pass that barrier and pierce it near the anus as we mentioned above, either with a needle or another sharp instrument, and then clean all those tangled meats that are in the tear as much as you can by scrutinizing.
Then ram the wound together with the tear and the upper mouth until it heals, and the naser may remain open inside the anus, which is lighter on the patient, or the naser may burst due to this quality.
If you insert the needle in the naser, and it is on one side of the anus near the surface of the body with the skin and the ring around the anus, then take a needle with a pointed end like a shoe maker's needle.
Then insert a twisted string of five strings or something similar in it, and then insert the needle with the string in the naser until it reaches its depth; if it has reached the edge of the anus from within the body near, then take another string.
Then remove the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the anus and bringing out the end of the thread, gather both ends together and tie them tightly and leave it for a day or two, so whenever the thread cuts through the flesh, tighten it tightly until that flesh which is between the two threads falls off, then treat the wound until it heals and gets better.
If the mouth of the anus is not open, open it however you can, except that it be very deep, so you have no right to do that in order not to cut the muscle, then do with it as we mentioned until it heals.
The shurka scalpel used to cut the anal openings should be very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other so that it does not cut what is not needed as you see.
Chapter 81.
In the hole of hemorrhoids from which blood flows, cutting it and treating fissures.
The hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the rectum, resembling onions or grapes, and from them there are small and large ones, and blood flows from them all the time.
And some are one and many, and are outside the rectum and in its extremities, except that these which are outside the rectum are usually very dry, from it a little yellow water or a little blood flows constantly, and their color is the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is inside the rectum is to order the patient to defecate and to tighten until the rectum comes out to you, and you see the warts, so you grip them with tweezers or grab them with your fingernail, and then cut them at their roots, if they do not stop flowing due to their moisture and relaxation.
And peel it with a rough cloth or a piece of softened bread, and pull it with your fingers, then cut it, and then sprinkle on it some sharp particles so that it does for it the role of cauterization or burn it as mentioned in the chapter of cauterization.
Then treat her with all the remedies until she heals, if her anus does not respond to come out, inject the patient with a syringe containing some stinging to wash what is in the anus and to come out quickly when the patient defecates, so tie the warts that are outside of the anus and order them gently easily.
This is the case when you take her with your fingernail or hang her on a hook and cut it, then treat her with what we have mentioned until she heals, and if you do not like cutting with iron, you should use her hole in this way: take a twisted thread and put it in a needle.
Then draw the wart up and pierce it with the needle at its root from the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread under the needle, which is obstructing it, and tighten the knot well, then tie the thread and remove the needle, do this for all the warts, and leave one of them without piercing.
To let blood flow from it, then put a cloth dipped in rose oil or kohl on the anus and place it on the anus and order the patient to be quiet, then leave him alone until it falls down, and when it falls down, treat the warts with ointments and all the remedies until he heals.
As for the treatment of fissures, it often occurs from dry skin and locking up of the humors; so if it becomes chronic and does not respond to any treatment, it should be shaved with a surgical blade or your fingernail until it becomes moist and the upper scale that prevents it from healing is removed.
Then treat it until it heals as it should, and if it does not heal, repeat the process more severely than the first time until it bleeds, but yes, and then treat it because it will heal.
Chapter 82
In the treatment of inverted claws, non-inverted thorns, dry warts, and nail.
The nail is a rounded knot on the color of the body, resembling a nail head; it is found throughout the body, especially at the base of the feet and fingers, and it causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to split what is around the nail and grab a chisel or a hook and pull it from its root, then treat it; And if you want, sew it on as mentioned in the previous section. As for dry warts, each one is a small, rough, knotted lump roundly raised above the surface of the body.
It often appears in the hands of children; its treatment is to extend the wart and cut or bore it with a silk thread or a hair, so that it falls; And if you wish, you can burn it with fire or sharp medicine.
Warts may be removed with the tool I mentioned to you when treating ants; as for the ant, it is a small knotted lump, rough and thick on the surface of the body, going deep into the flesh; and if it is exposed to cold, it feels like ant bites.
It is found in the entire body, and most of it is in the hands; its treatment is to take a tube from an eagle's feather or a hawk's feather, and make that tube on the ant until it surrounds the tube's sides, then turn your hand with the tube so that what is around the ant is split.
And make it go deep into the flesh and remove the ant from its root; and if you wish, you can do that with a copper or iron tube in this form:".
The upper part of the tube is tightly closed, facilitating its grip and twisting with the fingers; and if you wish, you can burn the ant as mentioned in the previous section on burning warts.
Chapter 83.
In pictures of tools used for injection for issues with diarrhea, constipation, and cholera.
The syringe may be made of silver, or of copper or brass that has been hammered out, or of cast bronze; and with this machine there are made both small and large ones, according to who uses them. The one that is used for treating small children should be small, and those whose seats are narrow or painful should have very soft syringes; the image of a large syringe:
The top part of the container to which the tube is attached should be wide for this reason, it has a partition where the tube is tied as you see and its lower end which enters the rectum should be smooth and very thin on one side, with two holes on one side and one hole on the other.
The size of the hole should be slightly thicker than the thickness of the rod, and the tube in which the medicines are made should be like a small pillow; its diameter is one handspan.
Then many holes are drilled as it turns, and the distance between each hole is the thickness of a finger; then a thick thread is inserted into those holes, about ten threads or more, and the tube is gathered up like a pillow. So when he puts medicine in it, it is tightened at the top of the syringe between the two stones with a firm grip, and this is an image of the tube and hole:
And the way to inject it is to fill the rectum or bladder with the medicine while it is heated to the limits of the patient's tolerance, and be careful that it is not very hot or very cold; then the patient should lie on his back and spread his legs.
Then a blanket or sheet is placed under him, and the top of the syringe is greased with grease or egg white or saliva of the goat or something like that, then it is gently inserted into the rectum; then the servant of the tube takes both hands together and squeezes it firmly so that all that is in the syringe is emptied into the intestines.
Then the syringe is removed and the patient's legs are tied to the wall, and if the medicine prompts him to leave then he should try to stand as much as possible. If he sleeps all night, it will be more effective in healing, because if injected into a diarrhea disease and hurry him to come out, let the syringe repeat until it heals.
If it is in the rectum or painful lumps, let the syringe be very gentle, smooth from the syringes used to inject children, and this is a picture of a gentle syringe stretched on its skin: .
Chapter 84
In treating injuries.
I have mentioned in the division of treating what is like cauterization, and I will remember it here in treatment with the hand and drugs to perfection, I say: Surgery varies depending on the thing that causes the surgery and depending on the location of the wound.
The things that cause surgery are numerous, such as a stone in the bladder or a piece of a sword or a knife or an arrow or a stick or an arrow, and many other things.
As for surgeries according to body locations, there are wounds that occur on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver, and other organs.
I am describing the treatment of some surgeries to make them a standard and a law for all surgeries, and I begin with simple head injuries because the compound will be mentioned in the first chapter of this book.
I say that when a simple wound occurs in the head and it is not a bone fracture, I examine it carefully to see if it is a stone or anything like it, and if the skin had only been torn, and the wound was large, and I feared for the patient's life the occurrence of a hot tumor, so hurry up and wash it with water on the spot. Do not delay doing that, and take his blood according to his strength if it does not prevent bleeding, especially if the blood that comes out of the wound is small. And let the bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wound.
He should beware of filling his stomach with food and drink, and of heavy foods; for if the discharge is obstructed, he should eat less and not eat meat or drink alcoholic beverages. If there is a swelling on the wound, bind it with a cotton cloth dipped in rosewater alone, or with the drink containing astringents.
If the swelling is hot, bind it to the wound if the flesh is still soft and has not been changed by the air's virulent effect, which I will describe for you shortly. But if it has been changed by the air, apply some ointments.
until it discharges pus, then treat it until it heals. If the wound is large and has been caused by a sword or similar object and its edges do not join together with the surrounding tissue, sew it up as I will describe for you in sewing abdominal wounds.
If the skin has been torn back and is exposed to the bone, but its hold is only in a few places, cut it off and then treat the wound with medicines that will grow new tissue to replace the skin. Advise the patient to eat foods that are nutritious and will help the healing process, such as meat, eggs, and other solid foods.
If there is putrefaction in the skin but it is not attached to the bone, cut off the rotten part and throw it away, then treat the wound. If there is a vein or a sweat gland that is bleeding and will not stop bleeding despite treatment, locate the artery.
If you hit it, but it does not fall off easily, cut it off with a scalpel and bind it up. If these wounds are small and simple, you only need to treat them by applying this powder (the "ذرور" mentioned earlier) to them while they discharge their blood.
Before the air changes it, the recipe for the "ذرور" (powder) is to take two parts of licorice, three parts of calamus (a type of spice), and one part of ground chalk or slaked lime (the last two are astringents). Mix these ingredients well, then grind them into a fine powder. Apply this powder to the wound and tightly wrap it so that it sticks firmly in place.
It hardens with blood, and is then tied up with sutures above, and left alone until it heals, because the medication will not come off until it has healed. It can also be done with lime alone if you do not have any mint or calamus.
This can also be done with two nails in many major surgeries if he perfects its position and ties it up, and the wounds are soft with their blood unless they have changed with the air. But if they have changed with the air somewhat, especially if it is in summer.
So there is no benefit in the placement of these threads to treat him with some of the pastes that thicken or carry on his bread porridge made from water and honey until it drains pus, then treat him with all the treatment until he recovers.
But if the wound has broken a bone and it is easy, then pull it with the splint. I have mentioned treating broken heads in what is renewed in the treatment of neck surgery. If the wound is in the neck, there is no difference in the treatment between it and a head wound if it is simple.
But if he has cut a nerve in the neck or a vein, there is no way to treat it except to avoid treating it with something that tightens it sharply such as black pepper and salt because they hurt the nerve and stimulate it.
And nothing is placed on the wound that is cold at all because the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection with the brain, which is the most honorable of organs, and it will be treated with soft drugs such as washed linseed with water several times, soaked with oil or rose water and myrrh.
If it has been washed with fresh water and all types of stones on this characteristic and wet pastes, but if the wound is large, use sutures or bandage his lips with sutures then treat him until he recovers.
If the wound has a depth and there is an indent in its lower part where pus has gathered, pak it in the lowest part of the wound, if the blood vessel has been severed and you have noticed the blood flowing, then amputate or ligature or stitch according to need.
If the wound has cut through some or all of the tonsils and the jawbones are sound, then stitch the skin together on top of the tonsils without touching the tonsils, level and return it to its natural shape, then tighten it firmly and leave it for a few days.
Then treat it with remedies that include astringents and drying agents until it heals, if the wound has affected the bone, then soften it, if there are any bone shards, then remove them all or as much as possible, and if you cannot, then leave it until the wound heals and the shard comes out easily.
If the wound is soft, sprinkle on it the powder we have described, if it has rotted and become bone, then treat it with what is mentioned in the section on chest and shoulder surgery.
If it is a stab wound from a spear or a knife and you see that it has a depth, then look out for breath coming from the wound, this means that the patient is still alive, so know that this is a fatal wound, and if it doesn't have a depth and is soft with blood, then don't sprinkle on it the powder or tighten it to prevent the blood from collecting in its depth.
So it will turn towards the heart and kill the patient, but make sure you use a sticky poultice that can absorb the fluids that come out, and let the patient sleep on top of the wound.
Let it drain, if it has been three or more days since the injury and there is no swelling, palpitations or difficulty breathing, and you see that his general condition is good, then know that the wound is healed, treat it with sutures and continue with the treatment to ensure full recovery.
If it is difficult to see him and always extend the bandage, then know that he has become a nasir and treated him from his gate. The sick person on the wound will not flow what is gathered in him, even if he has gone to the chest or back wound, treat him with what has been mentioned before of sewing.
If he is large or with seeds, if he is small, because if it has affected the bone and cut off some of its fragments, search for the wound and hurriedly remove those fragments if they are cleansing, but if they are not cleansing, leave them until .
It dries up the wound, because it is easier to remove them, and as for other wounds that occur in all organs, their rule in treatment is what we have mentioned,.
Chapter 58
In surgery of the abdomen and exit of the intestine and sewing it up.
The patch that exposes the abdomen may be large or medium or small, and the large one may exit from it one intestine or several intestines, so introducing them and sewing them up is more difficult and harder..
And the small patch may also make it difficult from another aspect, so it is necessary to make it easier to introduce the intestine into its place as soon as possible, because if it does not hurry, it will swell and thicken, making it difficult to introduce it, so for this reason it has become the best of patches, the medium patch, because it does not make it difficult to introduce the intestine as in these two types..
And know that sewing the abdomen on four faces, two are general and fit in sewing the abdomen and all other surgeries of the body, and the other two are special and work in all surgeries except they are more specialized in sewing the abdomen..
And I will describe them to you one by one with explanation and clarification, I say if it is a small wound that has come out of some of the intestine and made it difficult to return it, this is due to two faces either because of the smallness of the patch as we have mentioned or because the intestine was swollen due to the cold air..
If so, it should be warmed by dipping a sponge or wet cloth in warm water alone, or if cooked therein, the aloes and myrrh and saffron and senna, and let it be released with it until it softens up.
It may be done with a drink which contains it, and this is better than water alone in softening up the wind; if you see that the wind has softened, then wet the intestines with cooked beef or mutton, because this will facilitate its entry with ease.
If, after this treatment, it cannot be returned, then make a small cut in the cloth with the tool that you use to cut the navels, and the first treatment is better if it can be done; but it is forced to cut only out of necessity and when the means fail, and here is a picture of the tool:
It should have one end curved and limited, and the other not limited; and its thin end should not be as sharp as the blade of a needle but rather slightly flat, and it is an instrument like a small chisel, as you see; so if the wound expands and enters the intestines, then it should return to its natural shape.
And its special place if you can do so is better, and if the cloth is wide and is in the lower abdomen, then the patient should lie on his back and make his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper abdomen, he should make his head and chest higher than his bottom.
And the same applies if the cloth is wide and is in one side of the abdomen, so make your purpose and intention always the side where the surgery is higher than the other side; thus it should be used in major surgeries and in medium surgeries.
As for minor surgeries, you should place it according to what is possible for you, and then prepare a helper with you who holds the cloth as a whole with his hands, and brings it together, and then reveals it little by little for the person who stitches.
This is a feature of the general suture: that you take an needle or several needles according to the width of the wound, then leave from one side of the rupture as much as the thumb's thickness and pierce a needle without inserting thread into the skin on both sides. You take the skin's sides and the fascia inside, so that they become four strands, then you tighten them with a double thread around the needle from both sides until the wound's edges come together tightly.
Then you leave as much as the thumb' thickness and pierce another needle, then interlace it with the thread as you did with the first needle, thus doing so as many times as needed to finish stitching the whole wound. The needles should be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin.
This is because the thin needles cut through meat quickly, and the thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin, so the needles should be medium-sized to avoid this. You shouldn't pierce the needle close to the edge of the skin, near the flesh.
So that the meat doesn't tear quickly and the wound opens before it heals, nor should you place the stitches too far apart so that the wound doesn't heal properly. You should cut the tips of the needles to prevent them from hurting the patient when he sleeps, and make him some pads of cotton fabric on each side to hold the needle's ends.
You leave it until you know that the wound has healed properly. This type of suturing with needles is most suitable for small surgeries as it may only require one or two needles, or something like that.
Or the second general type of suture is to gather all four sides, that is, the skin' sides and the fascia inside, in one stitch with a needle having a slightly loose thread at a moderate thickness, then you return the needle to its starting point from the same side.
Let the thread be threaded from above the wound so that the stitching is according to the stitching of the kaisa which is tightened with it and put between each stitching and stitching after the thickness of the little finger, and this stitching everyone knows it.
With this stitching, he had performed a surgery on a man in his abdomen who had been stabbed with a knife. The wound was more than a handspan deep and had broken out of the man's intestine by two handspans from the middle intestine. The wound was in the middle of the abdomen.
He had left it alone for about twenty-four hours after he had brought his intestine out from the wound, then the wound healed in about fifteen days, and he treated it until it healed. He lived afterwards for many years, managing all his affairs, and the doctors judged that he would never heal.
And it is strange that I did not treat it with ointment, because I was in a place where there was nothing of drugs, so I would put old cotton on the wound twice a day and I took care to wash it with honey water until it healed.
As for one of the two kinds of special stitching, I will describe it on the text of Galen: that you begin the stitching from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside; so if it passes through the skin and through the muscle going straight along the length of the abdomen.
I left the edge of the peritoneum on the side that I inserted the needle into; and I inserted the needle through the edge of the other side from inside to outside in the margin of the mesentery; and if I passed it, I passed it again in the same edge of the mesentery from outside to inside.
And let go of the edge of the peritoneum that is in this side, and insert the needle into the edge of the other side from inside to outside; and as you pass it, pass it again in the same edge of the mesentery from outside to inside until it passes through all of it, .
Then also begin from this very side and draw a line with the edge which is of the peritoneum in the other side and take out the needle from the skin which is near it then return her in that skin and draw a line with the edge of the peritoneum which is in the other side with this edge from the edges.
And take her out from the skin which is of him, and do that again and do it several times to the point that you have sewed all the surgery on this example, and the sentence which describes this stitching that you stitch the stitches of the tailors for the fur.
By stitching the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the skin and leaving it once from the other side until you finish, and as for the second type of special stitching which he also mentioned, this is his words in text.
Is that he sews her on an example of what people of the healers sew, that is to say they gather each part to its counterpart by nature so they join the edge of the peritoneum to its edge and the margin of the skin to its edge, and that is what I describe for you.
It is necessary that you stitch the needle in the margin of the skin which is near you from the outside and take it inside alone and leave the edges of the peritoneum then return the needle and take her inside from the outside to the inside on the edges of the peritoneum both then return her also.
And take her inside from the inside to the outside in the margin of the skin other which is in the opposite side, and this kind of stitching is better than the general easy stitching and is the stitching which I mentioned before, so this is the words of Galen textually, and some have said that two needles may be enough for the abdominal stitching. That you introduce in them a single thread and begin to introduce the needle from you and take it to the other side and introduce the other needle from the opposite side him so that he takes her from you according to the stitching of the tailors equally.
And know that the rupture, if it is in the middle of the abdomen, then stitching it is more difficult than in all other places of the abdomen; and as for the treatment of the wound, its rule in its treatment is like the rule of all wounds, that is, you have realized the wound wet with blood before changing it by air and returned the bowel and drew it and secured it, so carry on it the salt grains.
If the wound has been changed by air, then carry on it some creams that you prepare until it suppurates and the threads fall off and the peritoneum and the serosa are healed, and then treat it as you treat all wounds until it heals.
If you do not have medicines, carry on it from the moment it begins to suppurate old cotton wool and replace it twice a day as I have told you until it heals, for you do not need any other treatment in most cases if the wounds are simple; but if you fear that the wound will share the pain of the main organs.
It is necessary that you dip a soft cloth in moderate heat oil or rose water and put it around the places between the ribs and the armpits, because he sometimes feels pain or fermentation in his intestines; so often presents this, then inject him with a black fluid solution.
Especially if the fermentation has reached in the intestines and became a piercing wound to his belly, and know that whatever was of the intestines thick, it is easier to heal; and whatever was of them thin, it is more difficult to heal.
And as for the small intestine, which is known as the jejunum, it does not accept healing from a surgery that occurs in it at all, because of its great number of vessels and their bones and the thinness of its fabric and its proximity to the nerve tissue; and if the thi.
If it has passed a period and it has turned green or black, then it is necessary to tighten it with a thread above the place where it turned black so that it does not bleed blood because there are veins and arteries in the thरब; then cut what is under this ribbon.
Make the ends of the thread connected from below the surgery, remove them out of it to make it easier for you to throw and pull them out when the hernia drops and the wound gets infected. He mentioned the wound that appears in the intestine, while if a hole appeared in the intestine and was small...
In some people, it may heal on its own because I have seen a man who was stabbed in the stomach with a spear, and the wound was to the right of the stomach. I treated him, but I did not expect him to recover. So I kept tending to him until it healed and the site closed up. But when I saw that the site had closed up, I was afraid for the patient that a bad accident might happen to him inside his abdomen, but no such thing happened at all, and he remained in the best of health. It is true that he can eat, drink, have sexual relations, go to the bathroom, and take a shower in his service. Some experienced people say that when there is a small hole in the intestine, it should be sewed up in this way.
This is a method that involves taking large ants with big heads, gathering the ends of the wound together, then placing one of these ants on top of the wound with its mouth open, and if it bites down and tightens its jaws, the head will stick to the wound and not come loose, and then another ant is placed near the first one.
Continue doing this with several ants according to the size of the wound, and then sew up the wound, and those heads will remain stuck in the intestine until the intestine heals completely, and the intestine can also be sewn up with thin thread.
This is the one that is released from the attached intestine after entering a needle, which is done by taking one end of this thread from the intestine and stretching it loosely, then tying a thin twine of cotton thread to its end, and then inserting that thread into the needle. And here the mesenteric omentum is sewn to the intestine, and then returned to the cavity; this kind of sewing with omentum and mesentery is done out of hope and expectation.
If the puncture is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy or cure for it.
Chapter 86.
In treating colds and nosebleeds.
Know that every wound or tumor, if it becomes chronic and age-old and turns into a abscess that constantly releases pus, is called a ulcer by definition; and we call it a cold sore.
It is, in fact, a complex, tangled, hard white mass that does not cause pain; it has a cavity like the cavity of a feather.
This is why some of them have named it feather; and sometimes it is moist, constantly releasing pus, and may occasionally stop releasing pus; and this moisture may be abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
I have mentioned in the classification, when discussing surgeries, that if a ulcer does not heal and does not grow hair, it is because of one of nine reasons: one is because there is a shortage of blood in the body; another is because it is old and obsolete; another is because there is hard flesh inside it and on its edges, which prevents healthy tissue from growing. Or because it is very dirty and the ulcer itself is putrid, and the material that supplies it is of poor quality; or because the treatment does not suit it; or because there has been a pandemic plague in the area; or because of a specific characteristic of the town.
Or because it is very dirty and the ulcer itself is putrid, and the material that supplies it is of poor quality; or because the treatment does not suit it; or because there has been a pandemic plague in the area; or because of a specific characteristic of the town. As well as being displayed in the city of Сараگosa, where diseases are difficult to mature and healing ulcers is slow by nature; or because there is a bone or several bones inside it; all of which I have explained in detail in the classification.
It is imperative that I familiarize you with the treatment of nasors and colds that occur by way of hand work, know that nasors may occur in all body organs; some end in great veins or arteries, or in a nerve.
or to peritoneum or to intestine or to bladder or to rib of the ribs or to spine of the back or to joint of the compound joints such as hand and foot; some lead to close of a chief organ and so forth.
So, whatever nasors are of this nature, they are difficult to heal from and require a lot of effort and knowledge to treat; if there are any nasors that have not reached the aforementioned locations that I have begged and hoped for a cure for them.
And I want you to arrive at knowing that; take a copper or iron probe if the nasor passes straight on, examine it with it, and if there is curvature in the nasor, examine it with a thin piece of lead because lead softens its body.
It will separate at the entry and turn towards curvature; if the nasor has many openings that you cannot determine with the probe, inject one of its openings with a drop; because the moisture you inject it with will flow towards the other openings and will flow.
of it, and then continue the inspection as much as you can to determine if there is a bone or nerve; or if the nasor is hollowed out or close by or a single nasor with many openings; stand on all of this with your full power from inspection with a weak pulse and pain when you press your hand on the site.
and such like of indications and causes that occur for the swelling, so if you have stood on all of this as a reality; then move on to the treatment with confidence; which is that you examine if it is; and if it is, then know that there are many types of treatments; one of them is that you cut open the area where the nasor is located and drain its contents, and another type is that you make a small hole in the area where the nasor is located and insert a probe into it to see if it reaches any nerve or vein.
The abscess should be made visible, either close by or in a healthy location away from any joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or one of the sites mentioned above. Then, as described previously, the abscess should be opened and the pus and rotten meat removed, along with any excess tissue.
And what grows in the mouth, such as meat or a wart, and treats it until it heals. If the abscess is far down and on a straight path, then it should be opened at a depth that allows for easy access, and then all its rotten meat should be removed.
Then use the twisted sutures in acute medicines and insert them into the bottom of the abscess, using iron to keep them in place. Do this several times until the acute medicine eats away at all the corruption in the bottom of the abscess.
Then force it with ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh until it heals. If this doesn't work, continue with the previous description. If the cause of the abscess is a bone and it seems possible to treat it, then open and cut it as described above.
Skin or bone, as we mentioned earlier. If the abscess reveals some bone that is damaged and blackened, then scrape it until all the damage is gone, then treat it to promote healing, and if it doesn't heal and continues to drain pus, then do the same thing over and over again.
Know that you have not reached all the extent of removing corruption, so reveal everything on it again and carefully scrape and clean it out, then force it to heal. If it heals, great! If not, know that there is more deep-seated corruption to be addressed, so reveal everything again.
Carefully scrape and clean it out to the best of your ability. If the damaged bone was small, then you can carefully remove it with soft claws that are suitable for this purpose.
If there are many bones, then carefully remove them all, leaving no bone behind. If there are some ligaments in the way that don't pose a risk when cut, then cut those ligaments and any excess meat.
If you are unable to remove the bones at the right time, carry on with the wound until it has become rotten and leave it for a few days until the meat and ligaments around those bones have also rotted. Keep the wound open so that the wound does not heal.
If you are afraid of this, place a gauze pad soaked in crushed sulfur with oil or a gauze pad soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments on it. Because once those ligaments have rotted and the bones haverotted, they will be easy to remove and extract.
If it is a single large bone like a leg or thigh bone, and the part that has rotted is only its face, then scrape it well until all the rot and blackness disappears, and then stitch up the wound. But if the part that has rotted is a significant one and the rot has reached the bone's marrow, then it must be sawn through.
And cut it all the way up to where the rot ends, and then treat it so that it heals. I tell you, a man had a case of gangrene in his leg, which I present as an example and aid for your treatment. This man was in his middle age.
A man in his thirties, he suffered from a pain in his leg due to a cause that originated inside the body and reached the leg, causing it to swell and become large with putrid matter. The man's condition did not improve after consulting several doctors, and the situation worsened over time.
The man's condition got worse, and a lot of pus and bodily fluids started coming out. A group of doctors treated him for two years, but none of them were skilled in hand surgery.
He then met a skilled surgeon who examined the leg and found that the pus was coming out of an opening into the bone. The surgeon then investigated all the openings.
And I found them all interconnected in all parts of the leg, so I broke one of those openings until I exposed some bone, which I found rotten, eaten away, and blackened, and had holes pierced through it up to the brain, so I spread out what was revealed to me.
And he was able to the rotten bone, and I think that there is no other decay in the bone but what I cut and spread out, and I removed it then I forced the wound with binding drugs for a longer time, so it did not heal, then I returned and uncovered the bone again above the first discovery.
And I found the decay connected to the bone, so I spread out what was revealed to me as well of that decay, then I threw forcing it, and it did not heal or adhere, then I also uncovered it, and I kept cutting the bone piece by piece and trying to mend it, but it does not mend until I cut about a handspan of the bone.
And I took out its brain, then I mended it with drugs, so it healed quickly and completely, because the patient's condition was weak, his ability to tolerate was weak, and I feared for him death because he used to have extreme vomiting that caused a bad faint, then heal.
And it grew back in the place of the bone, and its condition improved in his body, and his strength receded, and he dealt with his affairs, and there was no harm to him at all in walking, if it was a bone that had broken in a certain place of the body.
So it should be spread out on this condition, that you take a bandage and tighten it in one side of the bone, and order someone to stretch it up to above, and make another bandage made of thicker sheep's wool than the first bandage.
Then you tie it to the meat that is under the bone, and you extend the side of the bandage so that the meat comes down, and you uncover the meat from the place that you want to spread out, so that it does not harm the saw the meat, and you put a wooden or board under the bone firmly.
For if you do this, the saw will not be prevented from cutting the rotten bone, and the spread should be slightly above the site of the rot so that there is no rot in the cavity of the bone that does not show on its surface for feeling, so you have to spread it again.
If the bone is rotten and has not come away but is connected in some places, with rot in the middle or in some parts, then remove the flesh from all sides, and then place the tree from below, and then spread it from the first side where the rot is.
If you have finished spreading it, spread it from the other side and let the spread be a little away from the rot as we said, if the rot is in a joint, cut off the rotten joint itself and spread the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the rot is in the connection of joints, there is no way but to cut it off, if the rot is in the knuckle of the hand or foot, the matter in treating it is very difficult, but you should peel off the rot whatever it appears to you and scrape it and clean it however you can.
And with any way that suits you when it does not interfere with a nerve or a vein, and know that the saws and saws for cutting these bones are numerous according to the position of the bones and their height and thinness and thickness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness and fragility. Therefore, it should be prepared for each type of work a fitting tool for that work.
And know that the works themselves may indicate the type of tool you need if you have long experience and knowledge of the arts of this craft, because the skill of the craft and witnessing different types of disease. May deduce for himself what fits him from tools for each illness, and I have photographed for you in the last of this book several machines.
Make them examples to follow and measure with it on others if God wills, a picture of a saw:.
A second image of a saw:
A small image of a saw:
A large image of a saw:
A smaller second abstract image:
A wider third abstract image:
An image with a hollow in the abstract:
A cute second abstract image:
A third abstract image with a curved tip:
A smaller fourth abstract image resembling a needle:
A shorter fifth abstract image:
A final description of an abstract image that is useful for bone-grinding purposes:
A final description of an abstract image:
Chapter 87, the section title.
In cutting limbs and spreading bones.
The ends may rot due to a cause from outside or from within; if you treat this decay with remedies and therapy, but it does not improve, then you will see that the decay is spreading throughout the member; there is nothing that stops it.".
It should be cut where the decay has reached, so that the patient may live and escape great disease, which is greater than losing the member; and the sign of exposing that member to it is that it turns white, as if burnt by fire..
Or it may rot after blackening, until that decay spreads to what follows the member and takes hold of the whole body; so you should quickly cut it off; likewise if the cause of decay is a bite from certain insects such as sea snakes, snakes, or thorns, etc.
If the decay or bite is in the tip of a finger, cut off the finger; do not delay in allowing the decay to spread to the hand, and if it has taken hold in the hand, cut it off from the arm's original branch; do not allow the decay to advance..
And if he takes hold of the arm, then cut the arm at the elbow joint itself, if corruption is permitted and you see him heading towards the side of the shoulder, do not cut the shoulder at all, for in doing so the patient will die, but use other treatment according to ability.
And do the same with the foot if corruption takes place in a toe, cut the toe at one of the joints, and if it takes place in the metatarsus, cut the leg as a whole, because rising to the knee cuts off the leg.
If corruption has reached above the knee, there is no way to save it except to leave it and let the patient die, and the method of cutting a limb or spreading it out is to tie a bandage at the bottom of the location you want to cut and tie another bandage above the location.
And extend one servant of the bandage down and extend another servant of the bandage above and strip all the meat between the bandages with a wide scissor, so that all the meat is exposed, then cut or spread it out, and it is necessary to place linen strips from all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the correct place, causing the patient additional pain and hot swelling, and if blood flows during your work, quickly stop the bleeding or carry some cutting powder on it, then return to your treatment until you finish.
Then tie the injured member with a bandage that is suitable for it and treat it until it heals, and I will tell you an example that happened to a man in his leg alone of this specific condition that I describe to you, namely that there occurred in his leg blackness with burning resembling fire.
And that corruption was first in his toe until the man took all of it, so he bled from himself by himself when he saw the corruption seeking in the member with great pain and burning, so he cut it at the joint and healed.
And after a long time had passed, he [the patient] presented that same corruption to me in his index finger. He came to me and I repressed it with what I had on my hand from medicines, after I had cleaned his body. But the corruption did not retreat and continued to move to the other finger.
Until the corruption in his hand had become so severe that he asked me to amputate his hand. I refused, hoping to repress the corruption and also fearing for the man's life, as his strength was ebbing away. So, when he lost hope of my help, he returned to his hometown.
He later told me that after he had his entire hand amputated, it healed. I am telling this story to help illustrate what can happen with such an illness and to provide a guide for those who may encounter similar conditions.
Chapter 88.
In treating abscesses and the method of injecting medications into them.
If a lump forms in a muscular organ and lasts for a long time, eventually bursting or draining all its contents, leaving the area empty as if it were a vessel.
The skin on which it is located is like a torn cloth, and it has not reached the point of affecting the bone or any nerves or tendons. Therefore, it deserves to be called an abscess, rather than a abscess, only if its duration is long enough for the corruption to affect one of these organs.
It is then called a abscess or a boil, and its treatment is to cut off all that skin, especially if it has become thin like a cloth patch, and be certain that it does not stick to the affected area due to the corruption.
If I asked that the skin stick to the affected area, but it had not reached that level of corruption and there was still some thickness in the skin, I would treat it with a medication called 'Misri'. It is a type of medicine that can be injected into the abscess using a syringe.
Who is a mixture of resin, oil, honey, and saffron; all of which are combined in a container and cooked on the fire until the medicine thickens and becomes like honey. Then, you take what you need from it and thin it with water and honey and inject it into the affected area, clamping its mouth shut and leaving the medicine inside for two hours.
Then, you press it out by squeezing; you repeat this for several days until the medicine is purified and the odor goes away. If this medicine is not available to you, take ash from oak wood or hazelnut wood and mix it with water.
Then, you strain it and inject it until you are sure that the medicine has been washed; if not, there is a possibility of benefit from the Egyptian medicine or water of ash mixed with honey in which a little bit of saffron powder has been mixed.
Or, you inject it with honey and syrup mixed because honey will purify and wash, and syrup will adhere to the medicine, especially if the syrup is thick and drying; so, if you do this several times and are sure that the medicine has been cleansed from corruption, then inject it with something that promotes the growth of flesh.
For example, you take the lemongrass ointment and dilute it with rose water and a contracting syrup, or inject it with some of the other medicines and ointments that we have proven their qualities in the article about ointments; if the mouth of the medicine is narrow and does not accommodate the syringe tube.
Then, broaden it slightly with an iron bar or put a thread in the Egyptian ointment or sirup ointment so that it becomes wider; likewise, if the mouth is wide, gather its lips with stitches and leave what can fit the syringe without additional.
And, likewise, if the mouth from which pus flows is raised up towards the top; then, split it in the lowest place so that the pus flows down because when pus is injected into a pit-like medicine, it prevents flesh from growing there.
If you cannot make an incision in the abscess towards its bottom on what you want, then form that the organ be placed in a way that it easily drains away with pus according to what is prepared for you and form that nothing of the pus is retained therein at all.
As for the binding medications that are placed on the abscess from the outside and their way of being placed on it, is that you take one of the binding pastes similar to what you want and spread it on a cotton cloth and let the cloth be of such a size that it covers all the abscess. Then, cut with a scissors opposite the mouth of the abscess a hole wider than the mouth of the abscess a little, and then spread from the soft pastes on another cloth of the size of the hole and place it on top of it in a separated way so that it facilitates the exit of the pus from it, and do not remove the large cloth until.
for several days, and as for the one that is on the mouth of the abscess, you remove it in every time so that what has accumulated therein from pus comes out and knows whether what flows from it is much or little or thin or not.
And in addition, also check the place of the abscess itself whether its owner feels pain or not and whether there is swelling or not, if you have continued your treatment in this way and saw the substance that comes out is small on the mouth of the abscess.
then know that the abscess has attached or is approaching attachment, so remove it from tomorrow or on the third day, and when you open the wound, replace the cloth with another one and renew the paste, if pus comes out of the abscess after a long period of time is thin, do not despair from its attachment.
He will soon be healed because some people slow the growth of meat in their wounds and others are the opposite, if pus comes out of the abscess after many days is not thin, know that the abscess has not attached, and if the attachment of the abscess was delayed.
And his matter grew, so increase in the drying of drugs, and let be drugs that are in their composition wet and in their strength dry like the palm ointment if it has been increased therein a favor from the qullqatar, and of what is most treated with that it is taken palm ointment.
And he treats it with rose oil and sprinkles on it the old moderate alcoholic substance in its composition, then kneads it and uses it; and it may do this action if you did not find palm ointment honey, if you cooked it until it thickens and used it or take from the bitterness and the耐 and کندر and crush all of them and sprinkle it on the honey while on fire. Then you put him on a cloth and tighten it on the treasure or be painted with honey that you cooked until it thickens, sprinkle it on drugs and place it on the cloth and tighten it.
And it may be used in the same thing the dragonroot, and the root of sage (aspira) and the crushed caraway and cumin, single ones that have been used or grouped they are crushed and sifted and sprinkled on honey who وصف and use it; if the matter of treasure did not improve with this treatment, then know that there is in its corruption corruption.
And it has affected the bones or all nerves坚硬 or ligaments, and treated the treatment of the nostrum on what has been mentioned,.
Chapter 89
In the treatment of dahl (dah-lus) and the nail infected (jah- फरع) and cutting the extra finger and splitting the bond fingers.
Dahl is a lot of meat grows under the nail of the thumb of the hand or leg, and may grow in all fingers, if it has been prolonged matter and neglected its treatment swelled and became a hot rash.
Or be corrupted and stinky food so that it eats the base of the nail, and perhaps has corrupted all of it, and sometimes the corruption reaches the bone until it is a color  (k-mad) , and if you treat it with what we have mentioned in the division has not been effective treatment,.
It is necessary to cut with iron all the excess that grows out of the nail and then burn the wound, for scorching in this way is very beneficial. But if the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy.
And if the angle containing the nail has pressed the flesh inward and made it puff up and dry it, then it should put a thin drape under the angle of the nail that presses the flesh and raises it upward and cut that flesh gently.
And put on what is left of the flesh of the incendiary and corrosive medications until it all goes away, and then treat it with ointments until it heals. But if corruption has affected the bone, then you should cut that bone and remove it, for it will never heal as long as there is rotten bone.
If you see corruption and decay spreading in the finger, then cut it at one of the joints as mentioned above, and then treat it until it heals, for if the nail has been struck by a blow or injured and caused severe pain, then it should be poulticed first.
Then split the nail with a sharp scalpel, splitting it from above to below, and take care not to reach with the split to the flesh under the nail, for you will thus cause pain in the patient and be a reason for the growth of excess flesh at the site, and then treat the site with something that soothes pains.
And the extra finger that develops in some hands may be all flesh, or it may be bone in some of them, or it may have a nail, and the growth of some of them is at the base of a joint of some fingers.
Or it may grow in one of the joints of the finger, and it does not move, and what grows is all flesh, it can be cut easily by splitting it at its root with a wide scalpel.
And whereas the plant is in the root of the joint, its treatment is difficult, so it should be avoided to cut it; and whereas the plant grows in the finger at one of the joints, it should be cut first, cutting the flesh roundly towards the bone, then spreading the bone with one of those saws that are suitable for that.
And then treat it until it heals, and whereas the union which takes place between some of the fingers is often present, and this is what is born with man, and is in case of healing a wound or burning fire and so on, it should be cut.
Until the fingers return to their natural shape, and then place between them a thread or a piece of cloth soaked in rosewater so that they do not quickly heal and separate from each other, or put between them a thin sheet of lead until the place heals as it should be.
And likewise, if the union of some fingers of the hand is presented, split that union according to what is appropriate and useful for the shape of the member.
Chapter ninety.
In cutting the bunions.
Are bumps, twisted, thick blood vessels filled with pus that occur in most parts of the body, more commonly in the legs, especially in the shins, and second, that you should use skin scraping from the black mark repeatedly with a strong scrape.
Then let the owner of the blade be stripped, and as for treating it with iron, it is done in two ways: one that he split and remove the black blood, and the other that he sweat and release all of it, and as for splitting it, it is done on this character that the leg is first washed with hot water.
Until the thick, sour blood dissolves, then tighten the patient's leg above his hip to his knee with a turban, and then split the sweat in one place or two or three wide splits.
Then extract the black blood from your hand, from the bottom of the leg to the top, and from the top to the bottom, until you remove the amount that you see sufficient or what the patient's strength can bear. Then tie it up and order it to avoid foods that generate the black bile, and vomiting and phlegm are repeated.
When the veins are filled and this harms the patient, and as for draining him, it is done in this way: the patient's leg hair is shaved off, then he is taken to a bath and his leg is rinsed with hot water until it turns red and perspires profusely or is subjected to a vigorous exercise.
If he does not bring him a bath until it gets hot, then the skin is split from the sweat, lengthwise, either at the back of the knee or at the bottom of the heel. Then the swells are opened with tweezers and the sweat is stripped from all sides until it feels visible.
It is red when it appears, and if it has been stripped of the skin, it is like sinew. Then a tube is inserted into it until it rises and comes out from under the skin, it is hung on a blind hook, smooth, then another cut is made near that cut, the distance between them is three fingers.
Then the skin is stripped from the sweat so that it appears, then it is lifted with a tube as you did and hung on another hook as you did first, then another cut is made or several cuts if needed.
Then drain it and cut it off at the back of the heel, then pull it out through the second cut, then pull it up to the third cut, above all the cuts, until when it is all pulled out, then cut it off.
If it does not respond to pulling and draining, insert a needle with a strong thread, double it, tie it, and pull it out with your hand from all sides until it comes out, be careful not to break it because it will be very difficult for you to drain it.
And enters on the sick of it a mischief, so when you let him all down him put on the place of the wounds cover soaked in drink and oil and treated until he is healed, if the dalia is tense and has scars has twisting to sides.
And it is not on a straight line as we said so it is necessary that you split her on every side of its twists and places then hang her with chains until you let him all down, and preserve at your splitting on her that do not cut the vein or wound it because it will be difficult to let him down you preserve your effort,.
Image of the pull which you split with it dalia:.
Image of the blind hook:.
Not be for her to have a twist as the other hooks and not be sharp on the end so that do not wound the vein and be rough on bending smooth because if it was thin cut the vein with its thinness but be thick in bending,.
Chapter one hundred and ninety-nine.
In pulling the civil sweat.
This sweat is generated in the legs in the hot countries such as Hijaz and Arab countries and in hot countries the little crop of rot and perhaps it is generated in other places than the legs of the body, generated by a fungus that occurs under the skin..
As also happens inside the bodies of animals, worms and squash, and worms that are generated between the skin and meat, and the sign of the beginning of the occurrence of this sweat is to happen in the leg a severe inflammation then the place is swollen then begins the sweat comes out from the place of that swelling..
As if it were the root of a plant or an animal, so when it appears from it its side, it is necessary that you wrap on small piece of lead be its weight from one dirham kilo to dirham two and tie it and leave the lead hanging from the leg..
Whichever way it comes out, wrap it in lead and tie it up; if it comes out a lot, cut some of it off and wrap the rest up; don't cut it from its root before all of it has come out, because if you do cut it, it will shrink and go back into the flesh, causing swelling and decay in the area, and an unpleasant ulcer.
So it is necessary to care for it and pull it little by little until it comes out completely, leaving nothing of it in the body; sometimes this sweat can come out in people with certain conditions as much as five hands wide and ten fingers long.
I have also heard that it came out twenty hands wide for a man; if it breaks off while you are treating it, put a tube into the hole and push it back inside the body for a long time until everything in it is empty, and try to rot the area with medicines for several days.
Then treat it with treatment for tumors; this sweat may have many branches, especially when it appears in the joint of the leg or in the leg itself, which causes it to have many mouths and branch out from each mouth; treat it as we mentioned earlier in the division and above.
Chapter 92.
In cutting into the hole to get rid of the worm that develops under the skin, which is called "bull's disease.
This disease is called "bull's disease" in some of our countries, as it often affects cattle; it is a very small worm that develops between the skin and meat, and it moves up and down in the body.
It can be seen by touch when it moves from one organ to another until it breaks out where it broke out in the skin, and it comes out and forms from foul matter, some kind of mucus, as is the case with worms and snakes and toads in the stomach.
Its harm is that when it crawls through the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open it and come out, so it will lose sight; this often happens. So if you want to treat and remove it, you should wait until it moves and appears by touch.
It is necessary to tighten the flesh above and below it with a tight bandage, then cut on top of it and take it out, if it sank in the meat and did not find it, carry the place with fire until it burns it, and the most expected damage to the eye as we said.
If you see it has become in the head near the eye, tighten under it on the forehead with a strong bandage, then cut on top of it and take it out, and it is necessary for the patient to take care to purify his body with medicines that facilitate the pus of the rotten bad matter and to beware of food that generates putrefaction.
Chapter 93.
In cutting on a disease known as nafr.
This disease, which is called in our country nafr, is a pain that occurs in some organs and then moves from one organ to another; I have seen it on what I describe to you.
I was called to a sick woman in some deserts; I revealed her arm and she showed me a slight swelling in the vein of the forearm; after staying for an hour, I saw that swelling moving with the arm up to the shoulder as fast as it can be, as if it were mercury.
If it salutes from one place to another, the pain disappears from that place and remains in the shoulder; then she sat for an hour and it moved in all her body until it became in the other arm; then she told me that it is rotating all her body as you saw it.
I was surprised by the speed at which it moves from one organ to another, and I had never seen this disease with my eyes as I saw it in this woman; a group of people found that the pain moved from one organ to another, and I did not see it with my eyes as I saw it in this woman.
And I did not understand it until it is because the woman was from the desert, dry body, exposed veins; and this is what caused the sense of that wind that moves from place to place; and it must be that it does not appear on this measure in the inhabitants of the cities and the wet bodies, hidden veins.
If you wish to treat him and the owner feels pain, then he will appear to you clearly as we have mentioned. So tie it tightly above and below with haste and cut into it until that stagnant wind comes out and clean the place.
If you do not see it with your eye, then treat it by shaking the body and what removes the winds and disperses them, such as rotten fruit and the like of medicines.
Chapter 94.
In removing arrows.
The arrows may vary according to their types and according to the locations they take place in the body. As for their variation according to their types, some are large and others small. Some are hollow and some are solid. Some have three corners and others have four corners.
And some have tongues and some have shards. As for the members which fall into it, they are of two types: either the members are chief members that are hollow such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestine, bladder, etc. So when an arrow falls into any of these organs and the signs of death which I will describe to you later appear to you, then it is necessary that you abstain from removing that arrow from it because death will overtake its owner in most cases. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow does not hide in the depth of the member, then remove it and treat the wound. One of the signs of the brain when an arrow hits it and pierces the bone and wounds the membrane covering the brain, there will be severe headache, dizziness, and fever.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow does not hide in the depth of the member, then remove it and treat the wound. One of the signs of the brain when an arrow hits it and pierces the bone and wounds the membrane covering the brain, there will be severe headache, dizziness, and fever. And redness in the eyes, redness on the tongue, spasms and confusion of mind, and sometimes a sound is lost and the voice disappears. Watery blood may come out from the place of the wound, resembling porridge, and it has the consistency of meat water.
If these signs appear to you, then stop treating the patient and do not remove the arrow if it has not been removed yet. As for the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart and is close to the left breast, you will feel as if it has lodged in something solid, not in a hollow place.
And perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to the pulse, and blood flows from the wound black, and then follows the cooling of the limbs and cold sweat, so know that death is inevitable, and the sign of the arrow when it hurts the lung is the emergence of foamy blood from the wound.
And the vessels that follow the neck swell and the color of the patient changes and he breathes heavily and asks to inhale cool air, if the arrow hits the diaphragm in the chest, then it is close to the small ribs and breathing is great with severe pain.
And he sighs and all the organs of the shoulders move, and if the arrow hits the liver, there is severe pain and blood comes out from the wound that resembles the liver in its redness, and if the arrow hits the stomach, perhaps food comes out from the wound that has not been digested.
And his order is clear, and if the arrow hits the abdomen and nest therein, and something comes out from the wound or caseous mass or ruptured intestine, there is no hope for its treatment or removing the arrow, because if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out.
And something comes out to the outside, and the pain on the patient becomes more intense, so know that he is dead, And as for the other organs such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, forearm, back, upper arm, thigh, and leg, and similar organs, they may be affected in various ways.
When the arrow does not hit a vein or nerve, and the arrow is not poisoned, I will tell you some of what I have seen about these arrows so that you can use it to treat yourself, that an arrow had hit a man in his eye socket at the base of his nose.
So he took it out from the other side under the skin of his ear and healed, and I took out another arrow for a Jew who had hit him in the skin of his eye under the lower eyelid; the arrow had hidden, and I only caught its small end that stuck to the branch.
There was a large arrow from the hard compound arrows, square iron smooth and without ears, which healed the Jew and nothing bad happened to his eye; and I took out another arrow from the throat of a Christian, this was an Arabic arrow.
This is the one who has ears, so I split it between the temples, and he had gone into his throat, so I softened it until I took it out, and the Christian was saved and healed; and I took out another arrow that had lodged in a man's stomach, and we thought he would die of it.
So he stayed for about thirty days or so without any change in his condition, I split the arrow and manipulated it on him, and I took it out, and he was healed; and I saw a man whose arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound became stuck to him.
So after seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh; and I saw a woman whose arrow had lodged in her stomach, and the wound became stuck to her, and there was no change in her condition, nor did she find any harm in anything from her natural actions.
And I saw another man whose arrow had lodged in his face, and the wound became stuck to him, and he did not find much pain in it; and there are many like this, and I took out an arrow from a man of the sultan's generals who had lodged in the center of his nose, which had leaned to the right side a little.
And the arrow completely disappeared, so I was called to treat it after the arrow fell into three days; I found that the arrow wound was very tight, so I opened it with a fine awl, and I did not feel anything, but he felt a tickling and pain under his ear from the right side.
So I hoped that this tickling was from the arrow, so I bandaged the area with a strong adhesive and ripening in hopes that the area would swell and a mark of the arrow would appear, so I split it up, but there was no incident in the area that indicates that the arrow reached it.
If you bandage it and leave it for many days, an accident does not occur, so the wound is sealed and the patient remains hopeful that he will be cured by removing it for a period of time until one day he felt pain in the bone of his nose and told me the news, so I put on the wound the sharp, corrosive medicine for many days.
Until it opened and I probed it, I felt the thin end of the arrow sticking to the wood, then I increased in opening the wound with this sharp medicine until it appeared to us in person the end of the arrow, and I went with him for a period of time, about four months.
Then, when the wound widened and I was able to enter the hooks therein, I pulled it and moved it, but it did not respond to come out, so I kept caressing it and devising ways to deal with it using some tools until I captured it one day with firm hooks as their image comes in the last of the book.
The doctors ruled that the cartilage of his nose could not be healed, so I sewed it up and the patient recovered completely, without anything causing him any harm, and I tell you about how to remove some arrows so that you can make that a measure and a proof for what I did not mention.
Because the parts of this industry and its details cannot be understood by description, nor can they encompass what is absent, and the skilled craftsman measures a little to a lot, and what is present for what is absent, and infers a new work and a new tool in cases of unusual emergencies.
If you come down from this industry, I say that the arrows do not come out of the organs in which they are embedded except by two types: either by pulling from the position in which it entered, or from the opposite direction from which it entered, which comes out through where it entered.
Either that the arrow is protruding in a fleshy place, so it is pulled out and removed, or that it is stuck in a bone, so leave it for days until the flesh around it decays, making it easy to pull and remove; also, if it is stuck in a bone.
And if it does not come out, then you should drill around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a small drill until it spreads, and then pull it out and remove it.
If the arrow has penetrated deep into the skull and has reached some of the brain's cavities and some of the mentioned symptoms have appeared, then stop pulling out the arrow and leave it alone for a while to recover.
Then gradually pull it out, if it is deeply stuck and does not respond to pulling, use the drill around the arrow as you described to me, then treat the area until it heals, and if the arrow has hidden in a place of the body. And disappeared from sense, then examine it with the probe, and if you feel it, pull it out with some tools that are suitable for pulling it out, and if you can't reach it, due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow in the cavern, and it is not a bone or nerve or vein.
Then split it until the wound opens and you can grasp the arrow to pull it out, and if it has two heads (branches), then hold on to them and loosen the meat that is stuck in them from all sides with all your power and ability, and if you cannot.
And if you try to pull out the arrow in any position, then use your hand with clamps in all directions until you get rid of it, and be very careful so that the arrow doesn't break and become difficult for you to pull out and remove.
And let it rest for days until the meat around it putrefies, and then repeat it, for it will be easier at that time; if an obstacle is met in the form of a bleed, use what we mentioned above in its door treatment, and be careful to avoid cutting a sweat, nerve or tendon, and use the trick.
In every way you can extract the arrow, and let it be with care and caution and fixing as I have described to you; and it is necessary for you to use when you attract the arrow that the patient is in the same form as he was when the arrow hit him, because it is most suitable.
If you cannot do that, then use what you can from shapes; and as for the arrow that comes out of the opposite side, either it has come out of something to the outside or you may find the edge of the arrow by feeling from above the skin near it, and see it coming out.
Then split it and let the split be to the extent that you can accommodate it with hooks; then extract it, because it will be easier to come out; if it clings to the bone, twist your hand on a rotation so that the arrow affects the bone and expands for itself, and then extract it.
Or leave it for days, and then repeat it until it comes out; if the arrow's shaft has been knocked down, push it in, because it has fallen, and if you want to use pushing, introduce the hollow tool into its butt so that its cavity enters, and then push it with it.
If the arrow is hollow, push it with a tool that enters into that cavity, for the arrow will be easier to come out in this way; if the arrow is poisoned, you should curl up the meat that has become poisonous all of it if you can do that, and then treat it with what is appropriate for that.
If the arrow has hit the chest, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the ribcage, and it is close to what can be felt with a probe, and you can split it, split it and be careful not to cut a sweat or a nerve, and then take it out.
Then stitch the wound if it needs to be sewn, and then treat it until it heals, image of the hooks used to draw arrows:
Its ends are made in the shape of a bird's beak, just as if they were a cool-shaped tube; if they grip onto an arrow or any other object and do not let go, then you can make different sizes: large, small and medium. This is all done according to the size of the arrow and the width or narrowness of the wound.
Image of the hollow gun:.
Image of the solid gun:.
This is closed at one end like a club so that it can easily enter into the hollow arrow and push it,.
Chapter 59.
In ligature of blood vessels.
The blood vessels that are usually ligated in the body are thirty; of them, sixteen are in the head; the two pulsating veins behind the ears, known as the sensitii, and the two arteries in the temples, apparent; and the two veins in the eyelids, known as the observers.
And the erect vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose, and the jugulars in the neck; two veins in the upper lip from the mouth and two veins in the lower lip; these are known as the zikirahs; the two veins that go into the ears.
And the blood vessels that are ligated in the arm and hand are five; one is known as qafalah, and it is on the lateral side, and it is called by the general people, "blood vessel of the head," and akhal, which is the middle vein, and it is composed of a branch from the basiliq and another branch from qafalah, and it is called by the general people, "blood vessel of the body.
And basiliq, which is placed in the lateral side, and it is also called "the wrist," and it is called by the general people,  "blood vessel of the abdomen" and  "hand cord;" it is the one that adheres to the hand; it is the one that appears clearly above the thumb; and al-asilah.
The vein between the index and middle fingers has two branches; in the leg, there are three veins: one beneath the kneecap on the lateral side, another at the sole of the foot on the medial side, and a third at the heel on the lateral side.
In the other leg, there are three similar veins; the two veins behind the ears benefit from being cut for chronic illnesses, headaches, and bad scabies; as well as the manner in which they should be cut as I describe.
This is done by shaving the patient's hair and scratching their scalp at the points of the two veins behind the ears with a rough cloth; then the patient should be choked by a turban until the veins appear at the back of the neck, in the lower part of the head; these veins are then located with your finger as you feel for the pulse under your finger; mark their location with ink.
Then take a surgical scissor (a 'nashl'); put it under the vein in the skin until you reach the bone; then raise your hand with the vein and skin up, and cut the vein and skin together; the length of the cut should be that of two clenched fingers.
Or something like that; and send the required amount of blood; then tighten them with bandsages and leave them until they heal; earlier in the book, I described how to cut and knead these arteries; as for the two arteries in the temples, their benefit is to be cut for chronic headaches, difficult headaches, and painful eye conditions.
And the way to cut them as I describe it: have the patient choke their neck with a turban until the veins are clearly visible; then, you can feel for the pulse under your finger; when you identify the vein, mark its location with ink; then, raise the skin above the vein by one finger (your index finger) with your thumb.
And the incision is made from below, and the sweat is raised to above, and it is cut off as you did in the other two sweats; and send blood according to your need then loosen the grip of the patient and place your finger on the sweat for an hour.
Then you put a cotton and padding on it, tighten the wrap from above, and leave it until it heals; It has been mentioned before to cut them and to cut them and to thread them in the beginning of the book, as for the sweating of the forehead, its benefit is after the sweating of the temples for chronic diseases of the face such as leprous spots, sores and red patches.
And the way to sweat it as I describe it to you is to choke the patient's neck with a turban until the sweat appears; then take the tool which is called the axe; and this is its image:
You place the spike that is at the top of the axe on the same sweat, and hit it from above with a comb or another thing in its direction, and leave the blood to run according to what you want; then loosen the grip of the patient and tighten it until it heals.
And it may be opened with a wide scalpels; However, the scalpel should not be sharp at the end like all other scalpels but should be slightly thick at the end and sweat it on the deflection because the bone is close so that it might break in it if it was thin.
As for the two sweats that are in the temples, their benefit is for eye diseases such as scabies, redness, spittle, and skin diseases; And the way to sweat them is to choke the patient' s neck with a turban then sweat them and you are standing on his head, and let the sweating be on the deflection a little towards the length with a small wide scalpel.
If the place does not contain meat, because if the scalpel is sharp, it may break; then send blood according to your need and put a cotton on them and tighten them for one night then loosen them; And as for sweating the nose, it is beneficial against acute fever.
A severe headache and diseases of the face, such as a red stain that appears on the nose, especially if it is chronic, and a specific case: The patient lies down, then you take his nose between your left hand and hold a thin, long scalpel in your right hand.
And insert it in the middle of the nose itself between the nose on an even line because sweat does not appear there, so blood appears from it immediately. Your hand should be slightly more focused with the scalpel and you should take your fill of blood, then tie it up for a night because it will harden quickly.
As for the cheeks, they benefit from being removed in cases of short breath and the beginning of lepers and black diseases that appear on the surface of the skin, such as dark spots, mange and bad sores, and a specific case: The patient is tied with a ribbon under his neck, and the surgeon stands above the patient's head.
The patient sits on a chair, then you let the sweat come out for a long time, a wide gap, and then take the blood at an average capacity or according to what you see is needed, then do the same with the other sweat, and then untie the ribbon.
And tighten the two sweats with a moderate tightening so that the patient does not choke and leave it until tomorrow because it will heal the wound, and as for the jaw arteries, they benefit from being removed after bleeding the tonsils because they benefit in cases of mouth lepers, bad gums, bad sores, and cracks on the lips and bad sores.
The which are in the nose and around it, and the method of their removal is that the patient sits in front of you and tightens his neck with a turban, then turn his lips and look at the two sweats that you see one black on the right side of the lip and the other black on the left side of the lip, and distinguish them by their color.
And that is also because the two muscles are thin and black, so cut them off completely, and if it was difficult for you and you did not know what they were, then aim to cut the largest and most obvious one, and do the same with the two sweats in the lower lip.
And as for the two blood vessels under the tongue, it is beneficial to cut them after cutting the tonsils for the abscesses that are in the throat from the disease of the vocal cords and oral diseases. And its method is to sit the patient between your hands facing the sun, and raise his tongue and look under it on one side of a vein and on the other side of a vein, and their color is towards blackness.
And cut them and preserve them, do not indulge in cutting them too much, as there are blood vessels under them that may cause blood to flow from those blood vessels, and as for the three veins that are cut at the elbow, it is customary among all people to cut them, and they are cut in two ways.
Either by stitching with a wide rice-cornet or olive-shaped needle into the tissue, or by making a cut with a scythe-shaped knife, which is called the 'nishl' [and this is its image], Rice-cornet needle image: .
It should be wide as you see it so that it can reach the opening of the dilated, thick-walled and blood-filled veins, which contain thick, murky blood. This is a picture of the olive-shaped needle: .
And this needle is less wide and thinner at the tip, it is suitable for cutting thin veins that contain yellow-colored blood. This is a picture of the 'nishl' knife:  .
This  'nishl' that is suitable for cutting and is of various widths and thinness according to the size of the veins, and it can be used to show others. It is well-known among artisans.
And as for the basilic, which is one of the three veins, it is beneficial to cut it because it draws blood from the illnesses that are under the throat and neck, up to the chest and abdomen. The surgeon should be careful when cutting it, and he should put the needle's tip on its neck, because there are two veins under it, and if he makes a mistake and increased the stitching of the needle, he will cut this vein.
If blood flows, it is necessary that he should not cut it with the scissor of suturing, but rather he should cut it with a knife, for if the basilicus does not appear clearly, one should avoid it and change to something else or request some of its branches.
Or bind the place with the wrist of the arm, for it is clear and cut it with the knife as we said. If you want to cut him himself, before tying the arm, you should feel the place until you recognize the pulse place, then you will learn on him with ink.
Then tie the arm and cut the vein with a knife, as we said, and pay attention that the blow is far from the place of the artery, and when you see, when you tighten the bandage, air in the place where you marked with ink, then this air is the expansion of the artery, so avoid it.
If you see blood when you bleed, it jumps like baby urine and the blood is thin and red, know that it is from the artery's blood, so at that moment, hurry up, put your finger on it for a long time, then take your finger off, and if the blood stops, often, it stops bleeding, so tie the arm.
And leave it, and beware of the patient's neglect, and let it be on the neck, and don't let him move it for a while until he heals, because if the blood does not stop and exceeds you and there is no medicine with you in your time, cut the artery if it appears to you, because its ends contract and the blood stops.
Or take a slice of pomegranate and split it, then take half and tie it tightly to the place of the vein with ties and plasters until another day, if the blood stops, otherwise treat him as mentioned above by putting crystals that stop bleeding, and cutting his blood is not difficult in most cases.
For the small wound and the tightening of the bandage on the arm, so know it, and as for the deeper vein, the benefit of cutting it is that it draws blood from above the head and below the body because it is composed of a branch of the basilicus and a branch of the cervix as we said.
The surgeon should be at the top of his trade; for beneath him is a nerve, and if he increases the depth of the stab with the knife and hits the nerve, there will be numbness that makes it difficult to see, and perhaps it will never heal. This nerve is often felt.
If it is hidden in some people and is thin and cannot be seen, then you should make your stab with the needle and avoid the nerve as much as possible, because if there is a vein between two nerves, then make the stab lengthwise. As for the cephalic vein, the benefit of cutting it is that it draws blood from the head.
It is beneficial for eye diseases and it is necessary to make a stab with the olive needle or the wide رایhan needle in this vein, because it is safer for all the veins, because there is no artery or nerve beneath it.
However, when you make a stab, you should avoid the head of the muscle with the needle and ask for the soft place, and it does not hurt if it doesn't hit in the first attempt, but it might swell in some people if you don't make a stab in the first attempt.
But it does not harm him that swelling at all, and as for the method of bleeding and its effects and what should be brought to repair it, first you must know that bleeding is used either to preserve health only or to treat diseases.
Either it is used in diseases or, which is used to preserve health and sustain it and prevent the occurrence of diseases, that bleeding is done in one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely the cephalic vein, the brachial vein, and the basilic vein; and that bleeding is done at the beginning of spring when signs of fullness appear.
The bleeding is done on Sunday or Thursday after three hours have passed since the day began, and as for the bleeding that is used in diseases, it has no limited time, but whenever necessity and need call for it, whether night or day.
In every hour and at every time, it is not appropriate that boys should bleed until they reach the age of fourteen, nor should elderly people who have passed sixty years old be bled; if anyone intends to bleed for any reason.
It is necessary that he should clean his intestines before bleeding with a soft syringe if there is a lot of waste matter that has been retained, so that it does not flow into the veins during bleeding from the intestine, because the waste is putrid and harm the vital organs; nor should he bleed a person who is obese or drunk or under the influence of alcohol until that state passes.
And he should be careful not to bleed after a bout of diarrhea, vomiting, constipation, excessive sexual intercourse, fatigue, exercise, staying up late, fasting, or anything else that strengthens the body physically or mentally, and then examine whether the blood needs to be thinned before doing so if it is thick.
With food, drink and drugs if he can, then enters the bath or does some exercise so that his blood is purified and bleeding from him at noon as we have said; and he should strive to empty his chest that day of all detrimental psychological effects.
such as concerns worries, anger, fear and all physical ailments such as excessive fatigue, excessive sexual intercourse, and similar things; and prepare his company with things that people usually use of perfumes, incense, amusements, and so on, according to what he can afford.
Then the person who bleeds sits on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the person being bled sits, then the person who bleeds rubs his arm with his hand twice or three times, and then ties the bandage tightly and folds it over twice or three times, and let the tension be moderate.
Because when the tension is not moderate, either by excessive pulling which stops the flow of blood, or if it relaxes too much, which also stops the flow of blood; then, after tightening, it is necessary that he should rub the person who is bled with his hands all over them.
Until the veins swell and become apparent to the touch, then the surgeon will wipe the scalpel with a little old oil especially, and then he will place his index finger of his left hand on the same vein just below the site that he intends to scrape slightly so that the vein does not escape the stroke. For some veins, you will find them like a wound that bleeds when scraped, and for others there is air in them, so when the scalpel is placed on it, it goes down under the scalpel and deceives the surgeon, and if the scalpel opened it, it would only be a narrow opening.
Therefore, the surgeon must be careful and patient in all these things, then he will lower the scalpel, if the vein opened from its first attempt, or he will repeat it again for a short time under that spot or above it with haste if that spot does not swell.
If it swelled or bled, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage because it might cause an inflammatory reaction and heat, and he doesn't enter the bath, then he will repeat the scraping if he likes, if the scalpel entered and the blood flowed thinly.
And fear that the blood does not come out of the amount you want, so prepare the scalpel in the same hole with care and increase the opening slightly and do this quickly before the spot swells up, because in many people, the spot may swell when the small opening is made.
If you see that it has swollen, don't go near it because it won't be useful to you, put something of aged oil on it because it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this place than the oil itself or any other oils, and also.
So use aged oil in all your bloodletting of veins, and the Faruq antidote and Shakhzinayya can also be used if one of them is put on the site, then the blood will become thinner and dissolve.
If a lump occurs in the place of the bloodletting, it often happens, especially to one who has only done this once or whose vein was small, so he should hasten and put a sponge dipped in water and salt that has been slightly heated on the lump and tighten it for an hour, because it will dissolve.
One should do this after the blood has completely come out of the vein itself or from another vein, because if it remains in the place for a few days, there is something black or green, then it doesn't harm that, and if you want, carry on top of it a little ground pepper and dissolved salt.
or something of the juice of alfalfa and so on, often a lump and netow occurs when bloodletting from the basilic vein, so put your hand on it, if he found that he was slouching at your finger, then that is bad netow, so be careful not to put anything on it.
If it may bleed from a arterial vein, but bandage it with what contracts to stiffen the place and then treat it with all treatment until it heals, and one should extract blood for everyone according to his ability and the color that predominates in the blood.
If the blood is black, let it come out until it turns red, and if you see it thick, send it out until it thins out, and if it is sharp, send it out until its sharpness goes away, and one who is full and strong and needs to extract blood all at once.
That he broadens the vein of bloodletting and the scalpel is wide, and if it is weak, then the opposite, and one should extract it in batches, and the hole is better than the stitch, and that which is used in bloodletting from the veins is that it is heated, turned, and split, not stitched.
This kind of bloodletting is free from bleeding and cutting a nerve, and it is more beneficial than bloodletting by width and length, and if one usually experiences fainting during bloodletting, he should feed him before bloodletting something of soaked bread in rose water or skunkbeet.
If he is constipated and has blood in his stools three or four times, then if his mood is cool, let him take before leeching bread soaked in molasses or honey perfumed with anise or in a drink with a pleasant smell from basil.
If fainting occurs during leeching and it is caused by a lot of blood coming out, then he should drink lamb water and mild rosewater and use the anise-based concoction to soothe his chest and use all that we mentioned in the chapter on fainting.
Who is prone to vomiting, and as for those who want to refresh their arm and move their blood a second time, if the leeching made him vomit a lot and his strength was weak, then let the blood be moved a little bit slowly with power in successive days.
As for those who want to refresh their arm and move their blood a second time, if their body is strong, they should do it over seven or nine hours from their first leeching; as for those who want to draw blood from their body to the opposite direction of which it has tilted, then let them do it on the second or third day.
As for those in whom there is a lot of blood in their bodies, it has gotten hot and caused a fever, then let the blood be drawn all at once, drawing out as much as possible, and expanding the leeching site until fainting occurs after checking all the conditions for leeching. And put your hand on his pulse when the blood is flowing so that death does not occur where there is fainting, for this often happens if the leeching person is unaware; it is not appropriate if you want to refresh the arm and move the blood a second time.
And the mouth of the vein has closed, making it difficult to get blood out; then you should firmly poke him or twist him strongly, for this is very unpleasant; either you should leave it so that it bleeds again on its own, or you should move a scalpel blade away from what has hardened of the blood in the mouth of the vein.
If there is any salt in the water that has dissolved, or any antidote (in the wound), or if it has been treated with a caustic (agent), leave it alone. If the wound is swollen with sweat, then leave it.
Do not touch it until the swelling subsides, for if necessary, you must let the blood flow again. Either let it bleed from that spot again or from another vein in the other arm or from another sweat gland.
As for bleeding the vein in the forearm, it is blood from one of the two veins, aculeus or basilicus, if they are not found or are hidden, because it is a mixture of them. The method of bleeding is to have the patient put his hand in hot water until his arm turns red and sweat appears clearly. Then tie a bandage lightly around it.
Then let the sweat gland bleed slightly, not in width or length. Make sure the opening is wide. And let his hand be placed in the container with water that has been made hot. Let the blood run in the water.
Until your need is met. If it is summer, you may not need to put the hand back in hot water again, and bleeding this sweat gland is safer than all the veins. Because there is no blood vessel or nerve underneath, and the bleeding from the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases. The method of bleeding it is to tie the wrist with a bandage, or to put your hand in hot water, then massage it until it swells.
Because there is no blood vessel or nerve underneath, and the bleeding from the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases. The method of bleeding it is to tie the wrist with a bandage, or to put your hand in hot water, then massage it until it swells. It will be very clear to the sense, then let it bleed a little if you cut it. If you cut it all off, it won't hurt at all. Be careful not to insert the scalpel into the nerves of the fingers and the spot is bare of flesh, then put the hand back in hot water.
And leave it to flow with blood, for if you do not put it back in hot water the blood will congeal in the sweat of the mouth and abstain from running. But if you take out of the blood as much as is needed, put on the mouth oil and salt so that it does not quickly bond.
And this is what you should do with every narrow branch; As for benefit, it is beneficial for the diseases of the spleen, and so you should do with the second one, whether it be in the left or right hand. And as for the bleeding of the testicles, its benefit is for the diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as the diseases of the wombs.
And the retention of menstruation, and kidney diseases, and chronic sores in the thighs and legs, and like diseases; And the way to bleed him is to make him enter water that is hot and carry upon it oil until it drains the veins, then tighten above the knee with a tourniquet and sweat on its place at the heel towards the thumb.
And it branches out from him in the face of the man many branches, so he should bleed him in the widest branch of it or at the heel where it meets; it is better and safer. But if you bleed him in the face of the man, be careful of the nerves that are under his face.
And make your bleeding of him by distorting it as if you were going to cut it off, and the blade should be sharp; because if the blood does not come out with the first attempt, let his foot remain in hot water and leave the blood to flow in it until it empties, then if the surgeon makes a mistake in bleeding the sweat with bleeding in the first place.
And let him bleed a little above, because the place is safe and there is no fear of anything if you preserve the nerve as we said; And as for the sweat of women, its place is what we said at the heel from the side of the body.
The benefit of this method for hip pain if it is caused by hot blood, and the way to perform it is to make the patient enter the bath, and hurry and tighten his leg from the hip to above the heel with four fingers with a thin long turban, because it does not appear except in that.
If it appears, then dismember it on any condition, either on a distortion, which is better, or cut it off by cutting it off or split it, because its location is healthy, and it is very light in most people, so you don't find it.
And did not appear at all to the sense, so dismember some of its branches, which are those that appear on the back of the foot towards the little finger and middle finger, and preserve the nerves, and send the amount of blood you want.
Then loose the tightening and put a cloth on the place of fust, and tighten the place, because it will soon heal.
Chapter 66
In bloodletting and the way to use it.
Bleachers may be of horns and wood and copper and glass, and bloodletting is of two types: bloodletting with a condition and extracting blood, and the other is bloodletting without a condition.
And this bloodletting without a condition is of two faces. The first face is bloodletting with a condition, which is that you make the patient enter the bath, and hurry and tighten his leg from the hip to above the heel with four fingers with a thin long turban, because he does not appear except in that.
And bleachers of the back, and bleachers of the jaw, which is under the lower jaw from the mouth, and bleachers of the shoulders, and bleachers of the pelvis on the tail of the tail, and bleachers of the upper arms, and bleachers of the legs, and bleachers of the shins.
Bloodletting draws blood from the tiny arteries spread throughout the flesh, and for that reason, strength is not lost like it is with bloodletting. It should not be used with fire or without fire in any of the diseases that are caused by overfullness until the whole body has been emptied.
If need calls for bloodletting due to a disease or by way of habit, we have used it at any time, in the beginning of the month, in its end, in its middle, and at any time.
For some people, when their blood increases to the point that they need to remove it with bloodletting, they will feel a weight on their head and headaches. Some will feel fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. Some will experience itching in their face and buttocks, and darkness and swelling in their eyes.
Some will laugh a lot, some will taste blood in their mouths and their teeth will fall out. Some will spew blood, and some will find blood and wounds in their dreams; we have seen these things occur when need calls for bloodletting.
Especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we order bloodletting after two or three hours have passed since daylight. The benefit of a bloodletting punt is that it relieves head weight and water drains into the eyes.
However, it should be done after the whole body has emptied itself. This bloodletting may be instead of bloodletting from the nape (scalp), and one should not use it on someone with a chilly brain or one who has recently suffered a stroke, as it will do great harm.
For this reason, elders should not use it, nor should those with a chilly-brain condition or those who have recently suffered a stroke, as it will cause great harm. It also causes forgetfulness.
For this reason, the bloodletter should lower his cup slightly when using a compress to avoid causing forgetfulness. As for a bloodletting on the back, it is a substitute for bloodletting from the nape (scalp) or from the carotid arteries.
For this reason, it is beneficial for asthma, shortness of breath, congestion of the respiratory tract, coughing, and fullness; and it should be raised by a little hajamah because if it is lowered, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for hajamah in the tempos, it is beneficial for the headaches that occur in the head, conjunctivitis, migraines, and laryngitis; and it is a remedy for toothache; and it should be ordered to the hajama that he does not deepen his hand too much so as not to cut a vein and cause bleeding.
As for hajamah under the chin, it is beneficial for ulcers in the mouth, damaged gums, and other diseases that occur in the mouth; and it can replace the fasid (cough) of jawhak (a type of cough). As for hajama in the shoulders, it benefits from the pounding that occurs due to congestion and heat.
As for hajama in the inner part of the forearm, it is beneficial for what benefits fasid al-basliq, akhlak, and ka'fal because it attracts blood from all those thin veins that are in the flesh and attracts those thin veins from other thicker veins so that it reaches to the three thick veins.
It should be ordered to the hajama that he does not deepen in the cut because the place is bare of flesh and has nerves and veins, and while a single anus that is hajama on the anus benefits from hemorrhoids of the rectum and sores of the lower part.
It should be ordered to the hajama that the anus is large and made of copper because the place needs a strong grip, and perhaps a glass hajama will break, and it requires a lot of cutting; as for hajama in the legs, they decrease congestion significantly.
Because it attracts blood from the entire body and is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder; it promotes menstruation and benefits from boils and warts; and its benefit is close to the benefit of hajama in the legs.
The method for applying leeches is that the leech cup is first made empty and suction is applied moderately without prolonging it, but rather quickly put on and taken off rapidly to accept the pus into the site evenly. You continue to repeat this and follow up on it until you see the site turn red and open up.
When you see the appearance of blood redness, then it is appropriate to make an incision and repeat the suction slowly and then look at the state of the bodies, so whoever among the people is cheap meat, diffuse pores, it should be made one incision only not to open the place.
And order the leeches to widen the incision and deepen it slightly and adjust the suction gently and gentle movement, if there is a blood thickness, it should be made twice an incision while the first time should open a way for the blood fluid and its wateriness while the second time to extract the thick blood.
If the blood is very thick, it should be made a third incision to achieve the goal, in short, if we want to extract little blood, we are content with one incision, if we want to extract a lot of blood, let's make more incisions, and if we estimate that the blood is thick.
It is appropriate to make an incision that is deep and within the moderate limit in the incision, the depth of the skin only, what should be used from the adhesives when applying leeches, and water, and what the leech-collector warns against, while whoever has his skin thick, hard, coarse, and diffuse pores.
It is appropriate to smear the places of leeches with adhesives that open, soften, dissolve, while if it is in summer time, like Khir's oil or Violet oil or Sweet Almond oil or Pumpkin seed oil.
If it is in winter, like oil of hyssop or oil of lilac or oil of chamomile or violet and so on, if the wound is thick, cold, then let the oil be oil of marjoram or oil of goose berk or oil of buckthorn or oil of thyme and so forth.
If the hematoma is large, then the fat should be reduced and these people should wash their scalps after hair-cutting with rose water or cold water or water from the dogwood fruit or water from the pumpkin or water from the mallow and so on, but as for those whose blood is very moist.
then wash their scalps with vinegar or water of aloe and sumac and like these, but as for those whose fluid is thick, then wash their scalps with old wine or water of marjoram or cookery of mustard or chamomile and like these, and it is necessary that the hair-cutting be avoided in the bath and after the bath.
It is necessary that you use something after leaving the bath within an hour or two, and it is not necessary for anyone to sleep after hair-cutting, what is necessary to prepare before and after hair-cutting.
It is necessary that he looks first, if the hair-cutter or the person with a hematoma is yellow-colored and blood is hot and inflamed, then he should take coolants such as pomegranate, artichoke with vinegar, leek, melongena, and so on, and make his food chicken and lamb, skinned meat, and curd, and like these.
and if his disposition is cold, then he should drink honey and water or sakenbajin (a type of wine) and eat fragrant wine that is between old and new, and he should be ordered to eat less food and make his food chicken, ducks, pigeons, and baby quail, and it is necessary that the drink on the day of hair-cutting and bloodletting be more than the food.
and sometimes it is necessary that he drink some of the antidote al-faroq or musk medicine or shilthah before hair-cutting and before bloodletting or after it to strengthen the main organs and thin the blood, and it is not necessary for him to drink it on the hot days.
And the tourniquets that are without condition are those which are placed on the liver and spleen and breast and on the abdomen and navel and place of the kidneys and right hip because these organs do not support the condition upon them, and it is intended by them either to draw blood from an organ to an organ.
As for the tourniquets that are without condition, they are those which are placed on the breasts in the case of bleeding or we use them to remove the cold wind that has settled in the organ by placing the tourniquets on the abdomen and navel, because they agitate the organ and heat it and go away with pain to dissolve that wind.
And it may be placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stones in them with great strength of traction, perhaps opens the blockage or removes the stone from its place, and so it does when placed on the liver and spleen when there is wind that混乱هم، and these tourniquets may be used empty of the suction only.
And it may be used with fire and may be filled with lukewarm water in the diseases of colic, because it is filled with hot water alone or with water that has been cooked on some herbs that are suitable for this.
Then it is placed filled on the site and held and removed and is repeated on the need, and this is a picture of the tourniquet that is used with fire:
It is a capacity of the opening of two fingers on what we have described and its depth is half a cubit, and there is in one of its sides at about a quarter of it a small hole on the size of what an needle enters, made of Chinese brass or yellow copper thick edge.
It is smooth and even to the point of not hurting the organ when placed on it, and there is a thick rod in its middle of brass or iron where the candle is placed with fire, and this tourniquet may be made larger than what we have described or smaller according to the diseases.
And when used, the plasters for children and the emaciated are different from those for adults and the bodies that are incapable of movement, And as for the method of placing these plasters on fire on the member, it is to ignite a thread with fire from cotton or a small candle made of wax and place it on the middle of the stiffened penis which is in the middle of the plaster.
So that the fire rises up towards the bottom of the plaster so as not to burn the patient's body, and then it is placed on the member and finger in the hole which we mentioned, until we take hold of the plaster, so we do not need to remove the finger.
And the steam comes out of that hole and the plaster stays in place, then you ignite the thread on the mentioned characteristic and repeat it if it is needed, And as for the plaster used for the disease of swelling with water, there is no stiffened penis or hole.
And it is used by filling it with water and placing it on the member only, and this is its image: [Image of a person applying a plaster to their penis]
And as for this plaster, whichever is larger so that it can hold a lot of water is better,.
Chapter 79
In Hanging the plasters
The plasters are used in most cases in the members that cannot be placed with plasters because of their small size, such as the lip and the tongue, or because the member is naked of meat, such as the finger and the nose, etc.
And the method of using it is to intend from the plasters which are in fresh water that is free of impurities, and then leave it for a day and a night in this water until it is hungry, and nothing remains in its cavity. Then the body is emptied first by bleeding or cupping, then the member is wiped clean.
Until it turns red, then place the plaster on it, and if it is full, it falls down, and if it was possible to suck the site with a plastron, that is better, otherwise wash the site with vinegar and then with clean water and massage and squeeze it, and if the bleeding continues after the removal of the plaster, and this is seepage, so a piece of cloth made of cotton is soaked in cold water.
And place it above until the runoff stops, and if the blood is abundant, sprinkle upon it a ground up kind of verdigris or a sort of binders or something like that from the constrictors until the blood stops flowing, or half of the bakula, peeled.
And leave it until the bakula sticks to the spot, because the blood will stop flowing, and if it is necessary to restart the clotting, do not use that kind of clot if another can be used instead; if that kind of clot cannot be made to stick, then wipe the spot with fresh blood.
Or stick a needle into the spot until some blood comes out, and then put it on; because if she feels something of the blood, she will stick to the stand; and if you want her to fall, sprinkle some alum or salt or ash on it, because it will fall on the stand.
The Third Door.
In Cured.
This door is also from and what needs on it in the art of surgery, which is the repair of the fracture and the incident mandible in bones.
Know, O children, that some people may say that this door is not for the physicians and the laymen who have never studied it among the ancient books or read a word from it.
For this reason, this art has become lost science in our country, and I have never found anything good about it at all. But I benefited from it all because of the long reading of the books of the ancients and my determination to understand them until I drew science from them, and then I stuck to experimentation and practice for the rest of my life.
And I have drawn for you from it in this door all that embraced my knowledge. And my experience has passed on it after bringing it close to you, and removing it from the people of over-simplification, reducing it to its limit, making it clear for you, and depicting many images of machines that are used in it.
If he does not increase the explanation as I did in the two preceding doors, there is no power except by Allah, the mighty, the great.
Chapter 1.
In the first chapter, we will begin by presenting a summary and an overview of matters pertaining to broken bones and joint dislocations before moving on to discuss individual members in detail. It is important to provide a brief introduction and set the tone for the rest of the discussion. This will help you, and those who are sincere in their desire to learn this noble art, understand its true nature and essence.
I say that when someone experiences a break, a dislocation, an injury to the joints, or a fall, you should first attend to the proper reduction or relaxation of the injury. If there is no impediment to doing so, such as a lack of strength or if the person who has been injured is a child or an elderly person or if the weather is extremely hot or very cold.
Then, he should restrict his diet to cool foods and bird meat and avoid the more bitter foods, as well as overindulging in meals that fill the stomach with blood. This is done in order to prevent swelling and to ensure that there is no expectation of fluid leakage from the affected area.
At this point, the patient should return to their usual diet, and if the bone heals properly, they should consume thick, nutritious foods that are solid and not too fluid, such as porridge, rice, and meat soups. If the bone does not heal properly, then other measures should be taken into consideration. Eggs, fresh fish, and strong drinks can help speed up the healing process and improve the quality of the recovery. Be aware that broken bones in older individuals or those with weakened bone structure may not heal as well as they once did.
The sinews of their bones and their toughness, and what was once soft bone may join and fuse together like the bones of young children; but nature plants on the broken bone from all sides a thing resembling glue, which thickens and adheres to it and tightens it until it joins one part to another.
And binds some of it to the other until it comes to be in the utmost strength and rigidity as it was at first, so that nothing hinders its actions, .
This is why it is necessary that the food of the patient should be the foods which have toughness, viscosity and thickness as we have said, and know that the break is different according to the difference of organs because a leg bone fracture is opposite to a head fracture and a chest bone fracture is opposite to a back bone fracture.
And so all the organs are different from each other, and we will come to the explanation of each type of break in its context, detailed without the other, and the type of bone fracture may also differ from itself.
Because it may be that his fracture is folding without causing any shards, and some fractures run along the length of the bone and have shards and dư from the bone that are cleansed and uncleansed, and a break happens with a cut and tear in the skin, and a crack is a small fissure.
And each type has a specific trick to repair it, as will be explained in detail in its context, and what is recognized as a bone fracture is its deviation, confusion and the feeling of hard texture when you feel it with your hand.
So when there is no visible deviation, it does not rattle or feel hard when you touch the bone with disturbance, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture, but it can be soft or a very slight break or a small crack that should not be moved by movement and shaking.
But carry on him with the medicines that will be mentioned later when it is in place, then gently tighten it, and know that the bone is broken into two pieces without causing any shards, except that each part has gone away from its owner.
You should take prompt action to correct and level it before a hot tumor develops, for if a hot tumor does develop, you should leave it for several days until the hot tumor subsides, and then level it with any means of gentleness and ingenuity that you can muster.
And know that repairing and leveling it is easier than a bone that has fractures, and then it tightens on what will be mentioned later, if the bone has fractures, then there is no choice but to stretch the broken member from both sides hand or leg.
Whether with your hands if the member is small, or with two strings, or with a string and a hand, and let the member be placed on a level place on its natural shape until, when the two parts of the broken bone extend, then at that time remove those excesses in their places with any means of ingenuity and gentleness that you can.
And strive with all your effort that you do not cause pain or suffering to the patient with your action, and it is necessary in this time that you touch them and feel them with your hand, if you see anything that contradicts, then you repair it and level it according to your ability.
And be careful of strong stretching and powerful poking, as is often done by many ignorant people, and they often update with such action that a hot tumor or a tijdah in the member, as you have seen from their actions several times.
Then leave the member in a state of rest and quiet after correction and perfection, and warn the patient that he does not move it at all in the time of his alertness and sleep, and when he turns and disturbs, and when he defecates, and all his movements in order to achieve safety from pain.
And that is because he should not feel pain or discomfort when he feels the member in a certain position, then he transfers it to another position until he does not feel pain with it, and he strives with that, and he strives to make his posture even and straight.
In order to prevent any deformity in the member once it has healed, and as regards the method of tying the broken member, know that broken members vary in size, whether small or large, and their condition. What is small like the arm, finger, forearm, etc.,
The bandages should be flat and soft, and if they are thick like the thigh, back, and chest, the bandages should be wide and hard because a wide bandage is necessary for a large member and it should be tightened evenly on all sides without any deviation.
Then you begin to apply the plaster after you have made it smooth. Then you apply a soft plaster to the broken site and begin to wrap the bandage on the break site itself, three or four times, depending on the member's needs, and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage then go to the upper side of the break site.
With less tension than the tension you applied to the broken site, then you separate a little from the break site and loosen the tension slightly, a little at a time, until you get a proper angle, then take another bandage and wrap it around the broken site again.
Wrap, then go to the lower side of the break and let your action in tension and loosening be as mentioned when wrapping the first upper one, then place between the bandages a soft plaster or cloth that can correct the deviation of the break.
If there is a deviation, otherwise do not place anything in it, then wrap another bandage on top of it and make it flat on these tight plasters from your time if there is no swelling or hot tumor.
If there is swelling or a hot tumor, carry what soothes the tumor and gets rid of the swelling and leave it for a few days then tighten the bandage when ready, let the splints be made from half-round carved wood with care or let the splints be made from oakum wood.
The which are made of pine, or palm-leaves, or cypress, or burdock, and the like, so that each bandage is on this form and shape exactly.
Except that the splint which is placed on the broken bone itself should be thicker and wider a little than all other splints, and as for the length of the splint, it is made according to what suits the broken member of its size and smallness, the image of the splint:
Then you tighten the splints with another bandage according to your first tension, then tie from above with tightly wound threads, according to what we mentioned about the tension, that is, that your tension on the site of the fracture should be more. and as it gets farther away from the fracture, your tension lessens.
And the threads should be of average thickness and thin, and they should be made from wet canvas because if the threads are too thick like what I saw from the ignorant people making their stitches from canvas strips, it is a great mistake.
For your tension will fall outside the limits with them, and thin threads don't work either because you won't achieve what you want to achieve with them, nor should there be less than a finger between the splint and the splint.
If the patient feels pain in the tips of the splints after making the tension in the right places, then you should place something soft and fluffy underneath, or fluffed wool, so that he is not harmed by it, and as for if the fracture was accompanied by a wound and there was a tear in the skin, we will come to it separately.
And know that not every broken member needs to be bandaged on the first day, because if the member is large, it should not have splints put on it until after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the risk of heat swelling.
And this is the description of the bandages that were used to fix the first ones that were placed on the fracture and the jaw and the bruise, a brief and general bandage that fixes the fracture and is suitable for most humors, especially boys and women, because it is not beaten by heat or cold.
And it is that you take from the dust of the mill, which is the husk of the flour that clings to the walls of the mill when the millstone moves, and mix it as it is without grinding it with egg white, and make its dough neither thick nor thin, then spread it out.
A second bandage that fixes the fracture, dislocation, and bruise; it is taken from sheep skin, linden wood, pomegranate rind, raisin bark, and mulberry bark, each ten dirhams, and marjoram, each five dirhams, and myrrh, each twenty dirhams, and Armenian or Roman clay, each twenty dirhams. All of them are ground and mixed with water from oak or egg white if the humor is dry, then this bandage is used because it is good at assembling the bones that have been fractured quickly and is suitable for most people due to its moderation.
Another bandage that is useful for both fractures and bruises; it is taken from mulberry bark, myrrh, pomegranate rind, oak bark, each ten dirhams, marjoram, and honeysuckle, each five dirhams, raisin bark, six dirhams, and Armenian clay, twenty dirhams. All of them are finely ground and sieved, then mixed with water or egg white, and used.
A bandage for joints and loose bones that come out of their places, it soothes the pain that occurs in them and soothes the bone and fracture; it is taken from wool that has been treated with salt, immersed in vinegar and oil, then placed on the affected area. This bandage does not have much healing power.
But it is superior in soothing hot swelling and relieving pain, especially; a second bandage that fixes the fractured bone; it is taken from mulberry paper, wild poplar bark, both finely ground and Bandaged wet, a brief and general bandage used when the bone has healed partly.
And you want to analyze the rest of the tumor, you take from the origin of the maxilla and the daisy and purple powder and fine cassia of each part a part sharp all and knead with the paint if the member was not heated or if it was heated then knead with water of coriander or water and use it.
The recipe for a stronger compress than the first one, which is used when a solid tumor occurs after the breaking of the bone, take from the origin of the maxilla and the daisy and purple powder and fine cassia of each part a part sharp all and knead with the paint if the member was not heated or if it was heated then knead with water of coriander or water and use it.
Grind all of them and knead with water of tar or fresh water or with the paint, all of this depending on the temperature of the member and its calm heat, And whereas Hippocrates did not mention in his book that he should be placed on the broken member when it is healed.
Except the qurttiyyاط made of wax and oil only, and he described that it should be medium between thickness and softness, And whereas Galen saw that he should be placed on the broken member when it is healed the things in which there is dryness with something of heat such as salt and saffron and gum resin and the like what we mentioned.
A compress that is beneficial for weakness and pain, takeمغاث and roasted peanuts or bird feathers and maxilla and salt of equal parts, grind them all and knead them and apply them, And whereas the amount by which the bandage should remain on the member.
Then the solution is that you look, if there was no pain or itching or movement of the broken bone in its place do not solve it for many days because if there was a severe itching or painful shaking or swelling in the member.
Then hurry and solve it at the time and do not postpone it at all, and remove the bandage from him, then you take a soft cloth or a sea sponge wet with cold water and dip it in the water and wash the member until the itching is calm and the pain is calm, then leave the member to rest for an hour.
Then take a fine wool cloth soaked in vinegar and oil or rose-oil, and bind it on for a night, that you may keep the swelling cool and the member comfortable with no pain; then return it to the gentle stretch and loose bandaging, and do not stretch it as much as before.
And take care of it until it heals, if you see that the swelling, redness, pain and puffiness have all gone and do not need bandaging or stretching any more, return it to how you did it first time, whether or not anything has happened to the member.
Do not remove it until after three days, or four, or five, or twenty - all depending on how the member appears to you as we said; until such time as the fracture is healed and the meat is beginning to knit together.
And increase the stretching after that as much as your first stretch, and also increase the thickness of the food for the patient as we mentioned before; if you see that the fracture site has dried up and weakened more than it should, then know that the food is not reaching it.
And wash it with tepid water each time you take it off, and let it be three days; and decrease the stretch slightly; for in this way food will reach the member and it will heal quickly, whereas what ignorant people do when they break a bone again.
Because if it does not heal properly first time and heals crooked, this is an error on their part and a great mistake; and if it were right they would have mentioned it in their books and I have seen no trace of it in any of them. It is correct that you do not work on it, .
The second chapter.
In the accidental fracture in the head.
There are many types of accidental fracture in the head; its shapes are varied and its causes are many; some fractures are caused by a sword strike and some may be that all the bone ends up ending at the soft tissue under the bone called the membrane. As it does in wood.
And for that reason this type of fracture is called a "spontaneous" fracture, and if the sword cut some bone and baring its face only and did not penetrate to the rest of it, then this type of fracture is called an "absolute dislocation", and the wound in these two fractures may be large or small.
And of fractures there is what is called a "crush" or "shock", and its cause is a blow by a stone or a fall on a stone or similar, and this fracture is either penetrating, having approached the membrane that is under the bone, or that it may be in the face of the bone itself.
And the wound in these two fractures may be large or small, and of fractures there is what is called a  "subtle fracture" in bone marrow due to weakness and it moves with the force of little blow until it breaks. It moves with the force of a slight blow until it breaks.
And for that reason this type of fracture is called  "a hairline fracture", and it may be due to a fall or a hit by a stone and similar, which enters the face of the bone and becomes of the place depression as if it had been exposed to copper when it is struck by a blow, so it enters part of it inside.
And the most is that it is in the wet head, the bones of children's heads, and may be for all these types of fractures there are splintered and non-splintered fragments, and we will come to mention the treatment of them all in their place, and we recognize all these types of fractures by examining them.
And the examination with  "spoons" and removing the rotten meats from it, and as for the hairline fracture, it is known by examining the bone and rubbing it on ink, and the fracture appears black, and as for the treatment of the fracture, one should first look at the symptoms of the patient's condition.
If you see from its symptoms what indicates a clear sign of fear, such as vomiting bitter water and spreading and loss of mind and silence of voice and fainting and fever and severe headache and redness and swelling of the eyes and their reddening, and similar signs of disease, do not approach the patient or treat him, because death is certain to happen with these symptoms in most cases, without a doubt.
If you see symptoms that do not frighten you and if you wish for his safety, then take care of him. For if the wounded person comes to you in the first days after he was wounded and this happens during winter.
It is necessary that you strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in all cases, even if it is in summer days, then you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day before it ruins what is under the bone from the membrane, so that those symptoms that we have described.
If the bone fracture has reached to the membrane covering the brain and there is a deformity and a bump, then it is necessary that you cut off the damaged and deformed part on what I have described to you. That is, you shave the head of the injured person who has a bump.
And you uncover the bone in any way that is possible for you and according to the shape of the wound and what is easier on the injured person, if it appears to you when examining the bone bleeding or a hot swelling, then accept that with what is necessary.
That is that you fill the place with cotton pads soaked in vinegar and wax, and clean the wound until the swelling goes down and the bleeding stops, then you take and curve the bone and remove it, and this work has two ways.
One of these is that you cut the bone with a small, sharp blade.
Then you use another blade that is wider and shorter than the first one.
Then you also use another blade that is wider than the second one, and it is necessary that you have a set of different blades with some being wider than others and some being shorter than others, and they should be very sharp at the ends, made of good steel or Indian iron.
And use gentleness in striking the blade so that you do not shake the head and hurt it, if the bone is strong and hard, then you should bore around it before using blades; they call them non-submerged drills, and they only call them drills when they do not reach to the other side of the bone.
Because it does not exceed the limit of the skull bone to what is beyond it, because the perforator has a round letter on what is below his sharp head, similar to a small ring or circle, which prevents him from sinking and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
You should take from these perforators many that are suitable, each of which is right for the amount of the thickness of that bone until you prepare for every skull a perforator the amount of its sharp side in length and shortness according to the thickness of that skull, and this is an image of three types. From the perforators large and medium and small:
And as for the method of drilling around the broken bone is that you make the perforator on the bone and rotate your fingers until you know that the bone has passed then move the perforator to another location and make after what between each hole a distance equal to the thickness of the stick or similar.
Then you cut with the saws what is between each pair of holes and do that in order to the greatest extent possible of your hand from kindness as we have said until you remove the bone by your hand or by something else from some of the tools that I prepared for it.
Like the splint and clamps, you should take all caution that the perforator or saw does not touch anything of the membrane, if it is crimped on the bone and has recovered from the membrane if it was glued to it and removed it then it should be stripped.
And smooth out the roughness that remains in the bone with another tool that is similar to the saw except that it should be thinner and lighter than all other saws, and if there remained something of small bones and fragments then you take them with care with what you have from tools.
Then you treat the wound after that with the winding and ointments that comes in mention, and as for the other side of work is a side easy at all it is far from the risks ذكره Galen and praised greatly this is what he said: You should first begin by exposing the bone portion of the site where the fracture is more severe and common until you expose that part, you place a lens under this segment and this is its image:
The lens part of it should be smooth and not cut anything, and the sharp side of it in its sides going in length as you see so that the lens part rests on the membrane and the sharp side of the incision in the bone then you hit the incision from one side.
With a small hammer until it cuts all the bone gently as it rotates and you are safe from the membrane, no terrible accident happens, even if the healer is the ignorant people and the cowardest people yes or if he was sleepy.
If something remains necessary for the bone from the membrane in some bones of the bone then peel it off with the lens part of the incision and dispose of it gently, because it gets rid of it without pain or fear.
And if the bone fracture has not reached the membrane and what was cut from the bone is its face and there remains in it roughness and flakes of clay, then it should be stripped of that roughness and those flakes of clay with a gentle chisel that I have taken from her different amounts to enable you to use them in every place most suitable for them and most correct according to what leads you to work.
And the same bone and its shape, and it should be used in your inventory first for the bone, expose those chisels then use a finer one after it and keep doing that until you reach using the finest and thinnest ones all of them.
And the other small fractures and hair-like breaks and the mild fracture, it should be used for each one of them a treatment according to what leads to its repair, which is something that is not hidden from anyone who has the least experience in this craft and stopped at what we wrote and clarified in the large fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed after you remove the bone, you should take a cotton cloth to the size of the wound and dip it in rose water and place it on the mouth of the wound. Then you should take another cloth that is bent or folded. Dip it in rose water and ointment, place it on the first cloth, and do this as lightly as you can so as not to add pressure to the membrane. Then use a wide bandage on top of it, and don't tighten it except for what holds the wound in place.
Leave it with this treatment for a day or two to ensure that the swelling is gone, then remove it and use the ones that came with it, such as powdered myrrh, ground saffron, and small calamus root, and much frankincense powder.
Sprinkle it on the wound as it is dry, and in bulk, so use a medicine that can clear without burning, and strive with all your effort while treating the wound to keep it clean, free of grease, and not leave pus to accumulate in it.
Because pus, if it gathers on the membrane of the brain, will corrupt and decay it, which will cause a great misfortune for the patient, and it may occur in the scalp membrane when it is exposed by the removal of bone, especially if you neglect its treatment.
A black spot on the surface, look out for symptoms such as those we mentioned, know that he is certainly doomed, even if the blackness was only due to a medicine placed on it, and since this medicine can do this blackness, then it is in its power to cause this blackness.
Take a part of honey and three parts of rose water oil, beat them well, and smear it on a cloth, then put it on the membrane, then treat it with the types of treatment that should be done to help it heal.
Chapter III
In repairing the nose if it has been broken.
Be aware that it is not broken from the nose except both of them or one of them for two reasons: first, because they are bones because the lower part of him is cartilage and does not break, but rather it suffers from injury, bending and deformity.
If one of the sides breaks, then you should insert your little finger into the hole in the nose and straighten out that break from the inside with your index finger and thumb from the outside so that the nose returns to its natural shape, and let this be done by you with caution and make sure that what you do does not cause pain or discomfort to the patient.
If the break is in the upper part of the nose and the finger does not reach it, then it should be straightened with a slightly thicker rod, and if the break is on both sides, do the same, and let it be repaired on the first day of the break.
If possible, and if not, then after the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has settled, then insert a thread into the nose hole from cotton fabric if the break is on one side, or insert two threads if the break is on both sides.
And let the threads be thicker than what fills the hole in the nose, and some of the early surgeons mentioned that they should be soaked in fat and changed every day, but I do not see this as necessary, but it is best to soak the threads in egg white mixed with flour and dust of chalk.
Then leave the threads in place until the bone is healed and the cartilage硬化، and you can insert feather tubes into the nose at the site of the threads, after wrapping them with a soft fabric, so that the fixation of the nose break is more stable and to prevent the patient from having difficulty breathing.
And this is not necessary if you want to make the threads yourself, and if you wish, you can apply a paste to the nose in the place of the break, or dip a gauze in vinegar and oil and a kind of plasticine, or use a product made from diacetyl.
If there is no hot tumor, then it should be wrapped from the outside with fine semolina and finely ground camphor that has been kneaded with egg white, then you put a soft splint on it and do not tie the nose to anything at all, for if the bones of the nose are broken slightly.
Or if it has crumbled, then you should cut it open and remove it with the tool that is suitable for it, then stitch up the wound and treat it with what is suitable to patch and heal with from salves, for if there is a wound in the inside of the nose, you should treat it with tying and use lead pipes. until it heals.
Chapter Four.
In the repair of the lower jaw.
If the lower jaw has broken, and it is not a fracture with a wound, but a fracture from the outside only and has not broken into two pieces and sinks towards the inside, then knowing it is easy.
If the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your index finger from your left hand into the mouth of the patient. Likewise, if the fracture is on the left side, you should insert your index finger from your right hand and lift the fracture fragment gently from the inside to the outside.
Your other hand, outside the bone, should be used to straighten it. If the jaw has broken into two pieces, then you should use a splint on both sides to keep it in place. For if it has cracked teeth, they will grow together.
Or if it has separated, then you should tighten it with a string of gold or silver or silk, and then put the al-qirati on the broken jaw, then put a folded cloth on it, and put a large, secure splint on the cloth, or a piece of leather the length of the jaw. Then bind it from above according to what seems right to you and suits being bound together so that it does not move, and order the patient to rest and eat soft food. If you suspect that something has changed on one side of the face, act quickly on the third day.
Then bind it from above according to what seems right to you and suits being bound together so that it does not move, and order the patient to rest and eat soft food. If you suspect that something has changed on one side of the face, act quickly on the third day. Then fix what you took off with the dust of the mill along with the egg white or fine semolina, after removing the caustic from it and put on the bandage a soft splint; as long as that bandage sticks to it and does not change the condition of the bone, leave it.
Do not remove it until it heals and the fracture stiffens, for this fracture often stiffens in three weeks; if there is a hot swelling during that time, use what we have mentioned repeatedly to relieve it until it goes away.
And if the fracture is with a wound, if it has been cleared of bone fragments or fragments, soften in removing those fragments as much as you can remove them from the tool; if the mouth of the wound is narrow, widen it with the forceps according to your need.
Then, if you have not left any fragments, line the mouth of the wound, if it is wide; otherwise, carry one of the ointments that are suitable for this on it. And patch up the wound until it heals,.
Chapter V.
In setting a broken collarbone.
Most often the collarbone breaks from the front of the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in two places without fragmenting it; this is the easiest to set.
And if fragments occur in the fracture, which is more difficult to set; or if the fracture is with a wound, and if the fracture is not accompanied by a wound, prepare two assistants, one to adjust the upper arm next to the broken collarbone, and the other to extend the neck towards the other side.
Then, make the fracture flat with your fingers so that its shape is as it should be and there are no bumps or angles; if you need to extend it more, place a ball of rag or wool under the victim's armpit.
And let the bone be of a size to suit your need, and extend and raise the collarbone, and squeeze the ball with your hand until the fracture is level as it should be; if you are unable to pull one side of the collarbone out because it has gone deep into the chest, then let the patient lie on his back.
And place a medium-sized cushion under the patient's elbow, and have the assistant press down on the elbow until the collarbone that is deep rises up; and then fix the fracture with your fingers.
If you sense that a fragment of the collarbone has broken and is moving around, then carefully cut it out and remove the fragment gently; if the fragment is stuck in the bone, then prepare one of the saws you have ready for this purpose. Once you are under the collarbone, prepare the tool that preserves the skin; it is a tool made of wood or iron, and this is its image:".
It resembles a spoon without a handle, and its width is according to what you need for the size of the bone, whether large or small; and its length is also according to what you can work with; and let there be two sides, one wider than the other.
If the wound you have made when you removed the bone fragment is wide, and you have prevented the swelling of heat, then stitch up the wound; but if the wound is easy to heal or you fear the swelling of heat, then patch up the wound with bandages according to the size of the wound.
If there is a hot swelling, soak the bandage in rosewater and vinegar or drinkable liquid, and carry it with you; but if it is not necessary to wrap up the bone because there is no wound or incision, then carry on the bone with a bandage made of powder from the millstone mixed with egg white. And place a soft splint on it, then put the ball under the patient's armpit if needed, then take a long bandage that is about a foot wide, and wrap it around the splint and bandage; then take a roll of cloth that is flexible, then tie it to the end of the splint. It should be the width of three fingers and the same length; then insert it into a rag; then insert that rag with the plaster in the place of the turban that lies on the site of the fracture; then tighten the turban on the fracture as it turns. Wrap it around his neck and under his armpit on the correct side, and under the armpit of the patient; then wrap it several times on each side as you see that the tension holds the fracture firmly together, which is not hidden from you.
Just remember that the plaster should not move from the broken bone. Therefore, you should examine the patient every day; and whenever you see that the bandage has relaxed and the plaster has disappeared, repair it and tighten the bandage, and let the patient sleep on his back, and put a small pillow under his armpit while he sleeps at night.
To raise his shoulder from his side so that the fracture of the clavicle rises with the scapula, or to tie his arm to his neck; and do not remove the bandage unless a problem occurs, such as itching or swelling, for a period of twelve days.
Then change the bandage if you see a reason for it. Then tighten it again and leave it until the fracture heals and becomes more stable, and this will take about 28 days for it to become stronger and more stable. This may be the case in some people with less time.
Chapter six.
In the case of a shoulder fracture, it is rare for it to break in the wide part, but it often breaks in the middle, and this is only known by touching; so consider the shape of the fracture to determine whether it is a simple fracture or a complex one.
Do your best to restore it to its natural shape from all sides, then place a mixture of fine powder (raih) with soft chaste and put a rag on top; then cover it with a wide plaster.
Make a slit in the girdle the size of the shoulder or wider by a little, if it is under the bandage, chisel at a place on the shoulder, level that chisel with a soft chip until the bandage is level, then tie from above with a long turban.
Tighten and secure the bandage so that it does not move from its place, and check the binding every day; whenever the binding relaxes, tighten it and level the bandage if it moves from its place, and let the patient lie on his correct side, and the shoulder will be set in twenty.
A day or twenty-five days; if this period has passed, then the binding will be removed and you will be safe; because these are bones that are not afraid of being shattered or broken, and if a splinter of bone protrudes from the bone and lodges under the skin, split it open and pull it out. And do as I have mentioned in breaking the collarbone from reducing swelling if such a thing occurs, .
Chapter seven.
In bandaging breast fractures.
The chest can break in the middle, and this is rare; its edges are more likely to break and crumble. The symptoms of a broken middle part include leaning towards the ground, severe pain, difficulty breathing, and coughing.
Maybe blood has flowed, and the chisel in the broken bone can be felt, and it is not hidden from sense; its repair involves having the patient lie on his back, and a pillow is placed between his shoulders; then the ribs are gathered with hands from both sides, and they are gently leveled as much as possible.
And match it until the bone returns to its proper shape, then place a bandage and soft chip on top of it, and put a thin board made of mulberry or sage leaf, or something light, over the bandage after wrapping it in a cloth. Then, make the bandage loose enough to fit over the broken bone so that it does not slip off, and pass the bandage around the back several times and tighten it firmly, then inspect the bandage at all times, and whenever it becomes loose, tighten it again.
If, however, it is necessary to loosen it when there is a protrusion or pain or swelling at the site, then quickly loosen and remove the bandage and repair whatever has occurred as part of the treatment, and then replace the bandage if you think that is appropriate. Face it and tighten it firmly so that it heals.
Chapter VIII.
In the case of fractured ribs, know that the ribs occur only in the thick parts which follow the back and the ends from the front; it is evident that they are prone to injury because they are cartilaginous. This is not hidden from sensation when examined with the fingers.
And mend it by straightening the fracture with the fingers on a secure basis until the shape is even as it should be, and then wrap and tighten the broken bone with a splint if needed; if the rib fracture is inclined towards the inside, it will expose the patient to severe pain.
And knock as in the case of a rib fracture which is likely to affect those who have a spur; because the bone knocks against the diaphragm and also affects breathing and produces coughing and much blood, this is difficult to treat. The earlier ones have devised many techniques for it.
Some say that the patient's diet should be such that it generates wind and gas, so that the abdomen swells and stretches, and the fracture moves to the outside; we dislike this because it is not a confirmation of the occurrence of hot swelling if it has not occurred, but if it has occurred then it increases it and confirms it.
Some say that a plug should be placed on the site, then it is pulled hard; this is similar to measuring except that there is a fear that the plug will attract debris to the site because of its weakness, and some say that the site should be covered with wool that has been dipped in hot oil.
And the bandage becomes between the ribs until it is filled, so the ligature becomes flat if you wrap it on a round, then treat the patient with the treatment of the spike of food and medicine, if he saw that the illness was a heavy matter that he could not bear. And the bone was poking into the diaphragm painfully, and we were afraid for the patient, so it is necessary that we cut on the spot and remove the damaged rib then place the machine under it which preserves the fascia which has been described before, and we cut the bone gently and remove it.
Then we sew the wound if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it heals, if it develops a hot tumor in the meantime, so hurry up and bandage them with olive oil and put on the spot and treat the patient with what calms the tumor from the inside as well.
And he lies on the side that is easier for him to sleep, until it heals,.
Chapter 9.
In fixing the spine and neck.
While the spine and neck bones, if they are broken, and what is exposed to such injury is less likely to heal, and what is more likely to heal, as well as the vertebrae of the back, so if it occurs with someone and you want to know if it will heal or not. Then look, if you see his hands have become relaxed and numb and dead, and he cannot move them or spread them or squeeze them, and if you prick them or poke them with a needle, they don't feel it, then know that it will not heal in most cases, so he is doomed.
And if he can move them and feels the prick and poke, then know that the marrow of the bone has not been affected, and the patient will heal with treatment, if the spine fracture is like this and you want to know if it will heal as well or not.
Then look at his legs, if you see that they have become relaxed and what happened to the hands has happened to them, then, when he lies on his back, wind and stool come out without his will, and if he lies on his stomach, urine comes out without his will. And if he lies on his back and wants to pee, he can't do that, so know that he is doomed, so don't worry about treating him, because if there is nothing like that for him, the matter will be lighter, and the treatment of what has happened is that you aim to soothe the hot tumor.
By placing rose oil alone or with cooked egg yolks on the affected area, three times a day, until the hot tumor subsides, then you should put one of the strengthening, absorbent bandages on the site and tie it up tightly and order him to stay still and sedentary.
And he should not sleep except on the side that does not cause him pain until it heals, and if a chip or something has happened to him while he was struck in the bone, then it is necessary to split his skin and remove that bone. Then you gather the wound if it is large by stitching, then treat it with healing ointments until it heals, and if the last vertebra of the tail bone (sacrum) breaks, then you should enter the thumb from the left hand into the anus.
And the broken bone is straightened by the other hand as much as possible, and then you carry it on the bandage and splint if it needs it, and then tie it up.
If you feel a chip of the bone broken in it, split it open and remove it, then treat the wound with what has been mentioned above until it heals.
Chapter ten.
In repairing the fracture of the hip.
There is little chance of hip bones breaking, and if they do break, the fracture will be at the ends, and there will be pain in the affected area, leg weakness, and numbness in the leg on the side of the fracture.
And its repair is that you pass your hand over it until you are sure of the fracture, and if the fracture is in the ends only, then you level out that fracture as much as possible to make it resemble its natural shape.
If the fracture is in length or has turned inward, lay the patient on their belly until it is ready for you to set that fracture, and when you have made it even, you carry it with a bandage and then put a cast of wood or skin over it and tighten it up.
Do not fear for the fracture to shift or for the cast to fall off and become uneven in the hollows; fill it with something that will take the strain until it is level, and order the patient to sleep on their back or on their correct side, because if there is a hot swelling.
Cease to stretch and set it until the hot swelling subsides, and carry it with something that will soothe it as mentioned above, then return to setting and tightening it as it should be; for if there are shards in the bone or pieces broken from its ends, then it is not allowed to be removed.
And do not touch it, but make it even from the outside as we mentioned above and leave the strain on it until it heals.
Chapter 11:
Setting a fracture in the arm.
The member that is between the elbow and the shoulder head, if it fractures, then set it by taking a smooth curved stick of medium thickness on this image: [A illustration of a bent arm with a slingshot-like object wrapped around it]
And tie two bandages at its ends, and then hang it from a high place, and let the patient sit on a chair, and then put his broken arm on the stick until his elbow is stuck in the middle of the bend in the stick, and then hang something heavy above it.
Or have a servant extend it downward, then the doctor sets the fracture with his hands until the fracture is corrected, and the other face is that the patient lies on their heels, and a bandage is tied to their neck from their neck with a bandage.
Then order two servants to adjust what is above the fracture with their hands, and one to adjust what is below it, and each of them extends it to its side. If you want the extension to be stronger, then tie a bandage under the fracture and another above it, and let each of the servants extend it in his direction.
If the fracture is near the shoulder blade, then [the] band should be placed under the armpit and the other under the fracture towards the elbow, and likewise if the fracture is near the elbow, then the band should be placed on that place and on the elbow itself.
Then the fracture is gently smoothed without violence until it is straightened and joined together nicely, and then it is tightened. If there is no swelling, a hot poultice is placed on it, but if there is swelling, leave tightening for the seventh day and put a poultice on it, soaked in vinegar and rose water.
Until the swelling subsides, at which point it should be tightened; to tighten the bandage, put the bandage on the fracture, then put a new cloth bandage on top of the bandage, then gather the arm around the shoulder blade itself and place the hand open on the armpit.
And carry the bandage and tightening on the arm and the shoulder, so that the arm does the work of the splints if nothing prevents you from doing so and there is no change in the bone that has been broken, but if you are afraid that something will change about it, then use the splints.
This is that you place on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than all other splints, so that there is a space between each splint as wide as a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture, plus three fingers on each side.
Then tighten the splints with the tightening that you mentioned in the first section.
This is that your tightening should be stronger on the site of the fracture.
And whenever the fracture is farther away, the tightening should be less, if you see that putting the splints and tightening as we have said while you are bandaging the member from your hour then do it.
And if you are afraid of the hot swelling, then leave the tightening and splints until the seventh day as we mentioned before; then examine the bandage every three days to ensure that there is no itching or puffiness, or that food does not reach the member due to excessive tightening, so fix all of this according to what we have mentioned.
If you are sure that nothing of the above will happen, do not remove the bandage until many days have passed, and let the patient lie on his back with his hand on his stomach, and a rolled-up shirt put under the armpit.
And check every time, day or night, that the shape of the broken member does not change or that the bandage relaxes; correct all this with your own effort, and make the food of the patient soft first, so that when the bone is about to harden.
So the food should be thicker, for it is the custom of the arm and leg to harden in forty days, so at that time the bandage should be removed, and bath therapy and treatments with ointments appropriate for this should be applied; if the fracture is gross and displaced.
Do not remove the bandage from him until fifty days or two months, or
the second chapter.
in repairing a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, called the ulna and radius, the smaller one being that which lies next to the thumb and the larger one being that which is placed under the small one from below; so it may be that only the larger bone breaks or only the smaller one or both together..
If the smaller upper ulna bone breaks, then repairing it is easy and recovery is faster; and if the larger ulna bone below breaks, then healing is more difficult and worse if both bones break together; and the worst case is when the bones that have broken are those of the hand.
The doctor should, when repairing it, make the extension easy with care so that it is made straight; and if the larger ulna bone breaks, then it should be made to extend more firmly; and if both bones break, then it should be made to extend much stronger..
The shape of the hand should be laid out when mending and extended on a cushion; the thumb of the hand should be up higher than all the fingers, and the little finger should be lower than all the other fingers; the sick person should sit on their heels.
The cushion should be at the same height as the hand being repaired, so that the sick person does not have to struggle.
Then the servant of the arm should be extended from below, either with his hand or with a bandage, and another servant should be extended from above; then the doctor should make the bones straight until he brings them back to the best form possible, and if there are any pieces of bone, he should break them.
He should put back every piece of bone into its place, exerting himself; if there is a piece that emerges from the skin and does not give hope of being mended, split it and remove it, following the method we mentioned earlier; if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have dealt with this in an individual section.
Then take the treatment from there, if it swells up during your first repair, apply a hot poultice made of myrrh and white wax; it should be of medium thickness between thick and thin, and tightly wrap the cloth around it; gently tighten the cloth until the swelling subsides.
Then take off the poultice and place the bandage prepared from chalk powder and egg white; then put on the splints; the splint placed on the broken bone should be slightly wider and stronger; know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most cases.
If the fracture is in a single bone or in both bones together, then make your tightening at the site of the fracture stronger and tighter; and as you turn to tighten it upwards, make the tightening slightly looser on what we mentioned earlier in the first section, that is, if the fracture is in the middle of the bone, then you should make the bandages a little looser.
And let the strip which encloses the fracture be soft and wet, nor let it be too hard; and let the thread with which it is bound be of a special kind of silk, medium between fine and coarse, as we have described; and inspect the member and the ligament after days.
If something happens that needs to be fixed, such as an itch in the member, it should be washed with warm water until the itch is calmed, and the member should be left loose for a night so that it rests, then tightened again.
If the tightening has relaxed and the bone has receded, or something like that, fix it all by yourself, and look also: if food is prevented from reaching the member due to excessive tightening, loosen it slightly and leave it for days so that food reaches it, then tighten it again.
If nothing of what we have mentioned has happened to the patient, it should not be loosened until after twenty days or something like that, and then hang the patient's hand at his neck, so that his arm is moderate, and he guards his effort from disturbed movements, and makes his sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture of the arm in the arm will heal in thirty days or in two and thirty, and perhaps it will heal in eight and twenty days; all of this depends on the situations of the humors and the situations of strength,.
Chapter 13.
In Healing a fracture of the hand and fingers.
The bones of the palm and the joints of the fingers are less likely to suffer from fractures, but they are more likely to suffer from injuries; so when there is a fracture or an injury in the hand, it should be treated as follows:.
The patient should sit with his back straight and a chair in front of him at an even level.
Then the physician should place a bandage on the broken bone and straighten it, until such time as it aligns well; only then should a splint be applied from above, according to the nature of the injury.
I placed it in a soft cloth, if the fracture is downward toward the palm of the hand, make a half-sphere from a soft cloth and order the patient to grasp it with his broken hand then stretch with a long cloth.
Let the splint be made of leather that is soft so that it conforms to the curvature of all the hand and is tightened as needed, if the fracture is outward, then a splint should be made from above and another below in the hand so that the hand remains open and straight.
Then he carries the tension as the hand rotates and ties it between the fingers with the ribbon, if the fracture is in one of the phalanges then to align it properly, then tighten it with the palm, and if you want to make a small upright splint for it to support the fracture.
And it does not move, if the fracture is in all the fingers like the middle, ring, or little finger or index then align and tie with the healthy finger next to it or tie them all together on williness, this is better, or you can place a small upright splint on it to support the fracture.
As we said in the thumb, and check when you set it and its distance from the warm swelling, so you confront what is needed whenever something happens as his description repeated.
Chapter 14
In setting a hip fracture.
The thigh bone often breaks and can be felt because it moves forward and backward, and its repair is done by tying a bandage above the fracture and another below, while the patient lies on his face.
Then each bandage should be extended to its side at a moderate length, if the fracture is in the middle of the bone, and if it is near the root of the thigh then a soft bandage should be tied, whether from wool or like it.
At the root of the thigh towards the groin, so that the stretch is upward, and the other bandage below the fracture, and also if the fracture is near the knee, then let the bandage be near the knee to give the stretch downward, and then the doctor should align the bone with both hands until he returns it to its natural shape.
The bone heals well together; then the bandage and tension should be applied if there is no feverish swelling in the member, but if there is feverish swelling, leave it for a few days until the feverish swelling subsides, then return to its treatment.
As for its tying, it should be wrapped twice or three times with a solid and wide turban around the fracture, and what is left of it, then wrap the leg until the heel is at the root of the metatarsus, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, and make the ends of the thread come from above on both sides.
Then wrap what is left of the turban on the leg and thigh, then make a splint on the thigh at the site of the fracture, and make one splint on the shin bone, then fill the gap between the thigh and the leg with soft rags so that the tying is even.
Then start with the strong tying from the middle on the site of the fracture three or four times, and whenever you move away from the site of the fracture, let your tying be less stiff and softer and looser.
Then go to the ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and the leg, tie what is next to it from the splints above, then pass the ends of the thread down until you reach the heel of the foot, and also tie both ends of the splints from the other side.
So that the bandage does not come off from its place, and then leave the tying on it as long as there is no swelling, burning, or swelling on the member, and if something happens like that, hurry to solve it and fix whatever has happened in what we have mentioned above several times.
If there is a piece of bone sticking out, it should be made flat if you can do so, otherwise, cut it off and treat the wound with like what we have mentioned above until it heals, and this fracture may be tied from the thigh without adding the shin with splints.
As we have mentioned in the case of the upper arm and forearm, except that when it is healed thus, it does not expose the patient to lameness; but if it is healed alone without including the leg with it, then the owner will always be lame.
Be aware that the thigh stiffens in fifty days, or increases a little or decreases a little, all of this depending on the difference in humors and other conditions.
Chapter 15.
In breaking the kneecap.
If the kneecap is little exposed to fracture, it is often injured; and if it is fractured, it may be either a split or a splintering in its parts, and that may be with a wound or without one.
And stand on all of this by sensation, repairing it by making what is separated from its parts join and unite as much as possible with the gentleness and skill, then cover it with a bandage and carry it with a splint if it needs it.
And tighten up from above with the tension that is appropriate for it, and then take care of all the conditions that we have described in all breaks like the hot swelling and so on by meeting every cause with what is suitable for it until it heals, and:
Chapter 16.
In repairing a leg fracture.
If the leg has two bones, one thick called the femur and the other thin called the tibia, both are exposed to the types of fracture that occur in the bones of the arm. Therefore, its repair is like the repair of the arm, and the work is the same; if both bones break, the leg will turn in all directions, and if the thinner bone breaks, it will turn forward, and if the thicker bone breaks from below, it is something that is not hidden from you.
So use bandages and tightening and binding splints according to that, except that it is necessary if the leg fracture is gross and has many shrapnel that the bandaging is less and lighter and take care in your efforts to repair it.
And there is something more than the work of the leg, which is that if you level the splints and finished all your work, take two pine planks used in flattening rooms placed between slats or are from palm leaves or like it.
And choose from her what has a little thickness, and let not be of the thin ones, and let its length be on the length of the leg from the knee to the bottom, then wrap on each one two bandages on its length, and put the one of the leg, and the other from the side.
And let them be from the knee to the bottom of the foot, then tie the two pine planks in three places on both sides and in the middle because with this strapping the leg will prevent from tilting to the right or left and will strengthen it well, and may use a trough made of wood on the length of the leg.
And put it to keep him from movement, and most of what you should do that is in the fracture if there is a wound especially, then check the leg every day and take care of it with great concern about swelling or gasping or other. So when something happens, face it with what is required to heal, and the leg bone heals in thirty days or so,.
Chapter 17.
In the fracture of leg bones and fingers.
As for the heel, there is no exposure to fracture at all, and as for leg bones, it may be exposed to fracture, and fingers too; what happens to them is injury in most of the cases.
So if it is exposed to fracture of the leg, you see those bones have almost touched each other, then let the patient put his foot on the ground erect like a walker, and then you put your foot on what has risen from those bones, and level them.
Until you return it to its places, then carry the bandage and a wooden splint from above, and put under the sole of the foot a small board have two flat heads, then tighten it with a firm grip after wrapping it with bandages and everything else that you need.
If three or four days have passed, then release the bandage; for you will find that the bones are even, whether they were broken or dislocated. As for if some of the fingers broke, mend them and make them even according to what I have described for you in mending the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger according to the length of the finger and let it be slightly wider than that; then place under the foot this board which I have described to you, and tighten it well. If two or three or more of the bones are broken.
Then make a splint for each finger of its own length, with an indent in a soft cloth, and tighten the board at the bottom of the foot; and let each head of the板 be propped out from the sole of the foot by about half a centimetre so that it is securely positioned.
You should not forget to take care of all that we have mentioned to you in the other breaks of the symptoms we have mentioned, and adapt each symptom as it requires.
Chapter XVIII.
In the break of the woman's pubic bone and the mention of man.
When the woman's vulva is broken, she should be seated and then lean her slightly towards her back; the midwife should then stuff cotton into her vulva until it is filled and becomes like a ball in her vagina.
Then shake the woman, and raise her hips slightly; that cotton will come out until it is at the entrance to the vagina like a ball, and the fracture of the bone will be corrected; then put a bandage on her back. When she wants to urinate, take off the cotton gently so that she can urinate.
And return it to the first bandage it was put in; do this for seven days or so; if you wish, take a sheep bladder and tighten an tube at its mouth and insert all of the bladder into her vagina.
Then blow strongly into the tube until the bladder swells inside the vagina, for the fracture will then be healed, and stuff it with cotton and remain a few days on what we have described until he is healed, and as for when the bone of the perineum has broken in a man or woman, it is used to repair it.
And smooth it out as we have described in the hip bone, and it is not hidden from you the correctness of this unusual fracture that is rare to happen especially for those who have some training and understand my book well, yes because the fracture itself guides you in most cases.
On the way to repair and tighten it, so understand, and as for mentioning a man if his femur has broken like an owl's throat, he enters the penis into it then he is placed on it a cloth pad and is bound and left for three days or so until he heals, and.
Chapter 19.
In repairing fractures of bones when they are accompanied by wounds.
It is necessary for someone who has a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially if the bone is large, such as the femur or humerus, or similar, to promptly perform bloodletting if you help you with the conditions of bloodletting as we have previously presented.
If the wound is bleeding, you should promptly cut it by pouring upon it a powdered acrid substance if another is not available, and then take care to repair the fracture on that very day and do not delay it.
If there is no swelling, then leave the repair until the ninth day to allow the swelling to subside, and do not touch it on the third and fourth days at all, for he will be exposed to bad symptoms.
If the broken bone is protruding through the skin, then you should try to repair and smooth it with your hands gently and slowly, and if you cannot do so with your hands, then use this tool which is made of iron and its length is about seven or eight fingers. Cut off what is necessary and leave what is not.
And for this reason the physician should take three or four of them according to what is needed from treatment in each type of fracture, and let them be round, a little thicker so that they do not bend when pressed upon at the time of work.
And let it be pointed at one end, with a curve on one side and the thickest part above and the thinnest in the middle; this is its appearance: .
And they are called, in Greek, بيرم يريدون, a little splint; so it should become a sharp curved end on one side of the bone that has come out and push it with it once [until] when the bone has returned and is slightly levelled, then grind the ends of the fractures together.
If the broken end of the bone is thin and has not been taken over well by the saw, then you should cut off that end of the bone so that the machine can work on it; if you are not able to put the bone back at all in what we have described, then cut it with a similar type of cuts that we have mentioned.
Or spread it with one of the saws as best you can, and then remove what is left in the bone of roughness and small scales; if you return the bone and find that there is a strong pain that disturbs him after returning it, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you can return it to its natural position, do so because it will benefit the patient greatly; if you have completed mending the bone, then dip a cloth in a black glue solution and special thing if you are in summer, and do not put anything on the wound that has wax or oil.
So that it does not happen therein putrishment and corruption, then use the splints while you are free from gaping at the wound by cutting holes with a pair of scissors in the bandages according to the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to tie the wound tightly with the fracture, for often this has been done by ignorant physicians, who have thus caused death or gangrene in their patients; let your tying be soft and loose, contrary to the way other fractures are tied.
If the wound is bad or is a large wound and you are afraid of some unfavorable symptoms that we have described, and if it causes pain in the area that worries you, then it should not be placed on it splints; make him wraps made of stiff cloth in the place of splints and bind it with them.
If after a day or two you see that the wound has begun to generate pus, then remove the cloth that you placed on it with vinegar, and then use the gauze and ointments which are of our custom to treat wounds such as the quadrangular ointment and like, and it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage.
Check the wound every morning and evening until it heals, and it is necessary for you to set the member so that it drips down easily; if after many days the wound has not healed or stopped bleeding, then know that there are small pieces of bone in it.
Then inspect the wound with the probe, and whatever of those fragments is cleaned up, remove it and extract it; and whatever of them does not clean up, and pierces the member and causes pain, saw it and remove it by all means that you can do that.
If the wound becomes infected or rotten or any other type of decay and putrefaction, then you should deal with each symptom with its corresponding treatment that was described in its chapter.
And what you should stand at the saying of mine and bring it to your mind, if a large bone is broken and the shattering is on the member such as the femur and the radius and like of the large members, do not expose yourself to its pull and removal. Frequently death results from this; but I leave it until it putsrefies, and perhaps it will fall of itself after twenty or thirty days.
Then, when you see a place where treatment is possible in the wound, you should treat it; otherwise, leave it alone.
Chapter 20
In treating the complication that occurs after a certain fracture.
Frequently this complication occurs after the fracture has healed, particularly where it is near a joint; then the shape of the member is deformed and perhaps hinders the normal function of the member.
If the complication is soft, then use drugs that contract, such as aloe, myrrh, licorice, aniseed, pomegranate skin, and others; take some or all of them and grind them with a contraction solution or with egg white or vinegar.
And carry it on the complication in a piece of wood and tighten it very well and leave the tension not to حلّه for many days then حلّه and repeat another one until God wants the complication to go away, or you can fasten a sheet of lead upon it.
If the lead has a special property that removes all the bad stuff from the organs, and if the complication has hardened and intensified and the necessity to remove it arises, then split it from above and cut off the excess or scrape it with some sharp instrument until it goes away; then treat the wound so that it heals.
Chapter 21
In treating a fracture after it has healed and the member has remained thin instead of its original shape.
If the bone fracture has healed, and the member has remained thin and weak, this is due to a number of reasons. One of these is either due to the numerous ruptures of the ligaments and tying them in a way that does not ought, or because of excessive tension on the ligaments so that food cannot flow to the member, or because of excessive pulling, or because of improper movements at the wrong time, or because of a lack of blood in the sick person's body and its weakness.
And the treatment is to feed the patient and fertilize his body until his blood increases, and to use the bath and introduce pleasure and joy and so on, then carry the pitch on the member to attract the pitch to it a lot of food or continue to stretch it with lukewarm water. until it runs food in it and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22
in the treatment of broken bones if they are bent and prevented from acting as they should.
When a member is displayed, after it has healed, an abnormal curvature or deformity of the broken bone or has become complex and ugly in its shape. However, the member has not prevented its natural function, so one should not accept the word of one who claims that he can break a limb from the head; many of the ignorant doctors and bone-setters in our country used to do that.
This action is highly objectionable, and can lead to great harm; but if the curvature and complexity are soft, it should be soaked in water that has been cooked with herbs that relax, such as kholmi (a type of plant), original eکلil (a type of herb), and king's wreath (a type of plant).
And bandaged with relaxing strips such as the finely-ground diachylon or taken the latex of the original kholmi (a type of plant) and mixed it with chicken fat and oil of syriac (a type of bird) and bandaged with it, or taken dried figs and ground them with pig's fat and some of the fat of swans, and bandaged with it; these are medicines that are said to accelerate healing.
And the complexity should be massaged with soft, gentle movements using the hands in all directions at all times; if the curvature has progressed, become fixed, and hardened, and the necessity has called for treatment with iron.
then the top should be split, the bone's connection should be released, and any excess complexity or bone should be cut with fine knives, and care and caution should be used in doing so; then the wound should be treated with what has been mentioned above until it heals, and
Chapter 32.
The jaw is a joint that can come out of place, hindering movement and disfiguring the member and causing severe pain in the patient. Therefore, when any person experiences jaw problems, they should promptly try to restore it to its proper position.
Do not delay it at all, because if it is delayed, the joint will swell and rot, which will make it difficult to restore the jaw to its position. Therefore, it should be promptly tried to be returned to its place, as it often happens that the patient feels spasms and severe pain.
However, if it occurs, one should promptly bleed the patient and then leave him alone until the swelling subsides slightly, after which the member should be cleaned with hot water and oil, and then gently restored to its place. Then each member should be treated as mentioned in its own section.
The chapters on jaw surgery have also been arranged according to what has been mentioned earlier in the book regarding fractures from the top of the body to the bottom.
Chapter 24.
In the treatment of a lower jaw fracture.
In rare cases, the two jaws may slip out of place easily. They can slip out partially or completely, causing them to relax slightly. The patient's saliva will flow, and he won't be able to control his tongue or speak clearly. If the jaw has only slightly slipped out of place, it can sometimes self-resolve with the most basic care.
If the dislocation is complete, one should promptly try to restore it without delay. The doctor should insert the thumb of their hand into the patient's jaw at the origin from one side.
If the jaw is broken on both sides, and all the thumbs as well as the other fingers, he shall loosen the jaw and order the patient to let it go in any direction; then the doctor shall adjust the jaw and push it back until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to return it, especially if both jaws are broken, then use hot water compresses and oil until it becomes easier to return them, as we have said. If they returned and became even and closed the mouth of the patient and did not relax them at all, then put on them cotton wads with a salve made from wax and oil and resin.
Then bind it gently with a loose bandage, and the patient should sleep on his back with his head raised between two pillows so that he does not move to the right or the left, and he should not try to chew anything, but he should eat soft food.
Until the pain goes away and the jaw is healed, he can eat whatever he wants, but he must be careful not to put any strain on his mouth when eating or drinking or clearing his throat, until the jaw heals completely.
If the jaws do not return to their places and separate at a certain time, often there are high fevers and constant headaches, and sometimes he may have diarrhea or vomiting many times, then know that he is damaged.
And many of them die from this condition within ten days.
Chapter 25
In the repair of jaw at the shoulder and armpit.
As for the shoulder, it does not separate from the inside due to its connection to the chest, and it may separate from the outside, and this can be determined by touch. The patient should lie on his back and extend his arms.
Then you press the place with your hand strongly and it returns, then you put the bandage and splints on it and tighten them. As for its end which is near the shoulder joint and connected to it, it does not come out except rarely; if it came out one day, it should be put back and levelled as we mentioned and what presents itself to you.
Then you put the bandage and splints on it and tighten them, and you order the patient to stay in bed and rest until he recovers, with this treatment alone, you will put back the shoulder blade if it has also come out of its place.
Chapter 26.
In fixing the shoulder joint.
Know that the shoulder joint can dislocate in three ways: it can come out towards the bottom of the armpit, it can come out towards the chest, and sometimes it can come out above the shoulder. This only happens rarely.
It does not come out behind the shoulder place or in front of it because of the nerve, and most often it comes out and goes down towards the armpit, especially in people whose flesh is thin, as it comes out quickly with them and goes back quickly.
As for those whose flesh is thick, it is the opposite; that is, it comes out with difficulty and goes back with difficulty, and sometimes a person may suffer from a blow or a fall, which causes swelling in the shoulder, and one might think that it has dislocated, so you should test it to find out if it has actually dislocated.
Then you advance in its treatment, and you can tell if the shoulder joint is going down towards the armpit. If you compare the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, you will find a clear difference between them, and you will find that the head of the shoulder is Deformed and, when touched under the armpit, feels like an egg.
A patient cannot raise his hand to his ear or move it in any way. If the patient bends forward, you will see this clearly.
And this jaw can be easily reduced if it is soft or the patient is a child. Reduce it by having an assistant raise his hand up, then you place your thumbs under the patient's armpit and firmly lift the joint up to its position. The assistant raises his hand and extends it upwards.
Then lower it down. If it does not reduce as mentioned above and this jaw has been dislocated for several days, the patient should bathe in hot water and use a softener that relaxes and softens, such as cooking Root of khashshash (khush-khush), halber and ekleel-o-malik (egelel-o-malek) in water and use it.
Then the patient should lie on his back and put a ball of wool under his armpit, which is moderate between laxity and rigor. Then the doctor places his foot on the ball and grabs the patient's hand with his and extends it downwardly.
And pushes the ball with his foot, he will retreat to a certain position. If you want, reduce it in this way: stand a man taller than the patient next to him and bring his armpit under the patient' armpit and lifts his armpit up until the patient hangs in the air. And another assistant pulls the patient' hand downward his stomach. If the patient is light, you should hang something else on him to weigh him down, so the jaw will retreat at once. It may also be reduced in another way.
It is that you focus on the ground a long, thin wood whose head is round like a mortar's head, not too thick or too thin. Then place it under the patient' armpit after placing a soft cloth at the top of the wood. The patient stands on the length of the wood.
Then he extends his hand towards the other side and also extends his body with force from that side, then the joint returns to its place quickly. If it is difficult to restore it using all of what was mentioned above, then use this treatment, which is to take a piece of wood about the length of an arm. And make it four fingers in length and two fingers in thickness, with a round tip to facilitate its entry into the depth of the armpit, as follows:
Then he ties a soft patch on the round tip to prevent injury to the wood, and then places his hand, arm, and forearm on top of the wood, pointing down, and binds the wood to the elbow, forearm, and hand.
Then the arm is placed on a beam. A cushion is placed at the width, and the hand is extended towards the bottom while leaving the rest of the body suspended from the other side, then the joint returns to its place quickly. If it becomes difficult in any way to restore it, then a ball of moderate size made of wool should be placed under the armpit.
Then he carries the prepared wrap made of ground rye, with licorice and egg white on the entire armpit as it rotates above, then tightens the ball from under the armpit, and ties the bandage from above to the wrap, hanging his hand by his neck.
He should leave it unmoving for seven days, and he should make the food of the patient light so that the member recovers quickly; then it is solved after five or seven days, and it is trained with movement, if it has not relaxed and recovered, then it has healed.
If the joint dislocates a lot due to moisture exposure or another disease, then cauterization with the three feathers as mentioned earlier in the cauterization chapter should be used, if this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days, and the joint does not stabilize, then it has healed.
I re-wrapped and tightened it several times, but it still didn't stay in place and fell back down and relaxed. I couldn't lift it up anymore. So you should know that the nerve in the shoulder blade head has either been cut, stretched, or relaxed. At that point, you should know that the joint will never stay in its place.
As for the jaw that is towards the chest and breast and behind, it should be pushed back and moved with the hands until it goes back, and all types of tightening and treatment are used to heal it. If it still hurts after healing, then it feels sore in the member and its movement slows down.
So let the patient use the steam bath many times until this pain softens and returns to its first nature.
Chapter 27
In treating elbow joint.
The elbow joint can dislocate with difficulty and also returns with difficulty as well; it dislocates towards all directions, especially towards the front or behind. The jaw doesn't escape your notice because it is right under your sight and touch to any shape it dislocates.
And when you combine the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, it will be clear to you in an obvious way by curling the joint. The arm can't bend or touch its shoulder blade, and you should quickly respond and fix the dislocation as soon as possible before a hot tumor forms.
If a hot tumor is displayed, then it should be fixed with difficulty; and especially if the jaw is behind, as it is the worst of all types of dislocation and the most painful. It often leads to death.
And it is repaired if it is one of the things that can be fixed by having a servant extend his hands with both arms and the doctor's hand over the elbow from above and below, and pushing the joint with the thumbs of both hands or with the thumb of the hand, so that it returns to its place.
And if the jaw is forward, it may be returned by bending the hand once until it strikes with the origin of the back of her wrist that borders it, then did not return the jaw to return so use a strong power very much it is to extend the arm servants.
And the patient should be held by two servants so that it does not move when extended, and then the arm is moved in all directions after winding a cloth or a wide piece of cloth on his hand, and when the surgeon begins to operate with his hands, he wipes them with oil to facilitate the sliding of the joint.
Then the joint is pushed hard until it returns, and after returning, it should be wrapped in a bandage that includes blood plasma and egg whites and tightened securely, and the arm is hung from the patient's neck and left for a while.
Then take it off if the joint stays in place, and if you see that the joint has not become strong, but rather weak, then replace the bandage and the strap and leave it for a while until it strengthens, and then remove it, and if he experiences pain after returning the joint and removing the bandage, then put it back on him.
And if there is difficulty in movement, then use moisture in the bath and gentle massage and tapping until it becomes softer, or put a sheep's bladder on the joint, and tie it to him and leave it for a day and a night, then remove it and put him in the bath, and if he sweats, then wipe the joint with moderate sweating.
Then repeat putting the bladder on him once or twice or three times with entering the bath until it becomes softer, and if you want to put cow's bladders on him moistened and slightly massaged with oil and tighten it on him, do that several times because it will become softer and return to its first state.
Chapter 28.
In treating the dislocation of the wrist.
In treating the dislocation of the wrist. The wrist joint often becomes dislocated, and reducing it is easy compared to other joints, but one should quickly reduce it as soon as it comes out before it gets swollen or there is a hot swelling in it.
To reduce the wrist of the patient, place the wrist on a board and let the server extend his hand, then place the doctor's hand on the joint and push it back until it returns, but one should look to see if the reduction has been successful by looking at the palm of the hand.
Let the patient place his hand on the board when extending and reducing it, and if the joint is突出 to the palm of the hand, let the doctor' side be placed on the board so that his hand falls on the same joint, and if it returns from one time and another, then tighten it with a bandage that reduces swelling.
And leave it alone, and it will not tolerate it, and you cannot reduce it after a few days except that the joint remains in its place and does not harm the patient, unless the hand becomes weak and unable to grip anything.
Then you will know that the nerve has been cut or damaged, and there is no way to treat it except to tighten it with stitches, which may benefit or may not benefit at all; then, when the wrist is reduced, put on the bandage we described, then tighten it and leave it for five days.
Then untie it and exercise the hand, and if its movement becomes difficult and there is something like a crackling in it, then soften it with hot water and massage it several times until it softens.
Chapter 29.
In treating the dislocation of the fingers.
The fingers may come out in any direction; when one finger comes out to the palm of the hand or the back of it, extend the finger and reduce it with your thumb as soon as possible, then tie the end of the finger and hang it towards the direction it came out.
Leave it for two days then let it go and stretch it until it stands upright on its own. If it is at night, bind it to the same shape. Continue to undo it during the day and practice moving it and binding it at night. Do this for several days until it strengthens.
And do the same with it if it comes undone and goes into the palm of the hand, binding it towards the same direction. And do the same as you did the first time until it heals, and also do the same with it if it comes undone in other directions.
Chapter 30.
In the treatment of a dislocated girdle of the back.
If a girdle of the back or neck has come undone completely, or if many beads have fallen from their positions, there is no treatment as death speedily overtakes the patient.
This is indicated by the fact that the patient's stools come out without his control, and he often becomes relaxed in some of his members, his legs or arms, or one of them; and if a single bead falls from its place, then many beads fall.
And it falls in four directions; what falls behind is called a hunchback. As for its treatment, one should observe: if it is a hunchback that has occurred due to childhood, there is no cure or recovery from it at all; and as for the one that has happened due to a fall, a blow, etc., there is a treatment for it.
They have mentioned it with various methods of treatment, in a long discourse that does not yield much benefit, and I have truncated it; what is worth mentioning is brief over what they have not mentioned and explained it, and I have depicted the apparatus differently from what they have described and explained it.
I say that the hunchback that occurs in front, in the chest area, has no remedy or recovery from it, nor does the one that occurs on both sides; only the one that occurs in the back can be treated using what I will describe and illustrate. This is done by laying the patient on his face.
On a platform level with the wall and spread a wet mattress beneath it so that his chest is not hurt, then place a strong beam upright in a hole in the ground at one end of the platform near his head and another beam at his feet at the other end of the platform.
And a server holds the beam and let it not be secure in the hole, and another server holds the other in this way then wrap on the chest of the sick and under his armpits with a soft, thick cloth and extend the edge of the cloth to the beam that is at his head and tie him to it.
Then wrap another soft, thick cloth above his hips and above his knees and at his ankles, and tie all the ties together and attach them to the other beam that is at his feet, and then each server should stretch the beam to its side without removing the beams from their secured places in the ground.
Unless they are secure as we said, and the doctor places his hands on the block with force so that it returns or he places a board then leans on the board with his feet so that it returns, if it does not return with this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms.
And dig in the wall that we said is near the sick person a place to put in one end of the board, then place the middle of the board on the hump, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and he tightens it firmly so that he presses down on the block.
And returns to its place, and if you want to make it with a spiral that is twisted by hand, which is that you dig in the ground at the head of the sick person near one end of the platform, two beams whose length is an arm, and at his feet near the other end of the platform also two beams.
And let there be a space of one span between each beam, and after he has made in each beam a hole, and the spiral is secured, and all the beams are secure in the ground, yes, until it does not move at all, and enter a rod with a spiral, which is the spiral that is twisted with the ribbon in the holes of the two beams.
And at the end he drilled a hole that had been tightened with a stick as long as a shabbar, and did the same in the other two logs, and then tight the bandage that you had tightened in the chest of the sick man in the spiral that was at his head and the bandages that you had tightened in his legs in the spiral that was at his feet.
Then he stands at each loop, the servant twists his hand with the twine that he twists with the loop and the doctor levels the hump as we have mentioned, and this is a picture of the loop, the board and the sick man:
Then, after the servitor has returned and the position has been made level, it is necessary that the drying bandage be carried with egg white then the plaster then place on top of the bandage a splint from a board whose width is three fingers or something like that, and its length is what takes the place of the hump.
And on some good-quality nut then ties with the bandage that should be used and uses the mild food until it is healed, if there was still a bit of bump in the place at the end of healing, it is necessary to use the drugs that relax and soften while using the board we have described for a long time.
And you can use in that a sheet of lead, and a bump might be in the last nuts of the back, so it may be thought as a dislocation, and this is an extra bone that has grown up and has not been eaten, so do not expose him to this treatment because it may cause death,.
Chapter 31.
In treating the dislocated hip.
Know that the hip joint and the shoulder joint, only present four faces on which they separate, while other joints are slightly lost and collapsed. The hip joint dislocates in four directions.
For it separates to the inside, to the outside, to the front, and to the back, and most of it separates to the inside, and little separates to the front or the back, and a sign of separating it to the inside that if you compare the healthy leg of the sick man with his diseased leg find that the latter is longer.
The knee is hyperextended more than it should be; the patient cannot bend his leg at the groin, and the area next to the groin becomes warm and warmer before the head of the thigh has reached that spot.
The signs of the hip being dislocated are opposite to these signs, and if the hip is forward it will straighten its leg completely but cannot bend it without pain in the knee; if he tries to walk, he won't be able to do so forwardly.
The patient's urine is repressed and his groin becomes stiff; if the hip is displaced backward, the knee cannot be straightened and before the groin can be bent, the leg will not be able to bend without pain in the knee; when walking, his weight will be on the heel, and if the hip is displaced backward, the leg will also be shorter than the other.
The groin is relaxed and the head of the thigh can be seen at the position of the lomb-sacral joint; as for the types of this hip displacement, if it is old and has become chronic with its owner and has not tried to correct it and has remained in that state, there is no treatment for it at all.
Do not expose him to it, but if the hip is recently displaced and of any of the four types of displacement from the hip joint, hurry up to twist the joint and stretch it toward the inside and outside and move it right and left; perhaps it will be able to move.
It will go back without needing anything else; if it doesn't go back like this, you should prepare a strong and capable servant who extends his leg from below with his hands or with a cloth tied above the knee, and another servant who extends it from above.
By having one of his hands enter under his armpit, then tight a loose cloth on the root of the thigh; and another third servant who will stretch it from in front from the groin to the shoulder blade, or from behind to the back.
And let them all be extended at the same time so that the sick person's body rises from the ground and remains suspended, for this type of extension is a common type for the four types, if the jaw returns with what we mentioned, otherwise it must be that each type of the things I mention has its own specific treatment.
As for his own return if the jaw is towards the inside, it should be that the patient lies on his correct side and then a towel is laid at the root of the femur between the head of the femur and the place under the ribs.
Then he extends the ligament from the side of the ribs up to the top of the back to the side of the collarbone, and then another strong servant takes both his arms and embraces the thick place in the sick leg and extends it strongly outward, so it returns to its position.
This type is easier than the other types of treatment that involves returning this member, and if it is difficult for you to do this type of treatment or if it does not respond, then it should be bound all four legs of the patient with a strong soft ligament at the heels and knees.
And each of its owner should be the distance of four fingers, and the sick leg should be extended more than the other by two fingers, then hang the patient on the head from a wooden beam in the house that is away from the ground by two arms.
Then order a strong servant to embrace the head of the femur and another servant hangs on the patient, and the first servant pushes with strength, so the joint returns to its position quickly, but if the return is not successful or slow, then it should be bound all four legs together and laid on their backs.
Then the patient should lie on the bed according to what we described in the owner of the hernia, and the ligament should be tight on his sick leg and chest, then two wooden beams are placed, one under his legs and the other under his head, and an additional beam is placed in the middle of the bed firmly.
If it is wrapped around the patient's leg, a moist cloth should be used to prevent injury; the splint should be placed between the thighs so that it does not pull down when the leg moves during the tide; then each servant should hold his end and the doctor should level the hip with his hands, and if it responds by returning to its place.
If it does not respond, then the splint should be placed and pressed as we have mentioned in the case of a hernia; except that the patient should lie on his correct side; and if the dislocation is forward, the patient's leg should be extended once while he is in this very position on the operating table.
The doctor should place his right hand on the patient' hip and then press with his left hand; and, nevertheless, he should make the pressure downward toward the knee; and if the dislocation is to the back, it is not appropriate for the patient to extend downward.
He should be raised on the ground; but he should be placed on a hard thing; and it should also be that his leg is extended away from his hip, as we have mentioned, while he is on his side on the operating table, and the bandages are tight.
As we have mentioned above; and it is appropriate to use the splint on the position that the joint has come out of, if the hip joint returns to its place as should be, and there is no doubt about its return; then the patient' leg should be extended.
If you see them both level and the patient tightens his leg and extends it without any difficulty, then know that the joint has returned to its proper place; and at this point, you should join the hips together; tie the bandage tightly and with a turban-like knot so that the hip does not move in either direction.
You must keep the patient still for three or four days, then remove the bandage and compare the legs; if they are equal in length, then know that the joint has healed; you can then allow the patient to walk. If you see any relaxation in it,
Then wrap it and tighten it according to your first tightening and leave it for three days then untie it and walk slowly on it for a few days until it gets stronger, God willing.
Chapter 23.
In the treatment of knee dislocation.
The knee can dislocate in three directions: inward, outward, and downward; it never dislocates forward. The sign of a dislocated knee is when the patient is instructed to flex their leg towards their thigh.
If it doesn't attach to the femur, then you know the knee is dislocated. To reduce all the aspects of a dislocated knee, have the patient sit down and stretch their legs if they are able. Then, sit behind them and support their waist, slightly bending them towards the back, and then help the patient sit on your lap.
And attach your back to his face and make his leg between your legs then secure his knee with your hands and interlock them between your fingers on his knee then tighten the sides of his knee with force, and another servant extends his leg until the knee returns to its position.
The sign of it returning to its position is when the leg sticks to the femur in a relaxed manner, then wrap and attach the leg to the femur and tape them together with a bandage for three or four days, then release it. It should only be used for light walking for a few days until it heals.
If you can't reduce it with the previous description, otherwise use the strong force technique described for treating the hip to reduce it, until it returns to its position.
Chapter 33.
In the treatment of heel dislocation.
The heel can dislocate slightly or completely; the sign of a dislocated heel is when you see the heel swollen and protruding towards the direction it has dislocated.
For the treatment of its disappearance, it is easy to restore it and that he extends gently with hands and levels until it returns, and as for its treatment if it has been completely separated, it should be that the patient sits and a servant holds him strong aid behind his back in the middle.
Then grab your right hand on the top of his foot and your left hand from the bottom in the position of the shin, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and then with your left two times, then extend it with your left and push the toe of the foot with your right towards the leg without force.
Make this twice as described, then push the toe of the foot towards the leg in the third time and while pulling by the shin, if it returns in one or two attempts on this condition and you see the foot level, otherwise, repeat the work because it will return.
If it does not return to you as we described, then lie the patient on his back on the ground and insert a peg into the ground securely so that it is between his thighs and he has wrapped a rag on it so that it doesn't hurt the patient, then adjust the leg.
Then another server extends the leg either with his hands or with a strap he ties around the neck of the man, and then each server extends the other's owner and the peg is standing between the patient's thighs, holding it so that it doesn't fall down when extending, and then the doctor levels the jaw with his hands.
And another server extends the healthy leg down, and the jaw will return quickly, so if it returns and you see its stability, carry the bandage and the strap and tighten it with secure straps and tie the foot to the strap below, and you should protect the nerve that is above the heel from behind.
So that the bandage is not too tight on him and hurts him, then leave it for two or three days, if the bandage relaxes, tighten it again, and then let it go on the third or fourth day, and the patient should refrain from walking for forty days.
If a person walks before this time, he will not be safe from the fracture of his jaw and corruption, and will not accept treatment afterwards, then there is a hot swelling on him, it should be used to relieve it what we have described in other places of treatment and stretching until it goes away.
Chapter 34.
In the treatment of a man's jaw fingers.
It should be made smooth what has broken away from it with a little force, and this should not be difficult, but should be easy. If the jaw is in one of the sections of the back of the foot, then the patient should place his foot on a level surface on the ground.
Or on a board while he stands like a walker, then you should put your foot on what has been left of those joints, and then step on it with your foot firmly until it returns and you see that it has become straight and there is no depression in the place.
Then put a board underneath the sole of his foot, which takes the whole foot, and it should have two heads, and then tighten it firmly and securely for three days, and then remove it and keep it away from walking for many days until it heals and you are secure from returning by God's will.
Chapter 35.
In the types of the jaw that is with a wound or with a fracture or with both.
When something like this has happened, and one tries to treat and repair it, often it follows with death.
For that is why one should not undertake to treat such a thing unless he was skilled in the art, long practiced, gentle and compassionate, careful and not hasty, nor daring and impetuous; and he should use in the beginning the medicines that calm hot tumors only, and hand over the patient to God.
For the sake of Allah, except what I hope for it to be safe from harm with a light disease, and it has become clear to you that there is some hope in it; then send it back from your hour before the hot tumor happens.
If the member returns to what you wanted, then use the measure that calms hot tumors and treat the wound with what is suitable from the drying pastes, if the jaw was broken and there were fragments of bone healing, then break them and remove them. Follow in this regard what we have mentioned above with regard to simple diseases.
And be careful and keep away from taking risks as we have mentioned before, my advice to you is that this will be better for your health and safer for your life if God wills.
