“The author of this book said when he had finished to you, sons, this book which is a part of the science of medicine in its completeness and has reached in it the end of clarity and explanation, I saw that I should complete it for you with this article which is a part of work by hand.”
“For work by hand is enhanced in our country and in our time quite lacking, to the extent that it almost studied its science and ceased its effect.” “And what has remained of it are a few remnants in the books of the early scholars, which have been miswritten and distorted by error and confusion, until their meanings have become difficult to understand and their benefit has declined.”
“So I saw that I should revive it and compose in it this article on the way of explanation and clarification and abbreviation, and to come with images of hammers and other work tools, because it is part of increasing clarity and intricate what needs to be done.
“The reason why there is no skilled surgeon in our time because the field of medicine is long, and a person should familiarize himself before that with the science of anatomy, which has been described by Galen.” “So that he can stand on the benefits of the organs, their structure, and their humors, and connections and separation, and know the bones, nerves, muscles, their number and exits, the pulsating veins and non-pulsating veins, and their locations.”
“And for that he said, “Doctors are many by name but few in fact, especially in the field of hand work,” and we have mentioned a side of it in the introduction to this book.”
“Because he who is not aware of what we have mentioned from anatomy, will inevitably commit errors that result in the killing of people, as I have seen many who imagined themselves to be experts in this science and claimed knowledge without knowing or learning.”
“And because I saw a careless doctor who had split an artery of a pig in a woman's neck, causing her to bleed to the point that she died between his hands.”
I saw another doctor who advanced in removing a stone from a man who was old and the stone was large, so he panicked and removed it with a piece of the bladder's tissue. The man died after about three days, and I was called to remove the stone, so I saw what kind of bone was the stone and how the patient's condition was and what I estimated for that.
I also saw another doctor who lived off a local tribe's patronage because he practiced medicine.
A black boy was brought to me with a fracture near the heel of his leg and an injury; so the doctor, because of his ignorance, quickly set the fracture on the wound with splints and bandages, tightening it tightly, and did not leave the wound any breathing room.
Then he left him to his desires and then he left him for several days and ordered that the bandage not be removed until his leg and foot swell and threaten to die.
I called on him, so I quickly removed the bandage and he was relieved from his pain, but corruption had already taken hold of the member and I couldn't save it.
Corruption continued to spread in the member until he died.
I saw another doctor who was slow and lazy, and a malignant tumour appeared on him; so it became a big problem for his patient. That is because if cancer is pure black colour in the tissue, then it should not be exposed to iron at all.
However, if it is in a member that may be completely removed.
For this reason, my son, you should know that work with the hands divides into two parts: work that is accompanied by safety and work that is associated with injury in most cases.
I have warned in every place where this book comes from, work that is full of danger and fear, so you should warn against it and refuse it.
So that the ignorant one doesn't find his way to say and attack, so take for yourselves with strength and protection and gentleness and caution for your diseases.
And they took the best route, which leads to safety and a good outcome, and they avoided the dangerous diseases that are difficult to heal.
And purify yourselves from what you fear that may enter upon you, a suspicion in your religion and your world; it is better for your religion and higher in the world for your status.
For Galenus said, in some of his instructions: 'Do not treat a disease that is not there, so call yourselves doctors of nothingness.'
This article has been divided into three doors.
The first door:
In burning with fire and burning with medicine, sharp, ordered from the top to the bottom, and images of tools, and anvils for melting, and everything else that is needed in the work by hand.
The second door:
In incising, drainage, bloodletting, cupping, surgery, removing arrows and other things, all classified and ordered, and images of tools.
The third door:فى صور العظام والمعدة والقلب والكبد والكلى والسّواك واللّسان والاذن والعين وما شابه ذلك من الاجزاء المبوّبة مرتبة.
In fixing and removing with a splint, treating clubfoot and other things, classified and ordered from the top to the bottom, and images of tools.
The first door:
Burning with fire.
And before mentioning work, it should be mentioned that the benefits and harms of burning are mentioned, and in what mood it is used.
I say that speaking about the benefits and harms of melting is a long talk and a precise science; it is a secret that has been spoken about by a group of scholars.
They differed in it, and I have abbreviated their little language out of fear of repetition.
I say that melting benefits in general for any bad mood with or without a substance, except for two moods: the hot mood without a substance, and the dry mood without a substance.
If, however, the dry humor is mixed with a substance, they disagreed about it; some said that cauterization was beneficial in this case, while others contradicted this, saying that cauterization does not suit a disease that is of heat and dryness because fire's nature is heat and dryness.
It is not possible to treat a hot dry disease with a hot dry remedy; and he who says the contrary, that cauterization by fire may benefit a hot dry disease that occurs in the bodies of people. Because when you add the body of man and his moisture to the nature of fire, you cool the body of man.
I say according to his saying because experience has revealed it to me many times; but it should not be imagined in this matter except by one who has become accustomed and trained in the field of cauterization, a training of great depth. And he stood, differing humor of people and the condition of diseases themselves, their causes and symptoms, and the length of time.
And as for the other humors, there is no fear of them upon you; especially the cold wet diseases; for all the physicians agreed on their benefit with cauterization and there was no difference among them regarding its benefit.
And know, my sons, that if the treatment is cauterization with fire, its excellence over cauterization with a corrosive remedy because fire is a single essence that does not exceed the action of it on the organ that has been cauterized; and it does not cause damage to another connected organ in a small way.
And cauterization with a corrosive remedy may exceed its action to what is beyond the organs; and it may cause a disease that is difficult to treat, and fire, because of its honor and generosity of its essence, does not do that unless it has gone too far.
And this has been clear to us through experience due to the long service and dedication to the craft and standing on the facts of the matter.
This, therefore, I have omitted from my book; for it would not be fitting for such a book as this to contain in it a secret and mysterious method of treating the sick by means of an abstract philosophical proof.
And know, my sons, that they have disagreed as to the time which is most suitable for cauterisation and they have made the best time springtime.
And I say that cauterisation may be suitable at any time, since the injury caused by the time before is offset by the benefit obtained from the cauterisation. In particular, if cauterisation is necessary for a severe and acute pain which cannot be borne with delay, since it is feared that it may result in a greater calamity than the injury caused by the time before.
Nor do you think, my sons, what the general public and ignorant doctors imagine, that a cauterisation which cures a disease will never again recur; and they make it perpetual.
And this is not the case as they imagine, for cauterisation is like a remedy which alters the humours and removes the moisture which is the cause of pain.
Except that cauterisation has the preference over medicine because of the rapidity of its success, the strength of its action and the power of its effect.
It may be that the disease will recur at some time, according to the state of the patient's mood, the persistence of his illness, and his strength; and what is likely to collect in his body by way of humours and neglecting himself in terms of his diet and other similar causes.
Unless the disease which is treated by cauterisation is slight and confined to a small part of the body, where there are few humours and moistures; such as cauterisation of a tooth to relieve pain, which will not recur in this case and is the least possible.
And as for what the common people also say, that cauterization is the last of medicine, it is a true saying, not one that goes with their belief, because they think that there is no cure that benefits from a medicine or anything else after the occurrence of a burn, but the contrary is true.
But the meaning is that, if we have used various treatments in a disease and those medicines do not benefit, then we use cauterization as the last resort, and it benefits. So, from this, it has come that cauterization is the last of medicine. Not according to the meaning that the common people and many ignorant doctors have gone.
And the early scholars had said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they said that because gold is moderate in its nature and noble in its essence, and they said that it does not pucker up the site of cauterization, but that is not always the case.
Because I have tested that, and I found that it only works in some bodies and not in others, and cauterization with gold is better and more beneficial than iron, as they said, but when you heat the gold tool in fire, it does not show you when to heat it at the required amount for the color of gold.
And because it speeds up the cooling process, and if you add more of it in fever, it melts in fire and clumps together, so the artisan falls into trouble from that, so cauterization with iron has become faster and closer to the truth of the work, God willing.
And I have organized this chapter on cauterization by sections from the head to the foot to make it easier for the student to get what he wants, God willing.
Chapter One:
In Head Cauterization: One cauterization.
This cauterization benefits from excessive moisture and cold on the brain, which is the cause of headaches and frequent falls from the head to the eye and ear areas, as well as excessive sleep and toothache and sore throat. In cold weather, diseases such as cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and stroke are seen.
The image of this incision is that the patient be made to vomit first with a laxative medicine, purified for the head, three nights or four according to what requires the strength of the patient and his age and custom.
Then order him to shave his head with a scalpel, then make him sit down between your hands, having placed his hands on his chest.
Then you place the base of your hand on the base of his nose between his eyes, where your middle finger ends, mark that place with ink.
Then heat the olive press this is its image.
Disclose from the bone as much as a raisin or a poppy seed, then raise your hand, or else repeat your hand with the iron itself or without it if it cooled down. Until you see from the bone what I mentioned to you, then take something of salt and dissolve it in water, and soak a cotton ball in it and put it on the site and leave it for three days.
Then carry on with a cotton ball soaked in butter and leave it on him until the skin scar disappears, then treat it with the quarto ointment until he recovers, God willing.
And they say that the wound is whatever remains open, as much pus as it produces, is better and more beneficial.
And some mention that the skin is burned to the bone and the press holds on to it until some of the thickness of the bone burns, then what burns is stripped off after that.
And others say that one should be careful with the press until it has an effect on the bone in a strong way so that it falls from the bone as much as a pebble or a small fluke, and they claim that it expels the head of that place fumes and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then treat him until he heals, and I do not see these two types of pressing at all except in some people, and by way of conjecture and leaving it with me is better, and if there is a wound, the head moves when it comes to its natural connection as we have seen in all organs.
특히 병자의 머리가 본질적으로 약할 때, 첫 번째 종류의 절단 수술이 가장 안전하고 좋다. 나는 그것과 동일한 것을 사용하고 싶고, 당신이 그것을 따라야 합니다. 그렇게 하면 하느님께서 원하시는 바를 얻을 수 있을 것입니다.
The Second Chapter:
Head Amputations as well:
If there is chronic pain in the head, and the patient suffers for a long time, and if he has used poultices, plasters, sudors and bandages, especially if he has only had one type of burn, then see what happens. If the patient's head is strong by nature and not weak, and if he feels a very cold breeze, then cut another keiah above that one little bit. Then cut another keiah on each side of his head until the skin thins out and you can see the bone as described above. And cut another keiah at the back of his head in the spot that is called the skull, and lighten your hand in this one because the patient will find it very painful, unlike the pain felt in all the other head keiahs. I will describe this keiah in its place.
The keiah that is used to cut the patient's forehead should be lighter than the one used for his temples and the back of his head, and this is how it looks.
The Third Chapter:  "إن كان عليلك يشتدّ عليه كيّ الرأس ولم تكن عنده سوى تلك الكيّة الواحدة فاسلك من جانب إلى جانب ولا تكشف العظم فإنّ العليل يجد ألما شديدا خلاف ألم الكيّة الواحدة.
Head Amputations for Unchronic Pain:  If your patient is suffering from a non-chronic type of headache, and he has only had one head keiah, then cut it in an S shape from side to side without exposing the bone, as the patient will find this very painful.
If there is a headache with a fever and the pain extends to the eye, then make the patient vomit using medicines that purify the head. Then use all the treatments mentioned in the disease sections. If this does not help, then there are two ways to perform the keiah. Or caustic medicine sharpens the iron; or with the iron itself.
Or the burn sharpens the iron: Take a single clove of garlic, peel it and cut off its sides on both sides then split the place of pain from the side with a wide tweezers until it becomes a place under the skin that can accommodate the clove.
Then insert it into the skin until it disappears, then tie it tightly with bandages and leave it for five or fifteen hours, then untie it and remove the garlic, leaving the wound open for two or three days, then repeat.
On it a cloth dipped in oil until the place drains, then treat it with the ointment until it heals, or you can do this with some of the burning drugs mentioned in the eighteenth article in the chapter on burning drugs.
Or cut it with iron: On this point, here is an illustration of the iron tongs:.
Are called Iron Tongues because their head is shaped like a screw, with some bumps and in the center a small dent.
Then place it on the pain spot and hold your hand while you rotate the iron slightly, so that the amount of skin burnt is half its thickness. And raise your hand so that you do not burn the artery from below, causing bleeding, then dip a cloth in salt water and place it on the spot and leave it for three days. Then dip it in oil and treat it with the ointment until it heals, if God wills.
Or you can cut this chronic spot with the blade of the iron tongs and preserve not to cut the artery in this spot, especially chronic ones.
Chapter Four.
In surgery for chronic headaches.
If you have treated the chronic headache with what we mentioned in the previous treatment and what we mentioned in the chapter of diseases, but there was no improvement, and you see from the disease that which we did not mention, either burn it with medicine or burn it with fire. The iron should be heated until it turns white, and then the surgeon should mark a line about half a finger's width long on the area that hurts. He should then clench his fist and squeeze it with the iron to cut the artery and reach the bone.
However, you must be careful not to hit the jaw joint that moves when chewing, otherwise it will burn the muscle or nerve that controls it and cause spasms.
And be careful and vigilant about the arterial bleeding that you cut, for there is a chance of loss of blood. Especially for those who are unfamiliar with surgery and have not done it before, and who leave the work to chance.
And the remedy for accidental bleeding from the artery will be mentioned in its place in the book, if God wills. If you see a disease that cannot be treated with this cauterization, I shall mention the treatment in its place.
And I have seen a patient's body that can benefit from cauterization in the middle of the head as we described, and treat the wound until it heals, God willing.
If you prefer, you can use the cauterization method we mentioned in the chapter on cutting an artery with a double-bladed iron, because this is better and more effective.
Chapter V
In cauterizing pain in the ears.
If pain in the ear occurs due to a cold, and has been treated with laxatives and other treatments mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not go away, heat the iron (cauterizer) until it turns white, and then mark the point on the ear that hurts as shown in this image:
Then cut it with it after you heat it, all around the ear as it turns, or all around them if there is pain in both of them. And distance the cauterization (iron) from the root of the ear a little, after you mark the place with ink, and let the cauterization be about ten points in each ear or near it, then treat the places until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Six.
In fixing the limb.
The type of wound that is treated with a 'khi' (a specific type of plaster) is one that arises from phlegm, as mentioned in the discussion of the various types of diseases.
One should avoid using 'khi' on a wound that arises from dryness and spasm of the nerve.
When you have treated this type of wound with applications, poultices, and enemas, and your treatment has not been effective, then it is necessary to bind the patient's limbs. One at the base of the ear, a second slightly below the forehead, and a third at the meeting of the lips.
Make your bandages on the opposite side from the sick part, because relaxation occurs on the side that appears healthy.
The method of applying the  'khi' is to bind the patient with a bandage that extends from the base of the ear, under the forehead, and slightly below the hairline. The length of the bandages should be the length of the thumb.
With the 'khi', lower your hand until you feel a burning sensation halfway through the thickness of the skin. This is the image of the hot knife, which is similar to that mentioned earlier, but slightly milder. The knife used for this should be a little thicker than usual, and the treatment of the wound is as mentioned earlier, until God wills it to heal.
Chapter Seven.
In treating a chronic scar.
If the scar has become chronic and hasn't responded to treatment as mentioned earlier, and if there is no fever, then bind the patient' arms and legs with four   'khi'. A 'khi' should be applied to each ear, a 'khi' at the base of the head as mentioned earlier, and another at the back of the head.
The recipe for  the   'khi' is as mentioned earlier. Alternatively, a  'khi' can be applied to the stomach (pharynx), which is more effective, and then treated with the methods mentioned above.
Chapter Eight.
In the eighth chapter.
That is made of phlegm, it is necessary to give the patient liquid medication first from the large exudates and the purified grains for the brain.
Then he shaves his whole head and a poultice of mustard, written in the article of plasters, is carried on his back. If it is applied several times, it is a hit of cauterization.
And do that on the rank specifically mentioned here, for it will heal in that way. Otherwise, burn three cauterizations in the back of his head, which are gathered from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
And place a thicker finger between each cauterization and the other. Then treat the cauterization with what has been mentioned above, if you want to increase it, and if the patient is able to withstand it, apply the middle cauterization.
If you want to increase it, cauterize on the temples, and then treat it until it heals, and the caustic is olive-like in form, as mentioned above.
Chapter Nine.
In the ninth chapter.
It is necessary to advance in purifying the head with the exudates and what we mentioned above. Then shave the patient's head. Then cauterize a hit on the middle of the head, a hit on each temple, and a hit on the back of the head.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck, if necessary, in order to treat a general relaxation of the body and if the patient is able to withstand it and the disease is strong and persistent, apply four cauterizations on the vertebrae of his back. And measure the cauterization so that it burns most of the skin and raises your hand. Then treat it in accordance with what has been mentioned above until it heals, God willing, and the caustic is olive-like.
Chapter Ten.
In the tenth chapter.
The wounded person should be burned with the large scalds, and his brain purified first with large scalds and all the other treatment we have mentioned in the division, if he is a large patient and capable of taking drugs.
If, however, he is a boy who cannot take drugs, the gargles and mouthwashes that purify the brain should be used for several days before, with his diet improved.
Then his head is shaved, and one scald applied in the middle of the head as described above, and another in the back. And on each of his ears a scald, if the patient is strong and capable—the scalds mentioned for the person with epileptic fits and muscle relaxation in the neck and back. The scalds should be oil-based as described above.
If, however, the patient is a boy, make the scalds gentle like this.
Chapter 11.
In treating malady of the brain.
If the cause of cerebral disease is foul liquids and thick phlegm, apply the scalds mentioned above for the person with epileptic fits.
If the cause of cerebral disease is an excess of black-colored liquids, and the patient’s body is moist, then purify his brain as described above in the division.
Then shave the patient’s head, and make a cake of linen tight like a circle; then lower it into the middle of his head while he is seated and holding on to something from each side. Then take a pound of sheep fat that has reached its prime.
Then heat it gently on the fire until the finger feels warm when inserted into it; then discharge it in the middle of his head in the circle and leave it to cool down, which should be done with the patient every week for one time, along with all other good treatment, until he recovers, God willing.
And if you wish, you can put a small drop of it on several times without holding your hand over the cauldron, but rather by sniffing it; this type of cauterization moistens the brain moderately.
Then you hold it on with a cotton ball dipped in fat or chicken fat.
Chapter 12.
In cauterizing the water that falls in the eye.
If you notice the beginning of the water that falls in the eye with the signs mentioned in the division, then hurry to clean the head and vaporize it in a bath for days on end.
Then cut his hair at the base of the skull and cauterize it in the middle of the head, and cauterize twice on the temples if the beginning of the water falling in the eyes is all or from one side if it falls in only one eye.
Then cut with the cauldron all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the cauterizations be long in width on both temples and preserve from bleeding the blood.
If you see something of it, cut it on the spot with any possible treatment that you can and we will come to wisdom in the chain of arteries and cutting them and preserving from bleeding.
And may be cauterized at the back of the neck under the two bones with two ample cauterizations.
Chapter 13.
In cauterizing chronic tear.
If the eye tear is chronic, constant, and has its origin in the veins and arteries that are on the outside of the head, and you have determined that it is due to an excess of cold, thick, bilious humor, then cauterize it with the kind mentioned above in the beginning of water falling. A cauterization in the middle of the head, and two on each temple, and two at the back of the neck under the two bones, and if necessary, add a small cauterization on each side of the eye on the brow bone.
Chapter XIV.
In how to remove the deviated nose.
If you treat it with what we have mentioned in the division and it does not respond to treatment, then hasten to cut off the nose from the top, and nail it with the oil-filled nail. Then nail it with the mariner's nail, two nails above the eyebrows under the hair a little, and take care not to cut the artery, for this is the mariner's nail.
Chapter XV.
In how to relax the eyelid of the eye.
If the eyelid relaxes due to a disease or moisture, then nail it with the moon-shaped nail.
And if you wish, then nail above the eyebrows a little, two nails in each direction, separated from the temples, and each nail should be the length of the eyebrow.
And do not overdo it with the surgery, but on what burns a third of the skin, and this is the image of the nail on this characteristic.
Chapter XVI.
In how to remove the eyelid of the eye.
If the eyelids turn inward, resulting in a deep set eyes, then there are two types of surgery to correct this. Either nail it with fire, or use a corrosive medicine, and if you nail it with fire, then order the patient to leave his eyelids alone before that so that his eyelashes grow longer and straighter.
If you nail it when it is growing, then tie the patient's eyes so that they do not move until they grow and become straight, and if they grow and are straight, then place the patient's head on your lap, and mark the eyelid with ink in the shape of a leaf.
And the beginning of the mark is near the eyelids, and then you place a cotton wool soaked in milk of magpie under the eyelid, or in egg white, or in the saliva of the burdock fruit, and then heat the nail, and this is its image.
Then it is heated to the shape that you have taught little by little in many times until it burns the surface of the skin which is all like a sheet of asa and its apparent special mark and the sign of the health of your work is that you see the eyelid has shriveled and the hair has risen from the meat of the eye.
Then raise your hand and leave it for three days, then hold on to the cotton with oil until it comes off, then treat with the ointment until it heals, God wills, if there is any return of hair after a time and the eyelid relaxes.
Then repeat the cooking on that site as you did first, if the hair is in the lower eyelid then burn it until it returns to its natural position and does not pull the hair out of the eye, and as for burning the medicine is that you order the patient to leave the eyelashes until they grow and become straight.
Then make a paper model of the ash sheet, then take from the well-known soap and non-extinguished lime each weighing a dirham or about it, then grind them all together thoroughly, and do this in a hurry so that it does not dry up. Then spread it on the paper you made as an ash sheet shape, and put it on one or both eyelids, and put a cotton ball soaked in egg white under the eye and the patient's head in your lap.
Then place your index finger above the medicine and tighten it a little while moving it, because he will feel the burning as fire, as long as he feels the burning, leave the medicine and move it with your finger, if the burning stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the eyelid has risen as it rises when burned with fire or cut, otherwise, repeat the medicine on the site that did not affect by the medicine and did not become dark until you finish your work and shrivel the eye, then put cotton oil on it to remove the scorching.
Then treat it with the olive ointment or something else until it heals, and you should be very careful when working to keep nothing of the medicine from falling into the eye, for after a few days the eyelid may relax and some hair might enter the eye.
Then prepare the medicine on that spot that has relaxed from the eyelid, especially as you did first, and then treat it until it heals, and this is a picture of the leaves of the asafoetida plant.
And know that people's eyes may differ in size and length, so let your squint be according to that, and the correct path is not hidden from those who have experience in this industry.
Chapter 17.
In K ay of the nasor that projects into the m aq of the eye.
If you treat the nasor with what we have mentioned in the sections on disease symptoms, and your treatment is not successful, it should be burned in this way.
Command the patient to put his head in your lap and hold his head firmly with your hand, so that he does not move or strike his head.
Then place a cotton swab soaked in egg white or salves onto his eyes, and then heat the hot plate whose picture is shown above.
It should be hollow like the shape of an eagle's feather from one end, which is the end with the burn, and if you wish, it can be open at the other end, and if you wish, it can be closed like a staff, but this hollow shape is better for your work, God willing.
Then squeeze the nasor if it is open, and extract its pus, and dry it out, or if it is closed, open it and extract its pus, then put the hot plate on it when it is very hot, and hold it tightly with your hand until it reaches the bone.
And remove your hand slightly away from the eye towards the nose when you are burning so that your hand does not miss or disturb the patient, and the plate may fall into the fat of the eye and spoil it, if it reaches the bone in one burn, and if not, then heat the plate again if you need to do so.
Leave it for three days, then put a cotton pad with oil on it and treat it with the drying ointment until it heals. If after forty days it has not healed, put sharp, corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed and shave it as mentioned in its own section, God willing.
And another method of cutting the nose, some of the early scholars mentioned it, is to intentionally cut at the place of the nose, then put a small funnel in the same hole, this is its picture.
And pour the weight of a gold coin of lead solution in it, and hold the funnel firmly with a strap, so that the patient does not move at all so that the melted lead does not flow into his eye, and it is necessary to put a cotton pad soaked in egg white or water on the patient's eye.
For lead burns the place of the nose and cures it miraculously, so that if the nose heals with what we have mentioned of cutting and treatment, otherwise, you must use the hole in the nose and return the nose to the nose path as will be mentioned in its own section, God willing.
Chapter 18.
In cutting a wound on the lip.
Often a crack occurs in the lip, which is called a pimple, especially in the lips of children, as it often happens, when you treat this crack with what we have mentioned in the section on burning, and if the treatment does not succeed, heat a small iron skull on this image.
It is hollowed out like a knife blade, then it is placed on the fire in the same hole until the burning reaches the depth of the crack, and then it is treated with the ointment mentioned above, God willing.
Chapter 19.
In cutting a nose wound in the mouth.
If it has swollen in the root of the gums or in the tongue or in the roots of the teeth, and then it dried up and broke out, and pus flowed from it, it is a nose wound, then you should treat it with what we have mentioned above, God willing.
Then introduce it into the opening of the nostril and hold your hand until the bar reaches its full length and do this once or twice, then treat it as we mentioned above to recover if God wills.
If the material has stopped and recovered, otherwise it is necessary to examine the site and remove the damaged bone according to what will come in its book if God wills.
Chapter 20:
In case of loose teeth and relaxing sockets.
If the sockets have become relaxed due to moisture and the teeth have moved, treating them with medications has not helped, then place the patient's head on your lap and heat the metal bar as shown in the following image after placing the tube on the tooth.
Then introduce the heated metal bar into it quickly and hold your hand for a moment so that the patient feels the heat of fire has reached the root of the tooth, then release your hand, and then re-introduce the bar as many times as you want, then let the patient fill his mouth with salt water.
He keeps it for an hour and spits it out, as the loose teeth will become fixed and the relaxed tissue will tighten and the harmful moisture will dry up.
Chapter 21:
In case of toothache.
If toothache is due to cold or there is a pest in it and treating it with medications has not helped, then the two methods of causticification are either with fat or with fire.
While fat caustication involves heating raw cow's fat in a iron bowl or shell, then taking a cotton wool and wrapping it around the handle of the rod, and dipping it into the hot fat and placing it on the aching tooth quickly and holding it until it cools down.
You may also dip a wool or cotton into cold fat and place it on the aching tooth, and place the hot metal bar on top of the tooth to reach the root with the heat of fire.
And as for carving it with fire, that is to take a copper or iron tube and make it slightly thick so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient, then heat the mold whose image it is and put it on the same tooth and hold your hand until the mold cools down, you do this several times.
Because the pain will go either that very day or another day, and it is necessary after that scalding that the patient fills his mouth with sweet oil and holds it for an hour then spits it out, and this is the image of the mold.
It should be burned on any side you want and to the degree that can be done, and this is the image of the tube.
Chapter 22
In scalding pigs.
If the pigs are stubborn about pus and cold secretions and do not submit to maturation with medicines, and if you want rapid maturation, heat the hollow mold whose ends are permeable, and this is its image.
Let the smoke come out from the other end during the scorching, and place it over the same swelling once or twice if it needs to be done so that it reaches the depth of the swelling; if the swelling is small, then make the mold according to the size of the swelling.
Then leave it for three days and carry on a cotton wool dipped in oil so that what is burned by fire goes away, then treat with the paste and wicks until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 23
In scorching for hoarse voice and breathlessness.
If the secretions prevail on the respiratory tract, especially if it is accompanied by a cold constitution, then the patient should be made to vomit first with appropriate medicines, and then scorch him in a scar in the neck at the base of the tongue in the low position.
So be careful that you do not reach the larynx with the scorching, and do not burn it from the skin except for half of it; then scorch him another scorching at the joint of the neck at its last gem, and let the mold be shaped like a screw on the mentioned page.
Then treat it with what has been mentioned above until it is healed, if God wills.
Chapter 24.
In the treatment of lung disease and cough.
If the cough and lung disease are caused by cold, damp humors and there is no fever or consumption of the patient, and the disease is chronic, then cauterize two caustic poultices on the nipples in the lower positions, soft and hollow, and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And let the cauterization be in the shape of a pin, as has been mentioned above, and if you wish, let your plasters be drops by means of a cauterizer called "point" which has been mentioned above in the dropping of earache, and let the points be thirty or so towards that.
Then treat it with what has been mentioned above until it is healed, and you can make a plaster with three branches on this image, and hurry up with the cauterization because you will apply three caustic plasters in one go, and this is the picture of the cautery.
Chapter 25.
In the treatment of cauterizing the breasts.
If the head of the arm has come out because of slippery humors or has not remained in place while trying to put it back in its place so that it becomes a habit for him to do so, and then it comes out at the slightest movement, as we have seen, then it is necessary to straighten out the jaw first. Then the patient lies on his back or on his right side, and you raise the skin inside the armpit with your fingers of your left hand if the joint has come out to the inside.
Then you heat the double-bladed cautery which is shown in this picture.
Then you apply the cautery to the skin until it goes through to the other side, and the shape of the cauterization is four caustic plasters, or you can apply it with a cauterizer with three branches, in which case the shape of the cauterization will be six caustic plasters, and the branches should be on the thinnest part of the breast.
This is the image of the iron with three prongs.
And it may be increased by one, so that the ironings become eight, and then the ground grains are carried with salt, and then the patient is bound in bandages and not moved from time until he heals, and if the dislocation is to the top, and it is rare for that to happen.
So he puts the ironing above the shoulder one good spiral nail, or many ironings drop by drop, for the joint gets stronger and the moisture goes away and the patient heals.
Chapter 26.
In Ironing the stomach.
If there has been in the stomach cold and moisture, a lot of it until it takes away from its composition, and many falls to it, and treated with various treatments, but did not benefit, then the patient should lie on his back and stretch his legs and hands, and then iron him three ironings. An ironing below the breastbone, the size of a finger, with a good spiral nail, and two ironings on either side, until the shape of the ironings is triangular, and further apart than they are to each other so that they do not meet if they peel off, and the depth of the ironing is one-third of the thickness of the skin, and the shape of the ironings is triangular.
On this image and on this amount, no more than that.
And if you want to iron him one large ironing in the middle of the stomach, on this image.
The iron that is used for this single ironing is shaped like a circle, on this image.
And the stomach can be ironed drop by drop from a part that has split from this ironing, which is to draw on the stomach with ink then iron it with a dropsy iron, and then treat with the treatment mentioned above until it heals, and
Chapter 27.
In Ironing the cold liver.
If pain in the liver is caused by cold and moisture, or by a foul wind, to the point that it leaves its normal composition, and the patient is treated as mentioned in the division, it does not help. The patient should lie on his back, and mark with ink three knots on this shape and this exact amount on the liver, below the ribs where the human elbow ends.
And each knot should be made at the thickness of a finger, and the wound should be made along the body length in a straight line, and do not put your hand in the mold; Yes.
Let it be as much as half the thickness of the skin is burned; no more, and the patient should stand on his feet, if he is not standing, then lie down with his legs extended and his arms raised, this is a picture of the mold.
And you can burn these knots with the knife mold if you have it and are skilled in industry and preserve not to go too deep with the burn so as to burn the skin all over, which would reach the intestines because the skin there is thin, be careful.
Chapter 28.
In a bowl and massage the liver with a kick.
If it exhibits an outbreak in the liver, and you want to know if that tumor is in the flesh of the liver or in its lining, if it is in the flesh of the liver, then the patient will feel a weight and pain without sharpness.
If it is in the lining of the liver, then with the pain there will be a sharp sharpness and you will see that the doctors have been unable to treat him; then the patient should lie on his back, and mark with ink the warm spot.
Then heat the mold in the fire, it is a mold that resembles a mill; this is its picture. And burn it with one kick until the skin is all burned over, and end the burn on the lining, until the mucus comes out completely, then treat it with leech therapy to cure the abscesses.
And this kind of cautery should not be used except by one who has been trained in the medical art for a long time and who has witnessed these diseases by experience many times; then he may embark on such work and leave it with me is better.
Chapter 29.
In cauterizing the shouza.
The early books on cauterization with the root of the zeranbd for cold شواص is that it should be taken from the roots of the zeranbd that are dry and long in origin, one that is as thick as a finger, and then dipped in oil and heated over fire. Then cauterize it with one cauterization between the connection of the collarbone to the neck and two small cauterizations below the breasts a little slanted towards the side of the beard and two great cauterizations above the breasts between the third and fourth ribs.
Two cauterizations as well between the fifth and sixth ribs slanted slightly towards the back, and another cauterization in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach, and three cauterizations from behind: one between the shoulders and two on the sides of the spine below where the arm is joined to the shoulder.
And your hand should not be immersed deeply in the cauterization, but it should be in the skin slightly, and some of the early books have mentioned that some people used to use a kind of iron mace that was almost a crescent and heat it then enter it between the ribs until it ends up at the same spot as the tumor.
And the thread comes out as we have mentioned in the liver tumor, and in this case cauterizing with fire may either kill the patient immediately or leave a scar that cannot be healed.
Chapter 30.
In cauterizing the spleen.
If you treat disease of the spleen with what we have mentioned in the division treatment, and your treatment is not effective, then cauterizing it is done in three or four places aligned along the length of the spleen.
On the shape of the liver knots, their presentation and configuration: between each knot and the next there is a distance equal to the thickness of the finger or slightly more; and the same configuration as that mentioned in the肝結 node, both in appearance and in depth; and do not insert your hand into the knot, and the patient lies on his back.
The reverse side, in the elbow: lift up the skin that faces the spleen, where the elbow of the patient ends; on the left side, and when you lift the skin, it should be across the whole body, so that the knots fall along the length of the body.
Then you enter the two knives very carefully until they pass through the skin from the other side; then you remove the knife, and it will be four knots, or if you want to cook with the other knife that has three nails.
Then you treat the site of the burn after you leave it to drain pus for several days, as this is more effective than any of the other treatments mentioned above.
Chapter 31
In the treatment of ascites.
The caustic is effective in Ascites, especially; if you treat the patient with the treatments we mentioned in the division, and your treatment did not take effect, then it should be treated with four knots around the navel, and one on the stomach.
Another knot on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind his back, between the knots; one facing his chest and another facing his stomach, and its depth should be close to the thickness of the skin; then you leave the burn open so that it drains pus for a long time.
And do not leave the patient without treatment after the burn, as theجمع بين العلاجين يسريع من برئه، وصورة المكواة التي يُكوى بها الظهر تكون على شكل مسمار كما ذكرنا سابقاً، والصورة التي يُكوى بها الظهر تكون زيتونية.
Chapter 23.
In the treatment of foot and leg injuries.
If they swell in the mortise and fill with yellow fluid, then it is necessary to burn on the back of the foot in the callus between the thumb and the index finger.
And hold your hand with the iron, do not bend it, then raise your hand and never return to it, for it will drain yellow fluid and the iron will be in this position.
Then two boils are made on the legs, one below the knee and one lower down towards the middle of the leg, and two on each thigh, one above the knee and one lower down towards the middle of the thigh.
Leave the boil open for a long time without treatment, letting the fluid drain out, then treat it with all that we have mentioned.
Chapter 33.
In the treatment of diarrhea.
If diarrhea is due to cold and moisture, until it weakens the muscles that hold and digest food in the stomach and intestines, and this treatment with various treatments has not improved, and you see the patient still able to bear pain, then a large boil is made on his stomach. Based on the above, a stomach boil is made with an iron ring, and four boils are made around the navel, gentle with the iron, a large boil on the cotton above the rectum, or two boils.
If you see an abundance of moisture and the patient is still able to bear it, then a boil is made on the genitals and a boil on each hip, and perhaps you will add two small boils on the stomach near the large one, for this treatment is successful if God wills its success.
Chapter 34.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids of the anus.
If there are chronic hemorrhoids of the anus, or one that is composed of thick, cold, or foul-smelling moisture, and has been treated with various treatments mentioned in the classification, but the treatment has not been successful, then a patient is made to bear three boils on the lower part of the back, just below the buttocks, slightly raised, shaped like a triangle.
To cut under the bed with two fingers, if you think that his stomach has become cool and his food is not digested, and to see his face swollen. Then cut a large hole on the stomach, as mentioned above, and another one on his liver. And another one on his intestines with a nail-shaped hook, and leave the caisson open for some time, then treat him until he heals, God willing.
Chapter 35.
In cutting warts.
After cutting it, if you cut the wart, heat the hook that is like a nail, then insert it into the same place where the wart was cut and keep hitting your hand until the hook reaches the opening of the sweat which blood flows from it, do this once or twice.
If there are many warts, cut each one with a caisson on what we have described, and then treat them with what suits them of ointments until they heal, and if you also cut a large hole on cotton, it would be more beneficial in healing.
Chapter 36.
About the naso-pharyngeal cancer that is in the rectum and its surroundings.
If the patient does not respond to the incision and the surgery we described in its place and refuse it, perhaps he will be cured by the cut, so if it happened in one of the naso-pharyngeal cancers and it took time, it would flow from it and the corrupt fluids first, so you should measure it with a thin probe.
Then know the depth of the cut with the probe then take the iron piece that is like a mil and put it in the same naso-pharyngeal cancer on an even level as the depth of the naso-pharyngeal cancer and the amount that entered the probe and prepare to cut it once or twice or three times according to your need.
And be careful not to burn a nerve if there is one, or great sweat, and if the naso-pharyngeal cancer leads to the bladder or leads to the colon.
Be careful of these sites, all that you do is only if the naso-pharyngeal cancer is in a place of meat and you have estimated that it is not infiltrating, then treat the site until it heals, and if it closes the site and cut off the materials and stayed like that for a time, know that it has healed completely.
If the materials do not cut off from him, know that it is infiltrating or in its depth there is a great bone cancer or something like that which comes up to mention in its place.
Chapter 37.
In the cut of the kidneys.
If it happens in the kidney and there is a pain due to cold or strong wind, and there is a decrease for that, the group of the patient's pain, it should be burned on the two sides with the same probe mentioned above, and perhaps burn three times at the same table, so that it comes out three burns aligned, which is more beneficial in healing.
Chapter 38.
In the treatment of urinary disorders.
If there is a weakness and relaxation of the bladder due to cold and moisture until the patient does not hold his urine, so he rubs it with oil. He uses a cotton swab dipped in oil and rubs it on the lower part of the genitals where the pubic hair begins and on the right side of the genitals and on the left side.
And after the cautery, each on the level of the thumb, and another at the bottom of the back, or two if necessary, and the iron should be like a nail on what has been mentioned above.
Chapter 39.
In the cauterization of the uterus.
If there is a substance in the uterus due to cold and moisture that prevents pregnancy, disturbs its tissue, and makes it difficult to carry it, so it should be cauterized three times around the genitals as we have mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder. A cauterization on cotton at the bottom of the back, or two if necessary, and the iron should be like a nail.
Chapter 40.
In the cauterization of the hip joint.
It may be that there is a mistake in the mucus that reaches the hip joint, causing it to come out of place. The sign of this is that one leg becomes longer than the other when they are compared, and you find that the site of dislocation has a hole. So, the patient should be cauterized on the same hip joint, a semi-circle shape.
After you have marked it with a pen around the hip, as it rotates, so that the same side faces the center of the circle. The iron should be like the one mentioned above in the cauterization of the stomach. If you do not have this iron, so he rubs it with oil and rubs it on three places with the large olive-colored iron.
And he leaves a depth equal to the thickness of the skin, then treats it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 41.
In the treatment of women's vaginas.
If there is pain in the hip, and this is due to cold and moistness, and you have treated the patient as we mentioned in the classification, but there was no improvement, and time has passed, then the patient should ease the thick secretions with castor oil or saps of plants such as the sap of the spittlebug or the like.
Then apply hot compresses to the area, and perform three hot compresses in a trinity-like manner on this area.
And it should be of a depth that is suitable, and the gap between each scald should be the width of a finger. It can also be done by circling the area mentioned earlier in the hip dislocation scald, one scald. Or you can scald it in a circle. If he wishes, he can scald it in a single spot on the hip itself. This would result in four scalds.
To be a circle that surrounds all of the hip and burns through the entire thickness of the skin, this is the characteristic of the ki in the women's vagina if the pain is necessary for the hip itself, and it does not extend to the thigh or leg.
If it extends to the thigh or leg, then apply two scalds on the thigh at the point that the patient indicates pain, and one scald above the knee by four fingers towards the outer side slightly. The scald should be in the shape of a knife blade. The depth of the ki should be only as thick as the skin.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends towards his toes, then apply a scald at the point where he indicates the pain, three or four times or more if necessary. If the patient indicates pain under the knee towards his leg, then apply a scald in that area, one scald.
And be careful in all of your scalds that they do not reach the point of burning a nerve or an important artery, otherwise, you will cause the patient to suffer from a serious condition or even death.
I have seen one and two who burnt their hips and went too far in burning, so the swelling reached the foot until it reached the frost all over the body and rotted the entire leg then there was diarrhea and death afterwards. If the pain is on both sides, they were burned on this very pattern with an eye.
Some of the wise scholars have mentioned in burning the hips that this is its description, they make it like a cup made of iron, and its diameter is half a palm, and at its mouth it is on the thickness of a date pit or slightly less, and inside this cup there is another cup, and another.
And it is after what is between each cup is the size of a hand, and the cups are open from both sides, and its height is about a palm or two, and it takes for it a handle made of iron that has been firmly established in the cups. This is its description.
Then it is heated in the fire until it turns red and throws sparks, then it is placed on the injured hip and the sick person leans on the right side, so it is burned with three round burns in one go, then it is left for three days and covered with fat, and the wound is left open for a few days.
Then it is treated with ointment until it heals, he said: The author of this book This type of burning is rare for its ugliness and the horror of its appearance, and for those who are patient on it, but it is one of the good burns for those who are patient on him, and he was injured.
And as for the burning with medicinal agents that burn, it is that you make two cups like the neck that goes down in it the rivet of the door from brass or iron.
It is in its margin, a height of two palms or less, and what is between them is the thickness of a finger, and it is open from bottom and closed from top, and it takes some of it to make it like this pattern.
Then lower it on the hip bone and the sick person lying on his side, and fasten your hand gently. Then pour the sharp water between the circles that are heated with fire a little, and hold it for an hour of sandy time. The patient must be patient to its sting and burning, because he will find it stings like fire.
Then lower it on the hip bone and the sick person lying on his side, and fasten your hand gently. Then pour the sharp water between the circles that are heated with fire a little, and hold it for an hour of sandy time. The patient must be patient to its sting and burning, because he will find it stings like fire.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals, and if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a mold for it while keeping the water in place according to what you did with the hip, this is sharp water, and I have proven it in the article on repairing medicines.
You take from salt of the lathe and lime not extinguished each part, and you grind them and put them in a new pot that has been drilled at the bottom with one small hole on the amount that enters it the staff. And you place under the bottom of the pot another agitator.
Then pour on the salt and lime as much of the fresh water as will cover them, and after you have firmly clamped them with your hand, leave the pot alone until the sharp water descends in the bottom of the agitator pot. Then gather all that water and then throw it on another lime and another salt, again and again.
For it will then be extremely sharp, and is able to perform many operations in medicine, and burn all members because it does the same thing as fire itself. And among medicines there are those that are burnt with it, such as thawsia, and date syrup mixed with lime and soap.
And Galen claimed a story about an old man who treated hip pain and women's muscle spasms, and he greatly emphasized his importance. He claimed that it is sufficient in itself and will heal with just one application.
Until he might possibly bring a portable bath and come out of it healed, which is to take from the green shaitar if there is no green in taking the recent dried one, and smooth it with some fat and place it on the hip where the pain is or in the leg or in the thigh.
And tighten it and leave it for three hours, or as much as the patient feels the burning stop, then enter the bath, and if his body is damp, then put him in the basin, because the pain will go away and heal by God's will, and if it does not heal, then repeat the bandage after ten days once again.
Because it will heal if God wills, and know that one should not use cauterization with these medicines unless the body is emptied, and Diacycorides has mentioned that goat hair when burned and its ash applied to the groin helps.
And cauterization should be like this, take wool and drink it in old oil and place it on the deep spot that is between the thumb of the hand and the forearm, which is closer to the forearm, then take a dry hair of a goat.
Then light it on fire until it becomes a ball, then put it on the wool and leave it until it goes out, then take another one, and keep doing that until the sense of pain reaches the hip from the middle of the upper arm, and the pain stops by God's will, and this type of cauterization is called goat hair cauterization.
Chapter 24.
In cauterizing back pain.
It may be due to many reasons, such as a fall, a blow, or excessive vomiting, and it is in this category alone that cauterization takes place.
The one that is due to a cold liquid spill should, after the patient has vomited, be cauterized on his back where the pain is, three rows on the width of the table itself, after having marked the place with ink in each row five cauterizations or more according to what you see of the patient's ability and strength.
And the ironing is done with a point iron; and if you want, iron it three times or four times with a medium-sized nail iron on this image.
Chapter 34.
In burning beginning of the hump.
This condition often affects young children, and the initial sign is that a child experiences shortness of breath when standing or moving, and they may notice a prominent knob at the bottom of their spine that protrudes and feels raised compared to the rest of the spines.
If you see that and if you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a iron be made circle on this image. Take the iron on each side of the spine equally, and if you want, iron it around the spine with a point iron two or three times; make the spots close to each other, then treat the area until it heals using what we mentioned above.
And preserve that you do not use ironing in the hump which is from a nerve spasm, and .
Chapter 44.
In burning of gout and joint pains.
If the joint pains are caused by cold and dampness that drains into any member of the body, then it is usual for doctors to call this gout.
If the cold-cause gout is treated with the treatment we mentioned in the division, and the pains do not go away, then burning goes away, that is to say, iron it after vomiting a lot of times around the knee joint on this image.
If you need to drip on the face of the leg, then do it with a point iron, and if the pains rise to the knees or to other joints, often this condition leads to that, so cauterize each knee with three or four burns from each side with this very oil iron.
If you need more than this ironing, then do not press your hand too much with the ironing, but be on the skin thickness only, and if the pains rise to the hips or to the back, then use what we mentioned from burning in its own place.
If the pain is only in the hands, prick around the radials as they form two lines, if the pain remains in the fingers, prick each knuckle and the web of the hand, if after a few days the pain rises to the elbows or the shoulder blades.
Then, prick them on both sides, and do not neglect the treatment with good care and medicines; for if one eats well and expels phlegm, he will recover with this piercing, God willing.
Chapter 54.
In pierceing the swellings.
If a hernia appears in the groin and some of the bowels and mesenteric fall into the testicle, and this begins to manifest itself, then the patient should order him not to eat that day and to use whatever softeners can make the stool exit his abdomen.
Then he should lie down on his back between your hands, and order him to hold himself until the hernia or bowel comes out, and then you will push it back with your finger, and you will recognize with the ink under the swelling on the hipbone a mark resembling half a circle whose ends are towards the top of the body.
Then heat an iron of this shape:
until it is white and throws sparks; then send the bowel or hernia back into his abdomen, and then put a cushion between the patient's legs, and another servant place his hand on his knees to prevent him from moving.
And another on his chest, holding his hands; then lower the iron on the mark itself, while your hand is standing still and holds it until it reaches the bone.
And preserve your effort from the emergence of the bowel while you pierce yourself, so that you do not burn it, and thus a great misfortune will happen to the patient; and know that when you do not reach the piercing with the iron to the bone, your work will not be successful; it is necessary for the iron
Then treat the burned place with oil for three days until the charred flesh of the burn has disappeared, then treat it with all sorts of ointments until it heals. Let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is closed.
It is necessary that his diet during the treatment period should be soft so as not to stretch the abdomen when defecating, then when he wants to stand after the forty days, a tight bandage should be used and held for another forty days, reducing the fatigue and fullness of food and drink and severe crying.
If he uses this measure, then he will heal completely, God willing, and I will mention in its book the treatment of hernia by cutting a round hole on its size. Let it be burned from the skin like two thirds, then treat it as we mentioned above, because it will not increase, God willing, and some of the earliest have said to burn the hernia with an iron triangle in this form.
Once you have taught the hernia with ink, and when the line in width is at the top of the hernia, and the other line to below, and you lower your hand in the middle with a single nail-shaped burn. The first burn is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter 64.
In burning the hernia.
If something falls or hits a body part and the pain continues for a long time and does not respond to treatment, then it should be burned with an iron point. The burn should be applied to each member according to its size, small or large, weak or strong.
And the pain and spasm will go away, then he will heal from the first burn, otherwise, you will repeat the burn on him because it is the case of these pains that they move from one organ to what is nearby, so you should follow it with burns until the patient recovers.
Chapter 74.
In treating leprosy.
While lepers can benefit greatly from the use of the "khi," especially the type of leprosy that is preceded by pus and blackness.
If you want to treat a patient with leprosy, if it is in its initial stage, as we have mentioned in the previous discussion of cases, and has not yet progressed, and you are concerned about the patient's health falling into decay and being unable to recover, then you should perform five "ki" operations on the head. The one in the middle of the known head, the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, two on the temples, and one behind at a lump (called "qarn"). Make the  "ki" slightly effective on bone.
And you should remove the scales, as this helps the thin steam to reach and penetrate the skin, and perform a "ki" on the same spot in the scalp as mentioned earlier. However, if leprosy has persisted on the patient and there are visible signs of it, then you should perform the aforementioned "kis" on the head. A  "ki" on the tip of the nose, two on the cheeks, two on the vertebrae of the neck, one large at the base of the spine, and another above it in the same region, and two on the buttocks, one on each. Two on the knees, one on each, two on the shoulders, two on the elbows, two on the wrists, and two on each of the knuckles of the hands and feet.
Be careful not to burn the nerve that runs along the back of the heels, as it may be necessary to perform a   "ki" on the bone of the pelvis and another on the stomach and another on the liver. It is important to increase the number of  "kis" to make them more beneficial and effective.
And know that the patient does not feel pain in the same way as a healthy person because his body is numb, and it is necessary for the irons to be large and small according to the members and joints on what has been mentioned above of the properties of the braces.
Then treat the ki with fine oil with honey and other treatment until he recovers by God's will.
Chapter 84.
In ki of numbness When an organ is numb and treated with drugs, balms, and bandages, and did not recover, then apply the same ki on the skin according to what it deserves in terms of bone size or smallness. And let your ki be thick on the skin slightly.
Then treat it with the ointment until he recovers, and some of the numbness that occurs in the hand or foot in the spine vertebrae at the exit of the nerve that moves that member so that the numbness goes away.
And do not advance on it except one who is aware of the anatomy of members and exits of nerves moving the body.
Chapter 94.
In ki of leprosy.
If leprosy has advanced and not benefited from any of the medical tricks, then apply to it a ki that is slightly thick on the skin's thickness until the whiteness goes away and its color changes.
Then treat it with fine lentils with rose oil and Lisan al-Habal (a herb) and blood of hamams or blood of linefish, each part is mixed and applied to a cloth and the site is bound until it recovers.
Chapter 50.
In ki of cancer.
If the cancer is just beginning and you want to stop it, then apply a large ki around it as it revolves, and some of the wise men have mentioned that they applied a strong ki in the middle of it, I do not see this because I expect it to blister, and I have seen it happen several times.
It is proper that he be burned about him with a circle as we have said, or with many burns.
Chapter 51.
On the application of caustic substances.
If a person has become crippled (paralysed) and the injury has not healed quickly, either because the cause of the injury has not been addressed or because the patient is elderly and has little blood, or because of the passage of time, and you wish to accelerate the healing process, burn the area with small burns applied dropwise.
Then leave it alone, for it will heal faster. If you wish to delay the healing process, heat the iron accordingly.
And lower it in the middle of the cautery until it penetrates the skin, and let the burn be from what is below so that it facilitates the flow of pus, then treat it as required so that it heals.
Chapter 52.
On the application of cautery to eating wounds.
The 'akkalah' (a type of eating wound) is nothing but decay which spreads in the member and eats it as fire consumes dry wood. If you see the akkalah in a place that is suitable for application of cautery by fire, heat up small and large iron knives, depending on what is suitable for the place where the akkalah is located.
Then apply cauterisation on all sides so that the decay is completely removed and nothing remains of it, then leave it alone for three days and carry sulfur powder mixed with oil on the burned areas so that the skin scales fall off and all decay is eliminated.
Then treat it with ointments that promote healing of the flesh, and if after three days you see that the flesh is sprouting new growth in a healthy manner without any decay, then there is no need to apply cauterisation to the remaining infected areas, but if you see that there is still decay, repeat the application of cautery on the remaining infected areas.
For he is more quickly helpful than fire, and I have mentioned his treatment with acute medicine in the division; so take it from there whenever you need it.
Chapter 35.
In kya' of reversed and non-reversed nails.
This disease often occurs at the bottom of the feet, and is a rough and painful matter for the man; and it has two ways of treatment, either by burning with fire or by the sharp water treatment.
The treatment with fire is that you heat the hollow iron grater, similar to the feather of the eagle, made of iron to the size that surrounds the nail from all sides and is thin in the edge, then you lower it onto the nail heated, then you rotate your hand with the grate around the nail until the grate reaches the depth of the nail.
And leave it for three days to form pus, then bandage it with wild olive oil, crushed with salt, and leave the bandage on for a night; because the nails are reversed.
Often it occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, so you should take a tube of copper, or of iron, or of eagle's feather, and lower it onto the nail or wart, then pour a little sharp water into the tube.
And hold your hand while you rotate it a little with a grip to affect the edge of the nail, and let the sharp water find a way to sink into the depth of the nail, and let the patient wait a little for the sharpness of the water to hurt.
Then leave it, because the nail will come out with its roots; so you do this one after another until you finish all of them in the body, and then treat the wounds after they fall out with what grows the flesh from creams.
Chapter 45.
In treating dysentery.
If dysentery is caused by a cold in the nerves or a fever, four or five cauterizations should be applied on the spine between each cauterization, and one in the chest. And on his stomach a cauterization with the olive caustic agent; for the eliminative (disentery) cold disease, it is calmed and accelerated in healing.
Chapter 55.
In cauterizing pustules that occur in the body.
It may discharge pus in the body from cold, thick, corrupt material; when it first appears, a small cauterization with a lit matchstick or with an iron tip heated at the fire or with an olive caustic agent should be applied on top of each pustule.
And the pimples may be cauterized at first when they appear in this way; there will be no improvement and it will subside without a trace, and the patient will recover; however, it is necessary that this be done after the patient has vomited by bleeding.
Chapter 56.
In cauterizing bleeding that occurs when an artery is cut.
Blood often flows from an artery that has been cut in a wound exposed from the outside, or when splitting a tumor or cauterizing an organ, etc., and it is difficult to control it.
If this happens, quickly put your index finger in the mouth of the artery and squeeze it gently so that the blood is held under the finger and does not come out; then, place several olive caustic agents (small and large) on fire, and blow them onto it until they become very hot.
Then, take one of them, small or large, according to the size of the wound and the location where the artery has opened; lower the caustic agent onto the same vein after removing your finger quickly and hold the caustic agent firmly until the blood stops flowing.
And if, when you remove your finger from the artery's mouth, the clamp goes out, take another clamp from the clamps that are in the fire and do it quickly with one after another until the blood stops.
And be careful not to burn a nerve, and let the patient suffer a bad thing, and know that if the artery bleeds, it cannot be cut, especially if the artery is large, except by one of four ways: either by burning as we have said, or by cutting it off if it has not been amputated. If it has been amputated, its ends will shrink and the blood will stop. Or bind it with tight threads or put on it the medicines which are of a kind to cut the blood and tighten the splints with a tight binding.
And as for those who try to cut it with a strap or by tightening with rags or putting burning things and so on, it will not stop in that way at all, except in rarities, if someone comes to him without a doctor or medicine, he should quickly place the index finger on the mouth of the wound itself as we have described.
And tighten it very much so that the blood stops and flows from above the wound and on the artery, and the finger does not come off it with cold water that is always extremely cold until the blood clots and thickens and stops, and during that time look at what needs to be burned or medication.
The second door.
In the cut, injection, bleeding, and surgical wounds and so on.
He said: خلف (Khaffaf) mentioned in the first book all diseases that can be treated by burning with fire and medication, their causes, reasons, tools, and images of clamps, and I made that chapters from the first to the last century.
And I follow in this book the same path with great detail so that the student can easily find what he wants.
Before I proceed to do this, know ye sons that in this gate are hidden mysteries greater than those in the first gate of surgery.
For this reason, the warning should be more severe, since work in this gate often leads to vomiting of blood which supports life when opening a vein or cutting on a lump or draining an abscess or treating surgery or removing an arrow or cutting on a stone and similar things that are accompanied by all of them: mysteries, fear, and risk, and many fall into it.
And I advise you to avoid falling into what is questionable on you, for it may fall on you in this industry species of people with different kinds of diseases: some of whom have become sick with their illness and death seems easy to them.
Due to the severity of what he suffers from and the length of his illness, and the disease that causes him to despair, and death seems easy to him, and some of them give you their money and wish you health while sick, killing themselves - it is not appropriate for you to accept help from those who are in this situation.
And let your caution be more severe than your desire and greed, do not move towards anything of this before certain knowledge that supports a good outcome, and use in all the treatment of your diseases: the advance of knowledge and warning of what it ends with safety.
For your benefit in acquiring praise, glory, mention and gratitude is a help to you, may God guide you, sons, and not deny you wisdom and success; for it is in His hand, there is no god except Him.
And I have arranged this gate chapters on what was mentioned in the first chapter of the surgery from short to long according to what has been mentioned in the chapter of incision, so that it may be easier for you to get what you want from it, God willing.
Chapter I:
In treating water that collects in the heads of children.
This disease often affects children at birth when the midwife presses the baby's head too firmly. It may also result from an undisclosed underlying condition.
I have never seen this disease in adults, and all the individuals I have observed who had it died quickly. Therefore, I have stopped performing this procedure. I have also seen a child whose head filled with water and swelled up daily. The child was unable to sit on his own due to the swelling in his head, and the water kept increasing until he died.
If the moisture collects between the skin and the bone, or if it collects under the bone on the membrane, then surgery should be performed. If there is a small bump, make a single cut across the middle of the head, about two inches long. This will allow the fluid to drain. This is a depiction of the incision instrument.
If the moisture is greater and the bump is larger, then make two cuts that intersect with each other, as shown in this diagram:
If the moisture is located under the bone, and you can see the stitches in the head opening from all sides, and the fluid drops when you press it with your hand - this is not hidden from you. In that case, make three cuts across the middle of the head, as shown in this diagram:
Once the cuts have been made, all the fluid will come out, and then you will tighten the cuts with gauze and bandages, and wrap it with a cloth soaked in liquid, until the fifth day. Then, remove the bandages, treat the wound with ointment, and do not leave the head loose. Feed the patient with dry food that is low in moisture content.
To help the member heal and recover, repeat the incision process where you see the bone of the bump, as the moisture may be located at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right or left side.
You should aim for the split where the tumor appeared to you and filled with water, then split it according to what is possible for you, and be careful not to cut a vein so that there is bleeding, because the patient will die from that bleeding along with vomiting of fluid.
Chapter Two.
Cutting the two arteries behind the ears, known as the sensilles.
When a severe infection presents in one or both eyes, or in the chest, and no benefit is found in the treatment with drugs, then treat with the cutting of these two arteries.
If you want to cut them, you should first shave the patient's head with a sword, then rub the area with a rough cloth to make the artery appear, then grasp the patient's shirt collar tightly, and then look for where the pulse is beating, as well as the two areas that recede behind the ears; these are places that are not easily hidden except in some people.
Then mark them with ink, and cut them with a knife, cutting into the bone, and this is done by shaving the head; or you can introduce the knife into the artery from below and bring it up in cuts, and the length of the cut should be about two fingers clasped together.
If the pulse stops, blood will flow pulsatingly and continuously; if the artery is not found with the sensille, you should measure from the ear to a distance of three fingers, then mark it with ink, and cut into the bone.
Send out seven or eight drops of blood in the middle, and perhaps you will send out more or less, all according to what appears to you of the patient' strength and the swelling of his arteries; then look at the wound, if there is still something attached to the bone from the soft tissue, cut it.
So that a hot tumor does not appear, then tighten the wound with a cotton thread, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter Three.
In the surgery of the arteries in the temples.
If a person has a chronic headache or recurring fevers and headaches, and has been treated by conventional medical methods without success, we have tried, in these cases, to surgically cut or caulk the arteries in the temples as described above.
The surgery for arteriotomy involves shaving the hair from the temples and then locating the visible artery in the temple, which will be evident from its pulse; there is little to hide from this individual.
Or, when the weather is cold, if it is difficult for you to see, the patient should tie a cloth around their neck to keep their head warm, then you can use a cloth to rub or pour hot water on the area until the artery becomes visible and clear. Then take the scalpel which is as shown in this picture. Then, carefully strip the skin with the scalpel until you reach the artery; insert a hook and pull it upward to extrude it from the skin and separate it from the connective tissues on either side. If the artery is thin, bend it with the tip of the hook. Then cut a piece from it, as much as the ends distance apart, and contract and stop any bleeding; if it has not been amputated or cut, there will be no blood. Then vomit blood from six to three times.
If the artery is thick, it should be tied at two points with a strong double thread; the thread should be either made of silk or string of gut to prevent decay and early formation of scar tissue that may cause bleeding.
Then cut off the excess between the two ties; you can do this at any time, or even later on; if you wish, you can burn it with an iron scissor so that it falls off, and this will serve the same purpose as surgery or better still.
Except where the patient has a fever or an irregular spirit, for cauterization is of use in eliminating moisture, and it is more effective. After tying the arteries, the place should be filled with old cotton and well-made strips placed on top. After cutting the bandages, treatment should be done with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and plucking until God wills healing.
If during your work there is a flow of blood from the artery, hurry to cut it either by cauterization or by filling the place with vinegar and clamping your hand until the blood stops flowing. If you do not have any of these things, put your finger on it until the blood clots.
And wash the place with very cold water until it feels better and tighten it as needed, and what is lighter and easier than tying the artery is to burn the sweat with this iron with two blades after you have marked the places with ink.
And lower it very hot until it reaches the bone and the sweat stops at two places so that the distance between its ends increases, because this cauterization will not stick to it at all. This is a picture of the iron.
It should be sharp, the blades resembling two small knives, but less sharp than a knife, because if they are as sharp as a knife, cold will reach them quickly and meat will not take long to stick to it. If there is some thickness in it, fire will stick to it tightly.
Cut the meat quickly, and this work is better than any other work, lighter and easier, and let the distance between the blades be as thick as a finger.
Chapter IV.
In treating continuous eye tears that are hot and persistent.
If the tears are persistent and their aliran is from the vessels that run on the skull from outside, and no benefit is derived from treating them with medicines according to medical treatment, and you see the face of the patient have turned red. He feels a buzzing in his forehead like the buzzing of ants, and his eyes are weak, moist, and their eyelids are worn out by tears; so those who treat him must perform this operation, which is called 'treatment with the sword,' i.e., he must order the patient to shave the hair from his forehead.
Then he makes three parallel incisions on the forehead, each as long as two fingers, one in the middle of the forehead and the others at a slight distance from the muscle that moves the cheek.
And be careful not to cut the two arteries on either side; keep your hand away from the connection of the jaws, and let there be with you a piece of sponge made from the stomach or many dry rags to stop the blood.
Then insert the sharp needle into both ends as shown in this picture. Take the needle from the incision near the jaw to the middle incision, stripping off all the skin between the incisions along with the membrane covering the bone; then do the same thing from the middle incision to the third incision, and then remove the needle. And insert into the first incision another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other; this is its picture: [Image of a scalpel].
And make the sharp side face upwards towards the meat attached to the skin, and the smooth side face the bone; push it until it reaches the middle incision, and cut all the blood vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without cutting the skin on the surface.
Then do the same in the middle incision as in the other; after the moderate amount of blood has flowed, squeeze the spots to stop any remaining blood, then insert a cotton thread into each incision and put on it a cloth that you have soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar and oil.
To avoid a hot tumor, and on the third day, the ligature is removed and much water is used, then treated with balsam of myrrh with rose oil and all that is used for surgery until it heals, God willing.
Chapter V.
In the treatment of tears and discharges from within the head towards the eyes.
When a person experiences repeated acute, fiery, persistent discharges from within the head towards the eyes, causing the eyes to look weak and small, with weakened vision and torn eyelids, which fall apart. And in the depth of the head there is a sharp, painful pain and repeated coughing fits. Know from these symptoms that those secretions and discharges come from many deep veins. The best treatment for them is this: order the patient to shave his forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead.
And in the depth of the head there is a sharp, painful pain and repeated coughing fits. Know from these symptoms that those secretions and discharges come from many deep veins. The best treatment for them is this: order the patient to shave his forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise it slightly to the side, and begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple; make the incision into the bone, and keep your hand away from the jaw muscles that move when chewing until, when the bone is exposed, all the blood has been stopped by the sponge.
Separate the edges of the incision with cotton wicks or a twine of linen, then tighten with bandages and dip the bandages in liquid and oil so that no hot tumor forms. When you have removed it and seen that the hot tumor has been resolved, then you should rub the bone to promote the growth of flesh.
Then treat it with the drying remedy that promotes the growth of flesh, such as: taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of clove, preparing them into a paste, and using it to promote the growth of meat in such surgeries.
Chapter VI.
In the treatment of what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a metallic stone or a semi-metallic stone such as iron and glass; or a plant seed such as chickpeas and nuts; or a liquid object such as water and vinegar.
If a stone has fallen into the ear or if there is a grain of sand that does not grow in the ear, receive the ear towards the sun. If you see only the stone, stuff it with a little purple oil or serge then try to extract it by moving your head or sneezing with the wand. And plug the nostrils when sneezing has come, after you have put a strap around the ear with a rag or wool and extend the ear towards the top of the jaw. Often this treatment will get it out, if not, try to extract it with the gentle tweezers which is this picture.
If it came out with the tweezers, or not, try to extract it with a blind hook, soft and slightly bent, because if it does not come out in this way, then make a pipe of brass and insert one end of the pipe into the ear hole, yes indeed.
And plug around the tube with tar mixed with oil so that the wind does not take a path except through the tube, and then pull it with your breath forcefully, often it will come out this way, if not, take a little bit of mastic or dried gum that is used for birds, put it on the end of the rod.
After wrapping it tightly with a cotton swab, then insert it into the ear hole gently after drying the ear of moisture, if it does not come out with all that we have described, then hurry to cut before the hot swelling or spasms occur.
The recipe for the cut is to bleed the patient in the temporal area first, and then extract some blood according to his strength, then sit the patient in your hands and rotate his ear towards the top and make a small cut at the base of the ear, where the skin is thinner.
And let the cut be moon-shaped so that you reach the stone, then remove it with whatever you can, and then stitch up the cut quickly and treat it so that it heals.
And if the fallen thing in the ear is one of the seeds that grow and swell, try to remove it as we mentioned. If it does not come out, then take a thin, soft awl and bring it on this picture.
And try to cut that type of fallen seed in the ear, and indeed you do this if you are certain that that grain has become moist with steam from the ear until it becomes small pieces, then take it out with a blind hook or with a soft pair or with suction.
As we have mentioned, it is easy to remove it, and as for the water that has entered the ear, it should be used by the patient who coughs with a kondus first, and has filled his ear with some old cotton, lying down on that ear that has water in it, if it came out by that.
Or take a lot of pebbles along the fingers, thin and smooth, and warm them slightly with fire, then the patient puts one in the hole of his ear, and hobbles on one foot from that side, and strikes with another stone on the stone that is in the ear.
Continue to do that with a pebble, one after another, until all the water comes out, and it may be taken out by taking one from the reeds or from the feathers, and inserting the end of one in the ear and heating the other end with fire until most of it burns, then replacing it with another feather.
Do this several times until all the water comes out, or draw it out with a tube as mentioned earlier in the pebble, and if the animal that has entered is small in size, like the bed bug, treat it as mentioned in the division.
If its body is large and appears to the sense, try to remove it with a pair and hooks, and this removal of the earworm has been easier than all that enters the ear, and if the treatment you have done with what we mentioned in the division in the article of catarrh did not succeed.
It is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun, because if you see something from the worm, remove it with the chisel or with the soft hooks; because if you do not see anything from it, take a tube, this is its picture.
It should be narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and you should insert the thin end into the ear as much as it can be borne by the patient; then suck it strongly with a sucking motion several times until all the worms come out; if it does not come out for you, plug up the tube with wax as I mentioned to you in the casings.
If it does not come out for you as we mentioned, then use the drops that we mentioned, and they have been tried by the first to kill worms, and you will find this in the article of drops, and it is necessary that you pour oils and medicines into the ear with this device, its image is:
As you see, it is made of silver or copper, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, wide at the top; if you want the piston in the cavity of the tube to be of tight-fitting brass, and if you want to take a rod and wrap a cotton ball tightly around its end.
Then throw the oil or juice or what you want from these medicines into the tube and it is in the ear; then insert the rod with the cotton ball from above, and squeeze it with your hand at a moderate rate so that the oil goes into the cavity of hearing and feels it.
On the patient who is in pain, and let what you pour into the ear be warmed slightly in the fire; and be careful that the thing that drips inside it should not be very cold or very hot, because the ear does not endure it.
Chapter VII:
In the treatment of the سد (obstruction) that affects the ear.
Some children may come out of their mothers' wombs with unperforated eardrums.
And some people may also experience a blockage in the ear canal due to an injury or growing tissue; this blockage may be in the depth of the ear hole, invisible to the eye.
If it projects a little outside the hole and is visible, then what projects deep into the ear and is not visible is, in the best of cases, difficult to see. And what is visible should have the patient's ear placed in the sun. And look at it; if you see the plug exposed, open it with a fine scissor and this is its appearance:
The tip should be slightly wider than the rest of the knife, and both sides must be smooth so as not to hurt the ear. If the plug is made of flesh that has grown in the ear canal, grasp it gently with a forceps and cut it carefully until all the flesh is removed.
If the plug is deep in the ear, make a slight bend that is smooth and warm it slightly in fire then push it into the ear canal. If you feel the plug along with the patient's hearing loss, remove it gently.
And be careful not to wound the auditory nerve, and then make a thread of the size of the hole that has been soaked in egg yolk and put it on the wound. Repeat this several times to ensure the wound heals properly. Or take a thread, dip it in water and sprinkle some aqua regia on it.
And use it; if you see the ear swollen and red, a hot wound, then you should remove the thread and replace it with a new one that has been soaked in rose oil to soothe the swelling and heat. Then treat it until it heals.
If there is bleeding, dip a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear. Then continue with the rest of the treatment that stops the bleeding mentioned in the article about cataplasms.
Chapter VIII:
In the treatment of warts that appear on the eyelids:
These warts that appear on the eyelids can be moist or dry. It is necessary to grasp them with a forceps or a hook and cut them off with a fine scissor at the root, then apply aqua regia on the site.
If blood flows from it, you should extract it with a small lentil-shaped iron and dry it better after cutting it, and it often returns if something remains of its roots; and when it is burned with fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
Chapter 9.
In the treatment of cold that affects the eyelids of the eye.
Often, something that resembles a cold in its severity and stiffness occurs in the eyelids.
Therefore, it is called "برد" (cold), which is the gathering of a thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids; and the work is that you look at it, if the cold is visible on the surface of the eyelid, moving to all sides, order it to split it widthwise.
Then peel it gently from all sides to get rid of it, then hang it on the hook and cut it; if cutting is not possible except that the eyelid is cut with cutting, it does no harm to the patient, and if the incision is large, sew it and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, there is no harm in it, as the ointment will adjust and repair it; if the cold is slanted towards the inside of the eyelid towards the inner surface, flip the eyelid and hang the cold on a hook without the need to cut, and cut it from all sides.
If the eyelid has been cut, it does no harm; then wash the eye with salt water and treat the area with what heals it until the patient recovers.
Chapter 10.
In the treatment of keratitis, which occurs in the eyelid of the eye.
Keratitis is fat that forms in the layers of the upper eyelid, more common in children; it weighs on their eyes and causes them to suffer from the rays of sunlight, and they cannot see. Because the tears hurry towards them.
And so you will find them always propping their faces up, and sleeping on top of them; their eyelids will be wet, having grown larger due to the puffiness; the shrunken eye sockets will be clearly visible; and when you press the area with your fingers, you will feel the sunken eye sockets between them. The procedure is for the patient to rest his head on your lap.
Then take a cotton cloth and prepare from it a loop; and make from that loop a circle to the size of what surrounds the sunken eye socket from all sides; then put it on him and press with your fingers from all sides to gather the sunken eye socket in the middle of the circle.
Then cut in the middle of that moisture with a sharp needle; do not make the incision larger than the incision made in the bloodletting, and as for the depth, it is necessary to cut all the skin until you reach the sunken eye socket.
In most cases, the sunken eye socket will protrude from the incision in the form of a piece of fat that is white; so attract it with a cloth that you have wrapped between your fingers and take it out, while turning your hand right and left to eliminate it; and be careful not to increase the incision lest the needle injure the eye.
If the sunken eye socket does not appear in the first incision, it is necessary to increase the incision slightly gently until it appears; then attract it as we said, and then dip a cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the area and tighten it with a bandage, and some people grind salt.
And put it in the cavity of the incision so that what remains of that moisture melts, and then treat him until he recovers; if there is a hot swelling in the area, treat it with soothing compresses until it heals.
Chapter 11.
In the treatment of eye puffiness.
If it has grown out of the natural line of the eyelid, forming excess eyelashes under the natural lashes that have become entrenched, it will damage the eye and cause various diseases, such as constant tearing, drooping eyelids, clouding, and thickness, until it becomes a cause for the blindness of the eye.
To compress the eye on four aspects, either by burning with fire or by sharp medicine as mentioned in the door of burning, or that it is compression by cutting and stitching, or by canals as I have remembered.
You should place the head of the patient in your lap, and then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it turns, if not, then you should put a needle through a thread from under the eyebrow, and pierce the needle with the thread above it, and this is near the hair itself. Then you pull the thread up to the lid.
Then turn it with a stick, and then cut in the inner part of the eyelid, without the excess hair, with the needle from the larger tear to the smaller tear, then let go of the thread, and put a small cloth or cotton under the eyelid, then mark on the lid with ink.
Like the shape of an olive leaf, except that it should be the size you want to raise the eyelid, because people may differ in this regard; some need to cut a piece from the eyebrow on the amount that relaxes the lid.
And some need to cut less, all of this depending on the amount that the eyelid relaxes, then you pierce with the needle on the two lines that you marked, and start from the larger tear to the smaller tear, and one cut is near the natural hair, at the same thickness as the stick.
Then you put the needle in one of the angles of the skin, then peel it all, and then collect the eyelids with a needle and cotton thread, and wipe the blood away, and stick what is left of the threads on the eyebrows with some sticky things if necessary.
Whether you want to do that or not, it doesn't matter; then let the stitches and threads remain for about three days or four, then treat it, if you want, you can leave the wound without stitching and treat it with something that dries and contracts; because the eyelid will rise when the wound heals and closes. Stitching is better.
And this type of compression, which has been mentioned by the early scholars, except that it is less stressful on the patient and is a good deed with no risk involved. There is another method for compression as well, which is to attach a shape to the eyelid, similar to an Indian betel leaf, as we have described. Then raise the eyelid with three tweezers, spread out or grouped together in this form: .
Then cut away any excess lid with a small scissors, cutting it at an angle: .
If you cannot keep the tweezers still, and there is no way to steady them, take a needle with thread attached, insert it into the center of the shape, insert another thread near the larger eyelid fold, and a third thread near the smaller eyelid fold, gather the threads gently between your fingers, then raise them slightly with your hand.
Then raise the entire labeled lid as we have described, then stitch up the wound and treat it until it heals, if there is swelling or heat during your cutting or incising, soothe this inflammation with calamine lotion and similar topical anesthetics.
And the lower eyelid may also flip its eyelids, so we should use what we have mentioned of cutting and stitching and compressing with fire and sharp medicine. More effectively achieve the same goal as cutting and stitching, but with less risk to the patient, or with a combination of both methods.
Compression with a reed is done in this manner: turn the eyelid inside out and make the incision from the inside, as we have described. Then, make two thin reeds or wooden sticks, their length equal to that of the lid, and their width less than the width of an eyedropper.
And I have used a reed in its ends on both sides where the threads will cling, then gently gather the remaining lid with these reeds, tighten the sticks on both sides securely and leave it for a few days; the attached skin will die, darken, and rot.
Until it falls out by itself, if it slows down, then lend it with the plier and then treat it until it heals, so if it becomes swollen, the eyelid rises but does not dim the eyelids of the eye, this is a picture of the two eye lids make them on this form and this amount in length and width with a specific eye:.
Chapter 12.
In raising the hair that falls from the eye with a needle.
If it is one or two hairs, the work in that is to take a fine needle and put in it a piece of smooth silk thread about a span long, then gather the two ends and tie them together with a very loose knot, and let the length of the thread be about a span.
Then put another fine silk thread in the thready bit at the end of it, tie its two ends together if you want, then let the patient sit with his head in your lap near the sun so that the work is more visible, since it is a delicate operation, and then insert the needle with the thready bit in the root of the extra hair.
And then execute it on the eyelid with the needle slowly until you take it out above the natural hair, and then pull the thread up to above the thready bit and put that hair into it if it is one, two or three, no more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the thready bit in the eyelid along with the natural hair, and if you pulled the thready bit without taking the hair out with it, pull the thready bit down with the thread until the thready bit comes out from the top hole.
Then put the hair back in it and pull them, do this until it rises in the top hole and you see it clearly with your eye, so then let go of the thready bit and the thread, and tighten the eyelid, and leave it tight for two or three days until the hair is attached to its place and the skin grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add a long hair from natural hair so it rises with it or leave it until it grows after some time then raise it.
Chapter 13.
In the treatment of the stye that occurs in the upper eyelid of the eye.
The one that is exposed to this stye is called an epicanthus and this stye may be either natural or accidental. The accidental one is due to the fusion of a wound, incision, etc.
The work in it is to cut that fusion and separate its lips and make a thread of linen between them and bind it so that it heals, and it should not be used in its treatment things that dry and contract.
If you do this, you will return the stye with more severe than it was before; but use in it those things that relax such as the ring and the rope of bleached flour and linseed oil dissolved with something of fats and rub it with it and treat it.
And the principle of treating it is that you strive by every means to not be bonded in form as it was before, and this work we have mentioned is some repair of the stye but not to return the place to what it was before.
Chapter 14.
In the treatment of the stye that occurs in the lower eyelid of the eye.
This stye, which is from a white patch, is called in truth a stye and it may be natural or accidental; the accidental one is due to the fusion of a wound, incision, etc.
The work in it is to take a needle with two threads and sew it into the flesh and pierce it from the left ear lobe to the right ear lobe so that the thread is in the two sides of the flesh, then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with a wide scalpel.
If the shape of the eyelid returns to what it should be, and otherwise, take a screw and place it on the site of the incision and turn it with the lid and make two incisions in the inner side of the eyelid and the ends of the incisions are from the angles of the cut which you have cut until they meet, so that be there an angle. Until, when it meets, becomes its shape similar to this form:.
And is the Greek letter 'L', and then you remove that meat as much as the sharp side is below what follows the eyelid, and then you gather the scattered parts with two stitches, stitch it with wool thread, and then treat it as we have mentioned of drugs relaxers and suturing until it heals.
And if the sutured has spread from a cut or stitching or burn on, it should be made a simple incision without hair of the eyelids also as mentioned above, and then separate between the two eyelids with a rope on what we have mentioned.
And the word in the treatment of the sutured if it is from above or from below that it carries out her work according to what it seems convenient for you of the shape of the sutured, and the maker of the thing arranges the device with any face possible.
Until the shape returns to its natural shape or approaches it, and the same disease indicates you what is suitable for him of work and machine in most cases,.
Chapter XV.
In adhesion of the eyelid of the eye with the lacrimal bone or the cornea.
May cause this adhesion to many people that the eyelid upper is glued to the white of the eye, preventing it from easy movement and obstructing it from its natural actions, so that you should introduce the edge of a screw under the lid.
And raise it to above or extend it with a plier, and then cut the adhesion with a soft needle does not be by the sharpness of cutting needles, but is like a little dry so that he does not disturb the patient when working and slips the needle and hurts the eye because of its sharpness, and your cutting as though you strip that.
If the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the adhesions have all healed, then salt water should be poured into the eye or dropped into it from a solution of the zingiberic diaconium dissolved in water, and then the lid should be separated from the eye with a cotton wisp.
And place over the eye a wet cloth soaked in egg white, and after three days use the wound-dressing solutions until it heals.
Chapter 16:
In cutting the nares and removing excess tissue from the nasolateral regions.
The nares are composed of two layers: one nervous, which is like a thin, solid membrane; and the other non-nervous, which is like a stiff, white mass that disintegrates when touched by iron or caught in a fishhook.
There is no hook that can catch in it; and both varieties originate from the larger nostril and extend a short distance, until they cover the lid of the eye slightly and impede light and eye movement; to cut them, one should make the patient lie with his head on your lap.
Then he opens his eyes and you raise the eyelid with your hand; then you grasp the nare with a little flexible hook and extend it upward; then you take a needle, insert a horse or bull hair in it, and tie a strong thread to its tip; then you bend the tip of the needle slightly and drive it into the center of the nare.
Then you run it through with the needle, tie it with the thread to the nare, and extend it upward, and then peel away one side of the nare with a gentle scalpel or small scissors, leaving the natural tissue intact.
To prevent the nare from dripping with the tear fluid, which is constant, you can use the hook or needle and thread as mentioned above; then peel away the tip with a smooth scalpel.
If the blade comes into contact with the cornea, causing a hernia in the eye, then after cutting, place a little ground salt or زنجل in the eye and leave it for another day then treat it as necessary until it heals.
If the corneal stroma is not innervated and cannot hold a needle or hook, this type of corneal ulcer can often be treated with drugs, healing as described in the division. If you want to cut it, open the patient's eye.
Take a gentle, smooth knife with a weak edge and place it on this image: Shave the ulcer gently, taking care not to cut it. If you see that it is breaking up and fragmenting, just shave the cornea with زنجل or red شياف or ground salt and leave the eye shut for another day.
Then repeat the treatment until all of it is gone, unless you encounter a hot bump in the eye; leave it and treat the inflammation until it heals, then repeat the treatment on the cornea until it heals, and as for the eye socket's flesh,
If the natto hurts the eye badly, fix it with a hook and cut some of it off; don't cut too much to avoid causing tears in the eye. Then, drop red or زنجl شيaf in the lacrimal ducts until it heals,
Chapter XVII
In cutting the lid and any excess flesh that grows on the eye.
It may grow on the eyes of some people, red flesh that covers the eyelid or approaches it or overflows it; the eyelids may turn outward, resembling a rosebud.
The work involves having the patient rest their head on your lap, then opening their eyes wide, and using hooks to remove all the red flesh.
And he gripped it with a tweezers or pair of scissors and cut the first piece of meat, cutting it one by one until he finished all of it, preserving it from injuring her when working, and his cut is either with the tweezers that we have described in cutting the hairpin or with a small pair of scissors. As if you were about to pick up the threads as shown in the image in the door that follows this door.
So if your cut is finished and all the threads have gone, fill the eye with ground salt or drops of red powder and other corrosive medicines, and hold on to the eye from the outside a cotton ball soaked in egg white so that you don't get a hot swelling.
If there is anything left of the thread and you are afraid of a hot swelling, leave the eye alone and treat it with something that soothes the swelling, then return to it with work until it heals. The same applies to any excess meat that shows up in the eye of this kind.
However, you should avoid treating any weak eye by nature or by exposure to work with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this organ is suitable for such a task.
Chapter XVIII:
In picking the threads from the eye.
The threads are red veins that twine around the eye, preventing sight, and the eye weakens with age, so you should first look at it to see if the eye that has the threads is strong and there is no other disease except the threads.
Then, the threading, which is done when the patient puts his head on your lap, and you hang those veins with one or two hooks according to your skill. The hooks should be flexible in this form:
Or be two double hooks in one body in this form:
Then, with a sharp pair of scissors, carefully grab those veins and gently wipe away the blood from time to time until you see that the eye has lost those veins and the blood has dried up, and be careful not to injure the eye with the tips of the scissors, and let your work take place in the morning near the sun.
And establish very well in your work so that you do not cut except those veins, and when you are finished only compress the eye with green or red squint so that it eats with its keenness what is left of the ways, if you cannot grab him all at that time then bandage the eye with something that calms the eye's pain.
And leave him for days until the pain subsides and you are safe from fever bulge, then return to work on this eye alone until it is healed. This is a picture of cutting off the eye from inflammation.
And leave him [and the head of the ill is in the stone of the pupil and later dries tears and realizes vision in front of the eye and behind it and the origin in work that you open the eye with fixed openings or a triangle holds it a student]. The original in work that you open the eye with fixed openings or a triangle holds it a student.
And be patient, and the head of the ill is in the stone of the pupil and later dries tears and realizes vision in front of the eye and behind it, and you have two options to start cutting from the top of the eye or from below, and the first is to dry two strings on the upper side, one at the end of the eyebrow and the other at the beginning.
And hold it between the middle and index fingers, then hang strings from under them, then hold it between the ring and pinky fingers, and gently remove your hand so that you see all the veins raised; cut from the west smaller if you want with a scissors or a soft forceps.
And put the string on the needle and straighten all the veins so that they rise on the caliper, and do not cut the string; and if you want to dry it up, do not cut the string, as blood and tears will affect you.
Then cut with a scissors what is left on the eyebrow from above and below, so that there remains only one in the cornea; if you can remove it from the cornea by stretching, do so, because sometimes it may be ready to come out on its own.
And if you cut it, it would wound the place where it was cut for a few days, relieve the pain, and soothe the hot lump. Then prepare to operate on it again.
Chapter 19.
In restoring the nose.
The doctors call the nose a "nasir", if they treat it with fire or with sharp, harsh medication as described above and it does not heal, then the only solution is to cut through the tumor when it is ripe and extract all the moisture or pus in it.
Until the bone is exposed, so if the bone is exposed and you see decay or blackness in it, then polish it with a tool like this:.
And it is called "rasas" (a type of surgical tool), made from Indian iron, and its head is rounded like a seed of the fennel plant, engraved with a fine pattern like a file, so you place it on the site of corruption in the bone, and then you rotate it between your fingers while slightly crumpling your hand until you feel that the corruption has disappeared.
And you do that several times, then you bandage the site with drying and astringent medicines, if the site became closed and new meat grew and the nose stopped bleeding, it would take 40 days to heal completely and not break or cause any problems.
So, you should know that it has healed, otherwise, there is no solution except to restore the nose to a hole in the nose with a sharp iron or harsh medication, and if the bone is exposed again, you take a  "mishbaji" (a type of surgical tool) and shape it like this:.
Be triangular, and its shank is tapered towards the tip, as you see it. Then place it on the bone itself, and that is near the eye, and slightly remove your hand from the eye then rotate your hand with the  "mishbaji" until the bone pierces through and can be felt by the patient.
By making him feel that the wind comes out of his nose when he holds his hand on it, so at that time, you should bandage the site with astringent and drying medicines as I have told you. If the meat grows back and hardens, then the substance that was drained outside returns to the nose, and that is lighter on the patient if God wills.
Chapter XX.
In restoring the sight of the eye.
If the entire eye has been blinded and there is no damage or impairment of vision, then it should be dilated and then a ligature should be placed in the orbit. Then a tight bandage should be placed over the eye without condition and suctions should be applied thinly.
Then place on the eye a poultice made of yoghurt, honey, and egg white, and then tighten the bandage over the eye with many bandages, and the method of bandages is that you take a hot, soft cloth and fold it into four folds and make many of them.
Then place one on top of the other according to what the eye needs, then tighten them with a strong squeeze and replace the ligature with suction without condition, then remove the ligature and leave the eye tightened for a day and a night.
If the bandage has relaxed during this time, it should be tightened again, and then remove the bandage after a day and a night as we mentioned, if you see that the eye has returned to its former state, otherwise, repeat the dressing, bandages, tightening, and ligature until it returns.
Chapter XXI.
In cutting the eyelashes.
If a hernia has occurred in the lacrimal layer, then you shave and cut the eyelashes outside the eyelids so that they look like grapes, and this disfigures a person, so if you want to cut them, follow what I describe.
This is done by inserting a needle into the base of the lash at the bottom and then passing another needle through the thread twice from the corner of the eye, so that the first needle remains in place.
Then cut where the loop of the thread bends, tie some of the lash around the needle with a knot and tighten it, then remove the needle and place on the eye a damp pad made of egg white and leave it until the threads and lashes fall off. Then treat the eye to strengthen it.
Until the wound heals, and the grape vine may tighten from all sides with a circle of a piece of cloth in order to increase the eye's fluid, then thin forceps can be used to reach the core of the eye, so that the eye's fluid flows and falls from its place and becomes weak while resting. Then tie it up until it heals.
Chapter 22.
in the treatment of the stye.
This disease, which is called a stye, is a matter that gathers in the eye resembling descending water and not having any of it; the work in this case is that the patient sits on a chair upright and then you take his head with your hands from both sides.
And move it so that you see the matter descending in your eye, and then it does not move and does not disappear, and the light appears and the patient sees things as he used to see them, and if the descent did not occur as we mentioned, we knew that it was water, and if it did not prepare for the descent of the matter with what we mentioned.
Otherwise, sit the patient between your hands and then take a thin forceps and split it slightly above the corneal membrane at the point where the lid meets the corneal membrane in the orbit until the matter is removed.
So if it only contracted in the eye, a hot water that has been mixed with honey or water that has been boiled with honey and honey will be made, then it will be treated with all the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 23.
We have mentioned the types of water in the classification and which one is suitable for pouring with an explained explanation, so you take it from there on health, and it should be that you sit the patient between your hands seated towards the light near the sun.
And bind the healthy eye and tighten it tightly, then raise the eyelid of his eye with your left hand if the eye is the left eye or with your right hand if the eye is the right one.
Then place the tip of the needle near the acropolis with a thick thread in the same white eye from the smaller ear then push the needle hard and turn it with your hand until it passes into the white eye and feel the needle that he has reached something empty.
The needle should be at a depth equal to the distance from the baby to the last black, which is the acropolis of the eye, as you see copper in the same position as the eye sees, due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, then the needle goes up to the place where the water is.
Then push it down a bit at a time, as the water comes out immediately, the patient will see what opened his eye immediately and the needle in his eye, then rest for a while, if the water rises, lower it again without taking the needle out.
If it settles and does not rise, then remove the needle gently while twisting your hand a little, and then dissolve a little pure salt in the water and wash it inside the eye, and then put, all outside the eye, soaked or soaked.
With yolk and white egg, and tie it with the healthy eye, and as for us and our time, we put on it ground cumin mixed with egg white; if the needle does not enter the eye because of its hardness, because some people have a very hard eye. It is necessary that you take the tool called the knife that this is its image: [Image of a blade].
Then you pierce it with the same slit only do not press too hard, as is that you knock on the needle a little place and then put the needle as we mentioned, and when your work is complete, prepare for the patient to lie down firmly in a dark house.
He abstains from all movements and coughing, and make his food what softens him naturally without moving his head to the right or left at all, and the bandage is as it was until the third day, then you remove it in that dark house and test his sight.
Examine [the wound] then return the ligature on the seventh day; it is not allowed to do this at the time of treatment or after drawing from your hourglass but you should avoid this before water rises quickly due to intense gaze.
If a hot tumor appears, then the eye should be discharged before the seventh day and repaired with something that calms the swelling until it is calm, then the eye should be opened and a patch placed on its surface to train the eye under it for several days in that dark house.
He leaves the house gradually and deals with its reasons, and know that the hourglass cannot do without observation several times, so then he proceeds to work. It has reached me from some of the Arabs that he mentioned that he makes an hourglass in Iraq that absorbs water.
And I have not seen anyone in our country make that or read it in any of the early books, and it may be possible for it to be a later invention. Here is an image of types of hourglasses so one can stand on it if he does not know it:
It is made of copper especially and its side is this specific thinness with a triangle of sides sharp, .
Chapter 24.
In treating meat that grows out of the nose.
May grow out of the nose different excesses of meat, some of which resembles a scorpion with many legs and some is dull meat like mold color and some is soft meat not like mold color.
So if any of this meat is soft and not evil or cancerous, the patient should lie down with his face towards the sun and open his nostril and throw the forceps into that meat, then pull it out to the outside, and then cut what you have understood with a sharp, gentle scalpel from one side.
Until you know that all the meat has gone, if there is anything left that you cannot cut with one of the gentle machines with caution so as not to remain anything from it, and if blood comes out or a hot tumor appears.
If it is the case that he has a malignant tumor, then immediately cauterize it until the blood stops and all the meat comes off. Then throw it into the nose after cutting it with a knife and water or drink. If the nose opens up and moisture escapes to the throat.
If it is the case that he has a malignant tumor, then immediately cauterize it until the blood stops and all the meat comes off. Then throw it into the nose after cutting it with a knife and water or drink. If the nose opens up and moisture escapes to the throat, then know that it may have been cured. If the moisture does not go out as it should, then know that there is rotten meat inside, in the upper part of the loose bones that the tool did not reach with the cut
Then tie many knots in it and place each knot a finger's width or less apart, and have the patient insert the end of the thread into his nose with a stick or whatever he can manage, after making it like a seed and drawing its breath towards the throat.
Then take the ends of the thread, one from the mouth and the other that remains in the nose.
Then use the knots in the thread to cut the meat. Then remove the thread and put it back into the nose, having previously soaked it in Egyptian ointment that you have drunk. Do this for three days or more.
Until all the remaining meat has been eaten by the ointment, and then the last thing in the nose is a lead tube for a few days until it heals. If he needs treatment, dry it out using that method.
This is an illustration of the syringe used to drip oils and medicines into the nose:
Place a small silver or brass half-shell, open at one end and with a channel inside, like a little candle.
And if you wish, you can make the tube closed like a tube and level out the syringe.
This has a handle at the end, as you see; it grasps it when heated in it with oil or any other liquid or fluid substance.
Chapter 25.
In warts that grow on the tip of the nose.
Very often a wart grows on the tip of the nose, increasing in size and becoming ugly over time.
For that reason, it should be cut in its initial appearance and completely roots removed; then carry on the site either by cauterization or by a burning medicine which performs the function of cauterization, for if missed it will grow large and become hard, pale and insensible.
Do not expose it to iron, for it is a tumour of cancer; I have often seen cuts of this type of tumour and they returned to the patient with a great misfortune, but if the tumour is soft to the touch without being blue, and I see that cutting in all of it can be done. So make the patient vomit, cut it without caution or carefulness, and treat the site with something that dries and tightens so that it heals, and.
Chapter 26.
In sewing up the nose, lip, and ear. If the connection is separated from a wound or something similar, know that when such a connection is separated in one of these cartilage pieces, little can be done for it effectively except for some people.
So when one of those things is displayed, look if the wound is soft with its blood that you collect the edges of the wound with stitching and then treat it until it heals, but if the separation of the connection has separated her lips and each lip becomes a separate piece, so you should peel off each piece from the depth of its skin to make it bleed.
Then collect the lips with stitching, tighten them and leave them there with sheep's skin and a powder of licorice and a powder of other salves and place a plaster on top of the grains of the nettle or any other type of ointment and leave it tied for two or three days, then remove it.
And the medicine is changed and left until the threads themselves are cut then treated with the ointment until it heals, the prescription of stitching is to bring together what is spread in contact either by needles as we have described in abdominal stitching or by thread as I have told you there,
Chapter 27.
In removing the knots that occur in the lips.
It may sometimes happen that many people have small hard knots within their lips, some of which resemble staves of caraway and others are smaller or larger; in this case, the lip should be flipped over and a hook should be inserted into each knot and it should be pulled out.
And cut it from all sides and then fill the site after cutting with powder salt until the blood stops and then gargle with vinegar, and salt and treat the sites of what there is contraction to that until the wounds heal,
Chapter 28.
In cutting excess meat in the gum.
Often, a meat called abulus grows on the gum; it should be attached to a hook or grabbed with a forceps and cut at its root and left to flow blood or leave the wound open then put powder salt on the site.
Or one of the drying contractants; if that meat returns after treatment, it often returns; so cut it again and burn it with fire, for it will not return after burning.
Chapter 29.
In grinding the teeth with iron.
It may gather in the surfaces of teeth, inside and outside, and between the gums, hard and ugly scraps; and it may turn black and yellow and green, until it reaches a corruption that affects the gums and disfigures the teeth for this reason.
It should be that the patient sits between your hands and his head on your desk, and you strip off the tooth and the tooth that has appeared to you the scales and the thing similar to sand until nothing remains of it; and you do the same with the blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other colors until you purify it.
If what is inside of it has gone from the first sorting, otherwise you will repeat on it the sorting another day and a second and third until you reach the goal you want, and know that the tooth needs to different shapes garners according to how is convenient for your work.
For the garter that sorts the tooth from inside is not the same as the one that sorts it from outside and which sorts it between the teeth on a different image, and these are several shapes of garners to be with you all prepared:
Chapter 30.
In Extracting Teeth.
It is necessary that you treat the tooth from its pain with every effort and hesitate to pull it out because it is a noble substance, until there is no other choice but to pull it out.
So if the patient has decided to pull out the tooth, you should stabilize it until it is healthy again. Often the patient is deceived by the pain and thinks that it is in the healthy tooth, so he pulls it out and then the pain does not go until he pulls out the sick tooth; we have seen this many times from the action of the chirurgians.
So if the healthy tooth is stable to you, then it should be cut around the jaw with a blade that has some strength, so the gums are removed from all sides, and then move it with your fingers or gentle clamps at first, slightly, little by little, until it shakes off.
Then, when it is stable to you, strengthen it with the dog's claws and the head of the patient between your knees, so that it does not move, then pull out the tooth on a straight line so as not to break it; if it doesn't come out, take one of those tools and insert it under it from all sides with care and push to move it.
And if the tooth is punctured or worn out, you should fill that hole with a cloth and plug it tightly with a thin rod so that it does not collapse when you squeeze it with the clamps; you must investigate with the probe around the gums from all sides positively.
Preserve your effort lest you break it and leave some of it there, which would return to the patient from that very same place, bringing upon him a malady greater than his original pain. And do not make the same mistakes as the ignorant surgeons make when they build their bridges without using what we have described.
For they often bring upon people great miseries, the least of which is a broken tooth with all its roots still intact, or some of them, not just one. Or else, they might pull out some of the bones of the jaw as we have seen many times, and then rinse the site with a drink or vinegar and salt, and if blood starts to flow from that spot, it often does so, so crush then some of the alow and put it into the hole.
Or else, if the vinegar does not help, use a file to smoothen the tooth first; it should have thick sides, a short shaft and a thick grip so that it does not bend when you grasp it to pull out the tooth. These are the large files:
They should be as thick as you see them, with strong handles so that when you grasp them they do not give in or bend; their ends should be well-welded and some of them should have teeth that interlock;
And you can also make the ends like a refrigerator, so they are also very sturdy and hold fast;
Chapter thirty-one.
In pulling out the roots of teeth and removing broken jawbones.
If a tooth's root has broken and is still attached, you should place a cotton ball greased with fat on the site for a day or two until it softens up, then insert the file or large file into it. Those that resemble the sides in shape to the beak of a bird called a plover; this is a picture of the large files:
Make a hole in the bone, as shown below:
and the second is flat with a slightly curved edge, as shown below:
and another triangular one, as shown below:
We can also use this double-bladed tool, as shown below:
and other tools and tools mentioned earlier in the list of tooth extraction tools, and we can also use this large fishing hook-shaped tool, as shown below:
Triangular-ended hook with a slight thickening to prevent it from breaking, and know that there are many types of dental tools and they cannot be counted. The skilled craftsmanship, in his craftsmanship and ingenuity, invents tools for himself according to what he is led by work and the diseases themselves.
For some diseases do not have early tools mentioned for their different types; if a bone in the jaw or one of the facial bones breaks down or rots, search for it in its place with one of these tools and the claws mentioned above for removing teeth.
and we can use a pair of pliers like this:
be slightly thicker to hold the bone in place so it does not slip while extracting, and we will treat the affected area with appropriate drugs. If the bone is partially rotten, we will remove the decayed part and scrub off the black color until it is clean, then treat it until it heals,.
Chapter 32.
In extracting protruding teeth compared to other teeth.
If a tooth has erupted from its natural path, it distorts the appearance, especially if it occurs in women or slaves. It is necessary to look at it; If a tooth has erupted behind another tooth.
He could neither cut nor bind it; if it was attached to another tooth he would extract it with this instrument, as shown in the figure.
It was sharp-tipped and made of hard Indian steel; that is how you cut it, as often as necessary, because the tooth is very strong, and to prevent the damage of other teeth. If, however, the tooth has just come loose from its socket because of its coldness, use a file such as this one, pictured below:
It should all be made of hard Indian steel and its design should be very intricate; it should be like the file used to make needles, sharpened so that it can cut the tooth in a few days with care so as not to damage the other teeth, then smooth out the remaining part and polish it with a grinding stone.
If a tooth has broken, and it hurts the tongue when speaking, then it should be sharpened so as to remove any roughness of that break and even out and polish it so that it doesn't hurt the tongue or interfere with speech.
Chapter 33
In joining the movable teeth together with silver or gold wire.
If the anterior teeth shake and move due to a blow or fall, and the patient is unable to bite down on anything that needs to be eaten, and if you treat them with medicines that constrict but they do not benefit. Then, cut the tooth out at the root with this instrument, as shown in the figure:
The trick is to thread it with a gold or silver wire, with gold being the best as silver rusts and decays after a few days while gold remains unchanged forever; the wire should be of medium thickness, just enough to fit between the teeth.
The image of the joint shows you taking the wire and inserting its bend between the two correct teeth, then twisting the ends of the wire between the movable teeth one or more times until you reach the gum on the correct side.
Then, you bring the sutures back to the side where you started and gently and wisely tighten your hand so that it does not move at all and your thread is tight at the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out, then you cut both ends of the surplus thread with scissors, gather them together and twist them with the plier and hide them between the true tooth and the moving tooth.
To prevent the tongue from being injured, then leave it tightened like this for as long as it remains, if it loosened or broke, tighten it with another thread so that it enjoys it like this throughout the whole life, and this is a picture of the teeth and the structure of the tie in two healthy teeth and two moving teeth as you see:.
A tooth or two may fall out and return to its place and tie as we have described, remaining in place, but a skilled blacksmith only carves bone from cattle and makes it like the tooth and places it in the place where the tooth has gone. and tighten it as we said so that it remains and enjoys it, .
Chapter 34.
In cutting the ligature that is under the tongue, which prevents speech.
This ligature that is under the tongue may be either a natural one that the human is born with or a traumatic one from an injury that has healed.
The work is that you open the mouth of the patient and his head on your stone, and raise his tongue, then cut that nerve ligature with a blade until the tongue is released from its grip, if it had some stiffness and complexity, and this is due to a healed wound. A file and split it into two so as not to be tied, and if it is tied with thread, cut the thread and pull it out little by little until it comes out completely.
Be careful that the cut is not deep into the flesh, so as not to cut a blood vessel there, then rinse with rose water or vinegar and cold water, and then put a cotton thread under the tongue for the patient to hold onto every night.
To prevent a second hernia, if bleeding occurs, put powdered sulfur on the site. If the blood prevails, cauterize the area with a lens heat applicator suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with all the necessary treatments until it heals.
Chapter 35.
In removing the toad born under the tongue.
It may happen under the tongue that a tumor like a small toad prevents the tongue from doing its usual job, and maybe bone until it fills the mouth, and the work is that you open the patient's mouth toward the sun and look at the tumor.
If you see it as a red patch or black and hard, the patient cannot feel it, do not expose it to the sun as it is cancer. If it is inclined to white and has moisture, pierce it with a needle and cut it with a delicate scalpel and eliminate it from all sides.
If the blood prevails while you are working, put powdered sulfur on it until the blood stops, then go back to your work until you extract it completely, and then gargle with vinegar and salt water.
Then treat it with all the necessary treatments suitable for this purpose until it heals.
Chapter 36.
In treating tonsil tumors.
And what grows in the throat of all kinds of tumors may be presented inside the throat glands that resemble the glands exposed from the outside called tonsils, if you treat them with what I mentioned in the division will not heal.
So look, if the tumor is hard like a red patch and has little feeling, do not expose it to iron. And if it is red and its origin is thick, do not expose it either to iron out of fear of bleeding, but leave it until it ripens, either by suppressing it or by bursting on its own.
And if it is white and round, and its origin is thin, this is what should be cut. And the work in it that you see before the work whether its fiery fever has settled completely or has decreased somewhat.
When then, put the patient facing the sun, with his head on your lap, open his mouth and take a servant in your hands; you will attach his tongue to the lower jaw with a tool that looks like this:
Make it of silver or brass, thin like a knife; then, when you have pressed it on the tongue and noticed the swelling and examined it with your eye, take a hook and insert it into the hole and draw it out as much as possible without pulling any of the palates.
Then cut it with a tool that looks like this, it is similar to the scissors except that its two sides are curved; each side is very sharp; make it of Indian iron or Damascus steel:
If you do not have this tool, cut it with a scalpel, its picture is as follows:
It has a sharp edge on one side and is blunt on the other; after cutting one larynx, cut the other in this type of cut, then, after the cut, gargle the patient with cold water or vinegar and water.
If it starts to bleed, gargle with water that has been boiled with pomegranate skins or ashes or something similar as a contraction agent until the bleeding stops; then treat it so that it heals, and it may be that some lumps grow in the throat other than the larynx; cut them on the same basis as mentioned above for cutting the larynx.
And I treated a woman with a lump that had grown inside her throat, it hit the epiglottis, it was a little sensitive to taste, it was about to block the throat; she couldn't eat or drink; it was blocking her airway.
And she was about to die if she had stayed for a day or two, and the lump had grown two branches that came out through her nose holes; so I acted quickly, inserted a hook into one of them, and pulled it out; from it came a good piece.
Then I cut it where I saw it from the hole of the nose, then I did that with what emerged from the other hole of the nose, then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue, then I pushed the hook into the same lump, then I cut some of it, and only blood flowed out of it.
Then the woman's throat was cut, and she immediately rushed to drink water, then she got a taste of food, so we kept cutting that lump repeatedly for a long time, and the lump would replace what was cut, until it was long with her and me.
Then she turned away, and I don't know what God did to her after that.
Chapter 37.
In cutting the soft palate.
Which, when it descends into the soft palate and swells up and is white and rectangular, is called a post; and if it is thick at the bottom and round, it is called a post. If it is treated with what we have mentioned in the division, then the treatment is not successful.
I saw the hot lump have calmed down, and it had become thin, so it should be cut, and whatever was united and round, and there was no length to it, and it was like a blood clot or not colored or had no feeling, then it should be spared from being cut.
There are risks when the patient sits facing the sun, so the patient should sit with their tongue pressed against the back of their throat using the instrument described earlier, and then the hook should be pushed into the post.
And it should be pulled down and cut with one of the two instruments mentioned in cutting the tonsils, and you should not cut more than what is more than the normal amount, because you would damage the voice and speech.
Then, after cutting, you use what we have described in cutting the tonsils and treat them until they heal, if the patient refuses to have his tonsils cut, then you can use a trick on him without fear or caution, and the purpose of the trick is to put the patient's head in your lap.
Then he tightens his tongue with the device we mentioned, and then he takes sharp water as mentioned in the door of cauterization, and he kneads it with non-extinguishable cheese, and he does not make it thick or thin and fills it with this device. And this is its picture:
The end that you put the medicine in is shaped like a spoon, and you place the device with the medicine on the palate itself and the patient lies on his side, so that saliva flows from his mouth from inside his throat so that nothing comes down to his throat.
Then you hold your hand with the medicine and squeeze it on the palate for half an hour until you see it turn black, and the sting of the medicine has subsided. If you want to take a cotton swab, you wrap it around the end of a toothpick, and you soak the cotton swab in the medicine.
And you insert the toothpick with the cotton swab into a tube from above so that the cotton swab sticks to the palate. You do this several times until you achieve the desired cauterization, and then you leave it; it wilts and dries up after three or four days, and if you need to repeat the medicine, you repeat it.
And after cauterization, you wipe around the grape with a cotton swab soaked in fat and dry it up; then he gargles with cold water and treats from outside with vibrations and inside with gargling until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and less likely to cause fear.
And the palate can also be treated with something softer than cauterization and cutting, it is treated with incense for this purpose; Aniseed, cumin, mint, marjoram, chamomile, valerian, and other herbs are collected together or some of them in a pot and soaked in vinegar.
And it is boiled, and the pot is covered with clay according to this method; it is made of silver or copper:
Enter the limb in which the swelled part is into the mouth of the sick person until the steam rises to the larynx on the tube until it becomes stiff, and then repeat this several times until it is weak; do not make this treatment when the swelling just begins.
If it does not arrive, take a reed and assemble in its end a shell of an egg so that the mouth of the patient does not burn; and if you do not find this machine,
This is because the shell of an egg prevents the hot steam from burning the mouth, which is a good and safe treatment.
Chapter 83
In removing splinters that get stuck in the throat or other similar things.
Often a bone, a splinter of fish or other similar objects get stuck in the throat; therefore, it is necessary to remove what is visible with the help of an instrument when you press the tongue towards the light.
To see what is in the throat; and if something cannot be seen or is hidden in the throat, then make the patient vomit before he swallows his food as it may come out with vomiting or the patient might swallow a piece of twine or some other string.
Or he might swallow a piece of dry bread or take a piece of coral sponge and tie it to a string then make him swallow it, and if it reaches the place of the splinter, pull the string quickly, do this several times.
Often a splinter or bone sticks to it and comes out; if it cannot be removed with what has been mentioned, then use a needle instrument.
It is thicker than a reed, and at its end there is a hook that enters into the patient's throat with caution, while raising his head towards the sky so as not to cause coughing, and pushing the bone or splinter; or let the doctor do it with his hand,
And pushing the sick person down is better because he knows the location of the object that has entered and pushes it downward or pulls his hand upward with the tool, all this according to what is convenient for him until it comes out.
Chapter 39.
In Removing the hook that has lodged in the throat.
If you have treated the hook with what we have mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines, and it has not been effective, then look at the throat of the sick person towards the sun after you have pressed his tongue down with the tool that I have described to you.
If your sight falls on the hook, then pull it out with a small hook or with a gentle and secure pair of pliers. If you are not able to do this, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the sick person until it is near the hook, and then insert a heated metal rod into the hollow tube.
Do this several times and the sick person should abstain from water for the whole day, then he takes a bowl filled with cold water and opens his mouth to it and rinses with it, not swallowing any of it, and moves the water from time to time with his hand.
If the hook falls on the tonsils, as you sense when you feel the water, and if it has not come out with what we have described, then vaporize the throat with urine and with salves with the tool that I have mentioned in the mouth treatment. Do this several times, and it will fall.
The work in the vapor treatment is that you take a pot in which you heat coal with fire, and cover the pot with a lid that has a hole in it, then attach one end of the tool to the hole, then burn the incense and the sick person places his mouth on the other end of the tube and closes it so that he does not let the incense out, until he is sure that the incense has reached his throat.
If the hook falls on the tonsils, and if it does not fall with this treatment, then you will perform the vapor treatment several times and the sick person should be patient with thirst and eat salty food and garlic, and you will certainly remove it with this method. Here is a description of a tool that can be used to remove the hook from the throat: Take a metal wire about 15 centimeters long and bend one end into a hook shape. The other end should be cut at an angle to create a sharp point.
She is similar to the cleavers as you see, except that she has this cutting edge which enters the throat. The ends resemble the mouth of a bird; there is a roughness on the blade when it is used against something; if you do not leave it:
Another instrument is used to press the tongue; it is a wide iron ring, of a size to fit the mouth; it goes into the mouth, standing on one side of it; so that the mouth remains open against its will, and the patient cannot remove it by any means, until it is taken out:
The description of the instrument which opens the mouth in this size especially.
Chapter 40:
In it, he makes a cut in the vein and cuts it open.
There are many different types of tumors, each with its own unique features, which are mentioned one by one in this book. They differ in their size and structure: some are larger, some are smaller, and they contain varying amounts of moisture.
The second type is due to the locations in which they occur in the body, as the tumor that occurs in the head is not the same as that which occurs in the rectum or that which occurs in a limb; each has its own particular treatment:
There are some tumors that should not be lanced until the pus has fully developed and matured, while others can be lanced even if they have not yet reached their full state; this applies to tumors that are close to joints:
This is because the tumor, if it occurs near a joint, may prolong its course until it corrupts the ligaments or nerves around that joint, which could cause a permanent injury to that limb; or the tumor may be close to a vital organ:
This is because, if you delay lancing the tumor until it has fully matured, you will damage that chief organ; or, if the tumor is located near the rectum, you should lance it while it is still in its initial stages, as leaving it could cause the pus to spread inside the rectum and cause an infection:
And becomes, in a sense, non-curable; and it is necessary that you know the time of stopping the tumors which may have matured on completion...
and stop the tumor at the bottom of the place of the tumor if it is possible so that it is easier for the fluid to flow down or in a more slender place of the tumor and with greater saliency, let the poultice go along the length of the body if the tumors are in the direction of the hands and feet.
and the places of muscles, tendons, nerves, and arteries, and generally in all flat places which have no curvature, and as for those which have a curve, let the poultice go according to that place, and as for if the tumor is in fleshly places, then it is better to leave it without a poultice.
until it has fully matured as we have mentioned on completion, so that if you poultice it before that, the pus will flow from it a lot, and it may become hardened, and some tumors may stick to the length of the body due to necessity or according to what the organ needs.
and it is necessary that you use one poultice in small tumors and a wide poultice or many slashes according to the size of the tumor, and some tumors may be such that they should skin the skin and cut it if it has become like a rag.
and has become, in a sense, like what is presented in many nails and hides, and some of them are cut in a shape with three angles, and some of them are cut like an ash leaf, such as the leaf of the arbya plant.
and some of them are used with a round cut and a crescent-shaped cut and similar cuts, and as for what does not have a head like flat smooth tumors, then it is necessary to use a simple poultice only, and it is necessary if the tumor is large and has accumulated a lot of time, and you poultice it, do not rush out and remove all the pus at once.
Then, carefully remove some of it and then tighten the swelling until another day; then also remove some pus and do this repeatedly gradually until all of it is removed.
Especially if the patient is weak or a woman, an infant, or an elderly person; for the animal spirit often dissolves with the exit of pus in one go, so that the patient might die while you do not feel it. Be cautious on this path - a great danger.
And after you have squeezed out these bumps, you should wipe the wound and look at it; if the bump wound is small or the split is simple, use old cotton or cotton yarn as sutures; but if the bump is large and there are many splits in the bun
Then, insert a suture into each split until some of them join; and if the bump has cut off part of the skin or has made it hollow, then stuff it with old cotton or cotton cloth without moisture and tighten it on the third day.
Then, take it off and treat it with whatever remedies are appropriate until it heals; if blood starts to flow while you are working, use cold water and vinegar, dip a cotton cloth in them, and carry it on the affected area several times.
If the bleeding has stopped, then you should use the remedies and treatments and herbs that we have described in many places in this book from Al-Qanoon; if it is wintertime and the bump is in an area with a lot of nerves, then you should wet the bandages with warm water or oil.
And place it on the affected area; and if it is summertime and the areas are fleshy, then carry the bandages soaked in water or oil, or drink and oil, all of them cold, until - as we said before - the third day, at which time you should remove and wash the bump.
And use whatever is similar to treat it until it heals; this is what you need to know about the treatment of bumps in general, and as for the detailed way of treating a bump, I have mentioned it in the summary above,.
Chapter 41.
In the incision on the tumors that appear in the scalp skin.
Are exposed in the scalp skin small tumors, and they are of the types of goods that contain them abdomines, which have conditions as if they were a hen's nest, and their types are many, some are fat and some contain moisture similar to dung.
And some contain moisture similar to dushish (a type of sauce) and masaw (a type of broth), and so on, and some are hard and solid, and all of them is not dangerous in incision and extraction unless it obstacles you when you incise her, a vein.
And the work in incision on her is that you probe it first with the tool that comes after this image which is called Al-Madas  until you know what she contains, and if what she contains moisture, then incise her lengthwise incision on this image:
And start the incision from line ~ Ba ~ to line ~ Ja ~, so if the moisture is emptied, then peel the bag that used to contain that moisture and cut it all, and do not leave any of it at all, because often what returns if it remained anything.
Then dip a cotton pad in the peiry ointment if it is available, or salt water, fill it with the wound and leave it until the next day, because it eats what's left of the bag, then repeat the pad with the munsell a second and third time if you need to do so.
Until you are sure that there is nothing left of the bag, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals, and if the tumor contains a fat substance, then incise it as follows:
A lengthwise incision, and twist the hooks in the wound edges and peel it from all sides, and try your best to remove the membrane that contains it, if a vein blocks you, then do what I described to you before, and make the same thing in the tumor if it is hard by incision.
The treatment as I have mentioned, the incison on the hardened tumor is easier because it has little blood and moisture. And some of these tumors in the head in certain people do not have any moisture with them at all. Because when I made an incision on a tumor in my own body...
The head of an old woman, and I found the tumor as hard stone rough white could not break it even if someone threw it at him, and was not any of the other tumors occurred in the head like these tumors that occur in the heads of children.
And at the roots of the ears, split them all simply and make the cartilage from the bottom to facilitate the flow of the substance down, then treat it with what suits it from treatment,.
Chapter 42.
In the incision on pigs that are exhibited in the neck, these tumors often occur in the neck and under the armpits and in the axilla, and may occur in the whole body. And what is exhibited in the neck is one of them, and it may be abundant and some of them develop from other
And each pig has a special membrane inside it as is in the hides, and tumors in the head as we have described, and types of these pigs are many, some are hardened and some contain moistures and some are malicious and do not respond to treatment,.
I did not find any that had a good condition in touch, and its appearance was close to the color of the skin, moving in all directions, and were not attached to the spine of the neck nor the cheeks, nor the arteries, nor were they sunken.. So it should be split simply from above the body to below on this form of the line ~ Ja ~ to line ~ Ba ~:.
And peel it off from both sides and extend the skin with a hook or two hooks or many hooks if it needs that, as we said in tumors in the head, and take it out little by little, and be on the neck not to cut a vein or a nerve, and let the scalpel is not very sharp..
So that your hand does not increase the cut, or the patient is disturbed and you cut what you do not need to cut, because you cut a vein or an artery and prevent you from working, put in the wound powder zakar or some of the grains which cut blood.
And tie the wound and leave it until the edge of the swelling subsides and the wound relaxes and begins to rot, then the blood stops so return to your work until you are finished, then inspect with your index finger if there is anything left, then cut other small nails and clean them.
If there is a large vein at the base of the nail, it should not be cut from its base, but rather tied with a double strong thread and left until it falls off naturally without any harm, then the wound is stuffed with old cotton that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment and then treated.
If the nail has been cut completely, it should be gathered and sewn immediately after learning that there is no余料 at all; if you see that there is a remnant of the nail bone.
It should be aimed at cutting the origin and basis and using stitching and what we have mentioned; and whatever is of nails contain humidities so tie them simply where it appears to you the place of their maturity and make the tying from below as we have said.
Then use thread and ointment as mentioned above to eat what is left of the decay until you see that the wound has been cleaned, then treat it with ointments that promote healing of flesh
Chapter 34
In splitting the larynx for a tumor that occurs inside the throat.
The early scholars mentioned this split in the larynx and I have not seen anyone in our country do it, this is their style of speech; whereas the owners of slaughter should avoid splitting the larynx as it does not benefit them.
For all the blood vessels and lung to be healthy, and as for those who have a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils, if there is no disease in the airway, then the use of a tracheotomy incision should be used to escape the harm that comes from choking.
So, if we want to do that, we should incise the larynx under three circles of the trachea or four small incisions widthwise between two circles as much as the incision is in the fascia not in the cartilage and this location is in agreement with the incision.
For it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels are far from it, so if the healer is cowardly, he should stretch the skin of the neck with a hook then make an incision in the skin until it reaches the trachea, inclining the blood vessels to the sides or to one side if he sees anything.
Then he should incise the fascia that we have described, and he will know that the trachea has been incised from the mucus it releases, with the loss of voice, and the wound is left open for a time, and when the time in which he used to fear choking passes, the wounds are brought together by the skin.
And his plan and line of this phrase that we have mentioned is that if they see the patient's illness has been blocked by one of these tumors that they have mentioned, then all blood vessels and lung must be healthy.
And the patient is on the verge of death, and he himself fears being cut off, so they went to incise the larynx so that the patient can breathe at the site of the wound a little breath and be saved from death, but they ordered to leave the wound open until the surge of illness passes and its surge lasts for three days and similar.
Then they ordered to sew the wound and treat it until it heals, and what I witnessed myself was that a servant took a knife and cut it on her neck, cutting some of the trachea, so I was called to treat it, and I found it decaying as it decays when slaughtered.
I found the blood that had flowed from the wound to be slight, so I knew that she hadn't cut an artery or a vein, and wind was flowing out of the wound. So I went over and sterilized it and treated it until it healed, and nothing else happened to the servant except that her voice became hoarse, no more than that.
And after a few days she returned to her best condition, so from here we say that splitting the larynx is not dangerous.
Chapter 44.
In the split: on the tumor that appears in the larynx from outside and is called a laryngeal polyp.
This tumor, which is called a laryngeal polyp, is a mass on the color of the body, and it is common in women, and it has two types.
Either it is natural or it is secondary, the first being impotent, and the latter consisting of two types: one similar to adipose tissue and the other similar to a mass resulting from arterial clotting. In surgery, there is a risk in the second type. So it is not necessary to subject it to iron at all except what is small of it, if you examine and investigate it with a probe, you will find that it resembles adipose tissue and does not adhere to any of the arteries, so split it as you split on adipose tissue. And take it out with what it contains from the bag if it is in a bag, and otherwise, investigate everything thoroughly, then treat the site as needed.
Chapter 54.
In surgery: on types of adipose tissue.
The types of adipose tissue are numerous, and I have mentioned all of them in the classification, and one should mention here the difference between adipose tissue and abscess, as the latter is complicated by fever, pain, and a frightening swelling until the fever subsides. And the abscess completes, so the fever and severity subside, and adipose tissue does not cause fever or pain, and it is surrounded by a sac made of serosa, which is its special envelope, and it is the color of the body, and its beginning is like a pimple, and it becomes like slough, larger and smaller.
And they are of two kinds, either adipose or either they contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are many as mentioned in the division, so it is necessary that if you come to treat the wound, that you pierce it and search it first with the tool which is called Al-Mads on what its image comes in the door that after this.
Determine the size of the tumor, then remove the needle and look at what comes out in its place; if it is moist liquid of any color, cut it simply as mentioned in the other tumors, and if it does not come out in the place of the needle Moisture, know that it is adipose.
Cut it at a slant as I have told you, and hang it on the hooks and peel off the skin from all sides with caution and preserve the bag if you can get it out whole with the wound.
If the bag tears during work and you are unable to take it out whole, often it happens that way; take it out piece by piece so that there is nothing left of it, for if there is any left, little or much, the wound returns to its more common state.
If you are overcome and a little remains, scratch the wound with some sharp, abrasive particles when you finish, tighten the wound, and put something on top of it that soothes hot tumors, and treat them with all the other treatments until they heal; if the wound is large, sew its edges and treat it.
If a harmful or non-harmful sweat emerges and there is bleeding, hurry to scratch the wound with powdered astringent, leave it tightened for two or three days until the wound rotten and the fever of the blood abates, then return to cutting what is left of the tumor.
Chapter 64.
In Images of Tools.
The tools that cut and puncture, there are three types: large, medium and small.
Large scalpel:
Medium scalpel:
Small scalpel:
Large needle:
Medium needle:
Small needle:
Screw-shaped, polished:
Screw-shaped, soft lead:
Large, screw-shaped, soft lead:
Medium, screw-shaped, soft lead:
Small, screw-shaped, soft lead:
Scissors: Large, simple (one-tine) scissor: Medium, simple (one-tine) scissor: Small, simple  (one-tine) scissor:
Large, blinde scissor: Medium, blinde scissor:
Small, blinde scissor:
Large, two-tine scissor: Medium, two-tine scissor: Small, two-tine scissor:
Large, three-tine scissor:
Medium, three-tine scissor: Small, three-tine scissor:
Large scalpel:
Figure 31: A medium-sized surgical scalpel.
Figure 32: A small surgical scalpel.
The blades with which he makes incisions are limited, and the other ends are unlimited; they have been made so that one can use them to peel the skin off a patient when there is a risk of cutting a nerve or muscle, and the patient can find some relief from the pain caused by the blister.
And these are three types of blades because there are large ones and medium ones and small ones, a large blade image:
are made from half-hard copper, similar to that used for an eye lens, and in one end there is a scalpel blade hidden inside, shaped like a bird's tongue, which can be run back and forth as desired, as you see.
Images of the blades that are inserted between the fingers when excising lumps, which do not cause any pain to the patient, and they are of three types because there are large ones and medium ones and small ones, a large blade image:
Images of the clamps used to cut off bleeding, which are of three types because there are large ones and medium ones and small ones, a large clamp image:
are made from copper or from a round tin rolled into a length, as you see, and should be of the different types of clamps for quickly cutting blood when necessity demands it and when you do not have a remedy ready.
But they should not be used to cut blood in every part of the body; rather, they should only be used on fleshy parts such as the thigh and leg muscles, the arm muscles, the breast and abdomen, and the ribs, and so forth from among the moist flesh organs.
And from this [material] other small machines can be made similar to the shells of almonds on this picture:
It is used to stop the blood that flows from a phlebotomy site or when cutting a sweat or a artery and it can be made into a wheel as in this picture:
Chapter 74, 279 - The wound is closed with sutures
For the treatment of a man's breast wound.
Which resembles a woman's breast can swell up, and for some people their breasts may remain warm and ugly, so anyone who dislikes this should surgically cut out an oval shape on the breast as follows:
From line A to line B. Then remove all the fat, then fill the wound with the medicated ointment and stitch the wound shut, treating it until it heals; if the breast hangs downward and becomes flaccid like women's breasts do.
The surgical incisions in the upper sides should be made into two shapes similar to a crescent shape, each connecting to the other at its end, such that the larger incision surrounds the smaller one as follows: From line B to line C, then remove the skin between the incisions and cut out any fat, while using the aforementioned stitches and medicines, as well as any necessary treatments until it heals.
If the pieces that need to be cut are not fully removed for the benefit of the patient or due to blood loss, then the wound should be filled with cotton dipped in the astringent ointment and left until it is completely healed.
Chapter 84, 290  - If the breast is very large, a small hole can be cut into it as follows:
In the breast which has a lump under the armpit.
These lumps that appear under the armpit are of two types; one is solid and contains a sac, while some contain water, so if it contains water, it should be surgically cut into a crescent shape as follows:
From line ~b~ to line ~c~ If you vomit everything in the tumor of the period so much that it is finished, then stuff the old cotton and leave it until tomorrow and then take off the cotton.
And treat with the appropriate ointment until it heals, if the tumor is of the type of swine плесени then split it as we mentioned in the split on pigs equally if the wound persisted to that the pus extended, so use him in the fire as we mentioned before,.
Chapter IX and 49.
In shing the tumor that is exposed from the artery or vein and is called anurisma.
If the artery is injured and the skin that is above it becomes attached, then often what happens is that a tumor and swelling appear, as well as the vein can also cause an inflammation and swelling to appear,.
And the signs that you can know if the tumor and swelling are from an artery or from a vein The tumor if it is from the artery is rectangular and collected in the depth of the body, and if you pressed the tumor with your finger, you would feel it as if there was a crack.
And the tumor is round in the surface of the body, and splitting these tumors is dangerous, especially what is in the armpit, the axilla, the neck, and many places in the body, and very large ones should be avoided to treat them with iron..
And what is also in the extremities or in the head, so it should be avoided, and if it was an inflammation that came out from a vein then split it with the skin, then open the split with hooks, then peel off the artery and get rid of the ties..
Until it is uncovered, then insert an needle into the other side and tighten the artery with a double thread as I have told you in the tie of the two arteries in the temples, then scrape with a scalpel the place between the ties until all the blood comes out..
The tumor is resolved and then the treatment that generates pus is used until the ligaments fall off, and then it is treated with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the tumor was caused by a vein rupture, you should grasp as much of the tumor with the skin as possible and then insert a needle below the site where you are grasping with your hand. Insert the thread through the needle twice and then pull it out from the other side. Then tie the tumor securely according to what I have mentioned to you in tying the grape from both sides of the thread, for if you are afraid that the threads will slip, then insert another needle with a different thread under the entire tumor at the intersection of the first needle.
And tighten your threads in four places, then open the tumor in the middle until you take out what is inside, cut the excess skin and leave what is attached to it, and then put a bandage that I have soaked in liquor and oil. Then use the treatment that involves pulling and ointments until it heals, .
Chapter 50.
In the tumor that is exposed by nerve twisting.
As well as in the artery and vein, so too is the tumor in the nerve if there is a blow or excessive fatigue or the like, and this often happens in the areas of the wrists and heels.
And in any joint movement, it is a stationary tumor that resembles the color of the whole body, and it is usually not painful, and if it is pressed hard, the patient will feel a slight numbness, and the tumor is not usually concentrated in one place in the depth of the body.
It is under the skin, and it moves in all directions, and it does not go forward or backward, so whatever of it is in the joints should not be exposed to iron because it might cause chronicity, and whatever of it is in the head or forehead.
Split the skin with a scalpel, if the tumor is small, grab it with a forceps and cut it from the origin, if it is large, attach it to a hook and peel it off, then remove it and stitch up the wound and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 51.
In cutting warts that are exposed in the abdomen.
It may be exposed in the abdomen and in other parts of the body, small warts called wart-like, because they resemble a fungus. Their roots are thin and their heads are thick. They may have grown on the lips and some may grow very large.
I have seen a man with two warts in his abdomen that resembled a fungus the most. Their roots were thin and their heads were thick. They had grown on his lips and had split, and moisture flowed from them constantly. I cut them both and each weighed about eight ounces and the other weighed about six ounces.
The work in cutting them is to look at it. If the patient is wet and the color of the wart is white, moist and thin roots, cut it with a wide scalpel. And let there be a hot iron ring ready, because often, when it is cut, a lot of blood flows out.
If the blood overflows, burn it. If you see that the patient is cowardly and frightened of the iron knife, take a piece of tight brass wire and tighten the wart with it. Leave it for two days and then increase the tension on the brass wire. Continue to tighten the brass wire.
As much as possible, influence the wart until it falls off naturally without any complications. If the wart is thick, you may have to cut it in half or cut some of it off. This is especially true if it is located in the abdomen. However, be careful when cutting it, especially in cases where it is located in the abdomen.
Then burn it so that it does not return, and then treat the wound until it heals. Be careful not to expose a wart that is like a scar in color, has little feeling, and is ugly in appearance, because it is a benign tumor, and we will come to describe cancer later on,.
Chapter 50.
In the treatment of hernia.
The hernia may be caused by a number of factors, including split of the peritoneum covering the abdomen, which allows the mesenteric fat to protrude, or the small intestine, as discussed in the chapter on hernias. It may also be caused by a sudden outburst of blood from a vein or artery, as mentioned earlier, or from trapped wind.
If it is due to a split in the peritoneum and the protrusion of mesenteric fat, the lump will be the color of the body and soft without pain. It may appear at different locations. If it is due to the protrusion of the small intestine, its location will be even more unusual, as we have described. When you press it with your fingers, it will disappear and then reappear. It may also make a noise and increase greatly in size when entering a steam room or experiencing heat. If it is caused by trapped wind, it will be soft.
It does not disappear when pressed with the hand, nor increases or decreases in size. If it is due to blood, there will be a dark color; if due to herniated tissue, it will remain stationary and firm in one place.
If it is caused by wind, it will be soft to the touch. The treatment should be avoided as there is a risk of it becoming stuck or causing damage. I have explained in the book that bumps can form due to blood vessels.
If the hernia is due to the small intestine or mesenteric fat, the patient should be instructed to stand and stretch, then mark the area of the hernia with ink. Then, with a wide blade, make an incision around the hernia area at the marked location. Use a large hook to pull the middle of the hernia up, and then tie the incision with strong thread or silk, securing it tightly.
And the tying of the ligature is an adduction, then open in the middle of the stretched tumor above the ligament and put your index finger inside it and seek the bowel; if you find it, the ligament has taken it; so relax the adduction and push the bowel inside the abdomen, and if you find a pus, extend it with a hook.
And cut its margin, if it obstructs you a vein or an artery; so bandage it well and go back to your work; and take two needles, and put in them strong threads, and insert the needles in the patch that you have made around the tumor, clamping it down with both of them; then tighten the tumor in four places on the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place until the stretched flesh falls off itself or cut it off if it becomes softer and rotten; then treat it with what is appropriate of ointments so that it heals, and if the pus comes out from under the skin.
or of moisture; so it should be squeezed as we have said and the blood or moisture that you find is removed, then the patch is treated with what secures the place,.
Chapter 35.
In the treatment of cancer.
We have mentioned in the division types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines, and warning from treating it with iron so that it does not become a ulcer, and we remembered the cancer born in the uterus and the warning from treating it.
The early ones say that when cancer is in a place where it can be completely removed, such as cancer in the breast or in the thigh and other members, especially if it is small and just beginning, and as for when it has advanced and become large, it should not be approached.
Because, as far as I could, no one has been able to cure it completely, nor have I ever seen anyone else reach that point, and the work in it, if it is established as we said, is that you advance it gradually and ease the patient's suffering from the black wound several times, then cut it off if it is in the veins of a clear filling.
Then set the patient up so that he can work, and then throw the hooks which are suitable for him into the cancer, and then bore it from all sides with the skin, taking care not to leave anything of its roots, and let the blood flow and do not cut it quickly.
Then squeeze the places and drain all the thick blood with your hand or with whatever tools you can, and if it hinders you in work, let a great deal of blood flow from a vein or artery, and then treat it with all the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 54.
In treating syphilis.
We have been told in the division Of droppings types And how water meets And the signs of each type And its treatment with drugs, And which is treated with iron That is, the only type of droppings is treated with iron; do not approach with iron at all The type of droppings or the type of tuberculosis Or the type of consumption.
If this is so, then you should consider the following: If the patient has significantly increased in weight or if he has another disease in addition to syphilis, such as if he is overweight.
Cough or diarrhea and so on, then you should not treat him with iron because it is a danger; if you see the patient very strong and he does not have another disease besides syphilis, and he is neither young nor old, then the treatment for this type of syphilis consists of standing up straight in front of you with both hands raised. And a server behind him squeezing his stomach with his hands and pushing the water down towards the groin, then you take a surgical knife shaped like this: [Insert image of a surgical knife].
Limited on both sides, long and pointed at the end like a knife, except that it is slightly curved, so that it does not go through it when you work on the intestines and hurt it, then look If the syphilis has originated from one side of the intestine,.
It is necessary that you leave a space of three fingers below the anus with its shoe above the pubis, if it has generated cholecystitis from liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the anus with three fingers, if it has generated it from splenic disease, then your incision should be on the right side for three fingers.
nor should the incision be on the side that the patient wants to lie down on so that the blood does not flow to that weak spot, and then you pierce all the skin with the machine and then you insert the machine into that cut and lift your hand.
with the needle between the skin and the peritoneum as if you were peeling it and the amount that you peel it is equal to the nail or similar, and then you pierce the peritoneum until the needle reaches a empty place which is the place of water and then you take it out and insert in the hole the machine which this is its image.
It is similar to a tube of thin tube made of silver or copper or of ebony polished smoothly which has in its bottom a small hole and three holes on its sides two from one side and one from the other as you see it.
And it may put its tip sharpened like the point of the pen on this image: .
In the upper part of it there is a ring so that when the machine reaches water, it falls from its hour on the machine, you vomit water at an average time because if you vomit it more than what should be at the time, it may die by dissolving his animal spirit.
or it may cause him to faint which is close to death, but vomit it on the ability of his strength and what guides you on the states of the patient from the strength of his pulse and the beauty of his color, and then you remove the machine and hold back water because it is held from its hour.
due to the skin that holds the hole on the peritoneum which I told you to tighten it on this feature, and then you reinsert the machine another day if you see the patient likely to that.
Also, when you come out of water, do so little by little, for several days while being on your back, and preserve from error so that there remains only a little water. If you are afraid for the sick person and have left behind much water, treat him by burying him in hot sand.
And sweating a lot in the bath and the sun, and be patient with him regarding thirst, and treat him with drying medicines until he gets better, and burn on the stomach and liver and spleen after removing water as described above.
Chapter 55.
In the treatment of children who are born with a non-perforated urethra or a narrow opening, or when the opening is in an unusual place.
Some boys may come out of their mother's womb with their genitals not perforated, so you should hurry to perforate them from the moment they are born.
By using a very thin needle on this shape:
Then you place a very thin needle in the hole, tie it and hold it for three or four days, so when he wants to pee, move him away from it, then bring it back, and if you don't use a needle, the urine that flows on the site may not close.
And as for the one whose hole is narrow, he is treated with a needle as we have said above for several days until it expands, and those whose hole is in an unusual place, that is, at the end of the penis, so he cannot pee in front.
Until he raises the penis with his hand towards the sky, and he doesn't give birth to him before that semen cannot reach the uterus on a straight line, and this is a very ugly disease, and the treatment in this case is as follows: the patient lies down on his back.
Then you extend your penis with your left hand by pulling it strongly and polish the head of the penis with a blade or a sharp scissor, as if you were carving something so that its middle is raised, and the hole falls in the middle as it should be.
And when you are doing your work, be careful of bleeding; for that often occurs and put it opposite what stops the blood and treat the wound so that it heals.
Chapter 65.
In the ulcer that appears in the glove, the sack, the blackness, the decay, and the gluing of the glove to the sack.
This kind of ulcer often occurs in the penis, which is a soft, pinkish mass, and may be either benign or malignant. The latter should be hung on a small hook.
And cut it up until you take all of it out, then carry on with a cotton ball soaked in the Egyptian ointment, and then treat it with the olive ointment until it heals, And if the ulcer was malignant, then you should use cauterization after cutting and peeling it,
If the ulcer is in a glove that has not been cut and some of the ulcer is inside and some is outside, then you should remove the inside part first so that it heals, and then treat it from the outside.
Because you would not be safe if you treated them together, for the glove might burst, and there might also be blackness and decay in the ovaries and in the glove. It is therefore necessary to curl up all that which has turned black and is about to rot, or has already rotted.
Then, after that, apply honey mixed with ground pomegranate seeds and myrrh, and then treat it with all the treatment until it heals. If it bleeds, use cauterization in this way:
If cauterization is beneficial for both cases, that is, when there is bleeding and when the wound is corrupted, and if the glove has glued itself to the sack, then you should insert a lead tube into the urethra to drain the fluid from it,
And this adhering occurs in those who had a healthy wrapper and did not owe circumcision, and it may be that its adhering is by a wound or tumor, so it should be stripped with a blunt forceps until the bandage dissolves and the club is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them by inspection in the absence of circumcision, a part should be stripped from the club and from the wrapper; for the wrapper is thin so it may easily burst quickly due to its thinness, then distinguish between the wrapper and the club with a thin cotton cloth that has been soaked in cold water so as not to stick together either.
Then treated with a binding drink until it heals, .
Chapter 75.
In the purification of boys and treating what exposes them to error.
Circumcision is not something except for separating the bond as in other surgeries, but since it was done by us at our will and used in boys especially, it was necessary to draw up the work of the best way to do it..
And the easiest way to safety, I say, that the early writers did not mention circumcision in anything of their books because it was not used in their rituals; this is what we acquired..
By experience, because I have found the general public of artisans and butchers using the blade and scissors, and they use a loofah and binding with thread and clipping with a nail; I have tried all these methods..
And I did not find anything better than cleaning with scissors and binding with thread because, as for cleaning with a blade, often the skin will blister; because the skin of the wrapper is made up of two layers, so it may cut the upper layer and leave the lower one intact..
He will then have to cut the last one and start afresh, and cleaning with a loofah does not guarantee cutting off the tip of the penis because it may enter a hole, and as for cleaning with a nail, the skin of the baby might split and your work would be ruined, or the baby's skin might be naturally short..
Many times they are born like this and do not need to be cleansed. I have seen this. As for cleaning with scissors and binding with thread, the experiment has shown me its merit because the blade that is above is like the blade that is below.
When you squeeze your hand with the blades in proportion, it cuts at one length and time, so the thread's string becomes like a wall for the skin of the penis from all sides; it never goes wrong. The first reason to do this is to trick the child...
特に、少し理解できる子供の場合は、彼に糸を骨格に結び付けて次の日にもう一度やり直すようにさせ、喜んでもらい、できるだけ彼の心に受け入れられるようにし、手足を動かさないようにして立ち止まらせます。...
He should not be sitting down, and you should not keep the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot so that the boy does not see them or any of the instruments. Then, put your hand inside his penis and blow on the skin and pull it up until the tip of the penis comes out...
Then, clean it of any dirt, then tie the marked spot with a double knot, and tie another one slightly below it; then, grip the bottom knot tightly with your thumb and index finger, and cut between the knots... Then, lift the skin up quickly and take out the tip of the penis; then let the blood flow for a while, as this is better and less likely to cause swelling; then blow on it with a wet cloth or sprinkle it with dried pumpkin ash, which is also excellent, or corn flour; both are excellent.
Then, lift the skin up quickly and take out the tip of the penis; then let the blood flow for a while, as this is better and less likely to cause swelling; then blow on it with a wet cloth or sprinkle it with dried pumpkin ash, which is also excellent, or corn flour; both are excellent. Then, carry the powder from above in a cloth; a fried egg in rose water, mixed with fragrant oil, and leave it for another day, then treat it with all the treatment until it heals.
This is the image of the scissors which are suitable for cleaning:
The blade of the knife should be straight, with a handle as long as the blade. If the skin is torn during cleaning, it should be stretched with a fingernail before the area swells.
The skin should be cut evenly. If it cannot be grabbed with your fingernail, grab it with a hook and cut it; if three days have passed and the area under the hair plug remains swollen and hot, leave it to subside and then gently peel it off.
Cut it as you see fit, and be careful with the head of the penis; if you cut something from the head of the penis, it won't hurt; therefore, treat it with the substances we have described in the chapter on wounds.
If you cut more skin than necessary and it retracts above the area, it isn't very harmful; therefore, treat it as we mentioned to heal it completely.
Chapter 85.
In the treatment of retened urine in the bladder.
Retained urine in the bladder is caused by a blockage from a stone, a blood clot, pus, or protruding flesh; if you treat it with the methods described in the "Classification of Treatments" section, it will heal as described.
If the urine does not flow and you see that a stone may have damaged the neck of the bladder, the patient should lie on their knees, then get them to ride on their back, holding their abdomen towards their back.
Then the neck of the bladder will force the stone to move from its position and urine will flow. If it does not flow as described above and the patient's condition worsens, you should use a device called a catheter to remove it; here is an image of a catheter: [Image of a catheter]
Make it of silver, and let it be thin, smooth, hollowed out like a bird's feather, long and about two-and-a-half hands in length, with a delicate funnel at the head; and the attraction of the urine towards it is that you take a flexible thread and tie it tightly with wool or cotton.
Then you insert the end of the thread at the bottom of the catharter and hammer it with a punch to make a hole so that the wool can enter and plug it like a seed, then smear the catharter with oil or lard or egg white, and the patient sits on a chair.
Then his bladder and urethra are wet with oils, or oil and warm water, then the catharter is gently inserted into the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra, then the urethra is bent upwards towards the navel, and then the catharter is pushed inside.
Until, when the urethra is bent, it is pushed inside until he feels that it has reached something empty.
This is made because the route that urine takes has a curve, and then it tightens the thread with the wool slightly so that the urine follows the wool, and then take it out and let the urine flow. And repeat the catharter.
Then you do this until the bladder is empty and the patient feels relief,.
Chapter 95.
How to inject the bladder with injection.
and the tools that are suitable for this are made of silver or ivory, hollowed out, with a long tube on a thin shell; and I intend to pour water and medicines into it, so that this is done with a device called a syringe; its image is as follows:
Make it of silver or ivory hollow, with a long tube on the thin edge hollow all except the end; for that is solid. There are three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
The hollow place where the tube is, should be made to fit it without any extra addition so that when you draw anything from moisture it will draw and when you push it, it will push away as much as the net-sucker which is used for throwing oil in naval warfare does.
If you want to draw moisture into the bladder, you insert the tip of the syringe into the moisture and pull it up with the tube; then the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the syringe and enters the urethra as we have described in the urinary catapuls, and then push the moisture out with the tube.
That moisture reaches the bladder in a place until the patient feels it, and this is a small image of an injection syringe used to inject into the bladder: .
It is made of silver or ivory; its head, which is the upper one, is like a small funnel and under it there is a ring; then you take a camel bladder and put into it the moisture that you want to inject into the bladder and tie it between the two rings with a double knot.
And heat that moisture a little on the fire, then insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra, and then tighten your hand on the bladder with the moisture until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
If you don't have a bladder, take a thin piece of leather and make it into a circle and punch holes around its entire circumference; then insert a thick thread into those holes as if it were spinning, and then gather the circle together like a tablet after putting into it whatever moisture, ointments, or waters you want.
Then tie it to the machine and make it as you made with the bladder by squeezing your hand so that this moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter sixty.
On removing stones.
We have mentioned in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medications, and I have mentioned the difference between the stone generated in the kidney and the stone generated in the bladder and its signs, and I have mentioned the stone in which work is done by hand and the incision.
This is a description of that which is embedded in the urethra, and I will describe it with a clear explanation and concision.
I say that the stone generated in the bladder is more likely to affect children; its signs include the fact that urine exits the bladder similar to water in terms of its thinness.
It appears in it sand, and it scratches his penis and plays with it; it often hangs down and spreads, along with the anus, in many of them; it is easy for the children to recover from it until they reach the age of fourteen, and it is difficult in old age; and as for the youth, it is in the middle of that.
And what is its stone greater, its treatment is easier and the smaller is its opposite; so, when we come to treatment, it is first necessary that the patient be injected with an enema that removes all the waste from his intestines, because it may prevent the presence of the stone during examination.
Then the patient's legs are taken, he is made to sit down and shake them towards the bottom to fall out of the stone into the neck of the bladder or to stand several times, then you make him sit between your hands with his hands under his hips so that all the bladder becomes inclined downward; then you examine it.
And examine it from the outside, and if you sense the stone in the space, you should immediately do a incision upon it; if it does not fall under your touch at all, then it is necessary that you wipe the thumb with oil from the left hand if the patient is a child, or the middle finger.
If it is a complete boy, insert it into his anus and examine for the stone until it falls under your finger, then move it a little at a time to the neck of the bladder and push it out with your finger toward the place you want to incise.
And order a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand and order another servant to extend his right thumb up under the genitals and with his other hand extend the skin that is under the genitals towards the place where the incision will be, and then you take the scalpel that this is its image:
And you incise between the anus and genitals not in the middle but on the left testicle, and the incision is on the same spot as your finger is in the anus, and you press towards the outside to come out, turning it from outside wide and from inside tight as much as possible so that the stone comes out of it.
Not bigger, lest you press the finger in the anus on the stone at the incision so that it comes out without difficulty, and know that there may be some stones that have angles and letters, which makes it difficult to come out, therefore.
And some are smooth like a nut and rolled in it, which is easier to come out, and what is stone has angles and letters increases in the incision a little, if not come out like this, then you should turn on her, either that you grasp it with a tight pair whose edge is like a file.
To hold on to the stone so that it does not slip from him, or that you insert from under it a small machine with curved edges, if you could not on it, then you widen the incision a little, and if something of blood comes out, cut it with salt.
If it is more than one, first push the largest into the bladder mouth then incision on it and then push the small after that, and so you do if it is more than two, and if it is very large, it is not known whether to make a large incision on it because it exposes the patient to one of two things.
If he dies, or if his urine always leaks; because the wound never closes; but try to push it out, or change its position with claws, so that it comes out by force.
Once you are finished with your work, patch the wound with tar and resorbents, and bind it tightly; then place a wet rag soaked in oil and drink, or a paste of rose water and cold water to soothe the hot swelling. Then let the patient lie on his back without removing the bandage until the third day.
If it has dissolved, rinse the wound with lots of water and oil, then treat it with olive oil and castor oil paste until it heals; if there is a hot swelling that exceeds the wound, and there is an excess of acal and basilicon, like when blood clumps in the bladder, causing difficulty in urination and known by the presence of blood in the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove the blood; because if it stays, it invites bladder corruption and infection; then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and treat each type with its appropriate treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary in all times of treatment to bind the hips together to hold the medicines that are placed on the wound; if there is a small stone in the urethra, and it has embedded itself there, causing difficulty in urination, treat it with what I have described before it reaches the cut.
This treatment has often saved me; I have used this method, which is: take a steel tweezers, and the picture of it is:
a three-sided tip, sharp, sunk into a stick; then take a string and tie it to the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder; then gently insert the tweezers into the urethra until it reaches the same stone.
And you manage the split with your hand in the same hour a little little and you intend to pierce it until it passes from the other side because the urine flows from its time then you squeeze your hand on what remained of the stone outside the penis because it breaks up and comes out with the urine and heals the patient.
If this treatment is not suitable for you due to an obstacle that prevents you from doing so, tie a thread under the stone and another above the stone then split on the stone in the penis between the ties then take it out.
Then you remove the tie and purify the stagnant blood that has become in the wound, and it was necessary to tie the thread under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder and the other tie from above so that when the thread is dissolved after the exit of the stone returns skin to its place so as to cover the wound.
For that it is necessary for you when you tie the top thread that you raise the skin to above so that it returns at your empty and covers the wound as we said, .
Chapter sixty-eight.
In removing the stone from women.
A little bit of the stone develops in women, and if one of them appears a stone, it is difficult to treat it, and many obstacles may arise, one of which is that the woman might be a virgin, and another is that you may not find a woman who allows herself to the doctor.
If she is a virgin or from those who have relatives, and you may not find a woman who masters this craft, especially working with your hands, and the fourth is that the site of the split on the stone in women is far from the site of the stone, so it needs a deep cut.
And in that there is a risk, if necessity calls for it, you should take a woman doctor who is skilled and good, and it is not often found, so her absence, ask a female midwife who is skilled in women's affairs or a woman who gives some indication in this craft.
Prepare her and order her to make all that you order her of inspecting the stone first, namely that she looks whether the woman is a virgin or not it should be that the finger enters in her anus and inspects the stone because if she found it, press it under her finger.
Then he orders her to cut it, and if she is not a virgin but a married woman, he orders the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and look for the stone after putting her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it hard.
If she finds it, then it should be that she draws it from the mouth of the bladder down to her bottom as far as her top thigh, and then she cuts it at the pubic bone's midpoint on the side that is easier for her, and if she feels the stone in that area.
And her finger does not move from the stone, pressing it under it, and let the cut be small first and then insert the rod on that small cut if she feels the stone then increase the cut as much as she knows that the stone comes out of it, and know that there are many types of stones.
Of them small and large, smooth and jagged, long and round and round, so you know their kinds so that you can guide it to what you want, and if blood圧倒s you, pour in the place of powdered salt and hold it for an hour until the blood stops and then go back to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and work that you count with yourself from the tools I mentioned in taking out the stone to help you in your work, and if blood overwhelming you and you know the pulse of blood that a vein has stopped, then put the powder on the place.
And tighten it with bandages firmly and leave him alone, and do not return to him, and do not take out the stone, perhaps the woman will die, and then treat the wound, so if the pain of blood stops after days and the place becomes rotten, then go back to your work until you take out the stone, .
Chapter 26.
In making an incision on the uterine tube.
The uterine tube (adră mu'āyiya) is a gathering of moisture in the white fascia, which lies beneath the scrotal skin surrounding the ovum, and is called the testis; there may be a special membrane formed by nature in one part of the ovum.
Until it is thought to be another ovum, and it is generated between the testis skin and the white fascia which we mentioned, and this adrâ is not except in rare cases; its origin is due to a weakness that affects the females, so this material is deposited on them, or it may occur due to an impact on the testes.
This moisture may have different colors; it may be yellow, or it may be red blood, or it may be black pus, or it may be white water, and this is more common; the signs by which they are known.
Where the water is gathered, if in the white fascia which we mentioned, then the swelling is slightly oval, like an egg shape, and the testis does not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
If the moisture is in a special membrane, then the swelling is round on one side of the ovum.
This is why people may mistake it for another ovum; if the moisture is between the testis skin and the white fascia, then it falls into the scrotum, and to determine the color of the moisture, you can use the square probe mentioned earlier, and whatever comes out in the effect of the probe, you judge it by what is inside it.
If we come to the treatment with iron, then you should order the patient to make a blood transfusion if he is able to do so, and you see that his body is full, then let him lie on his back on something high by a little, and place a lot of cloth there, then sit down yourself on his left.
And he orders a servant to sit on his right hand, extending his penis to one side of the scrotum and towards the side of the belly examiner. Then he takes a wide needle and splits the skin of the scrotum from top to bottom near the genitals.
And the incision is made straight, parallel to the line that divides the scrotum into two halves until it reaches the white peritoneum and you peel it and preserve it from being cut, and your peeling of it is from the side that adheres to the egg more, and you extend the peeling as much as you can.
And then he spreads the peritoneum filled with water widely and drains all the water, then he separates between the edges of the incision with tweezers and stretches the peritoneum upward, and do not touch the skin of the scrotum containing it, and you cut the peritoneum as much as you can cut it either in its entirety or in pieces.
Especially its thin side, for you do not secure water that returns if it came out of its skin while your work is done, so when you finish cutting the peritoneum, put it back in place, and then stitch the edges of the scrotum skin.
And then treat it as you treat other injuries until it heals, and if you find the egg rotten due to another disease, you should tie the vessels that are in the knot to prevent bleeding, then cut the testicle from the knot and remove the egg, and then treat it with what we mentioned.
If the water collected in both sides is the same, then know that they are two testicles, split the other side as you did in the first one whether it is the same or not, and then wipe the blood.
And you enter into the incisions with a sponge that you have dipped in oil or rose water, and he makes another one on the outside with a sponge that he has dipped in vinegar and oil, and he stretches it on the testicles and the belly examiner, and he puts over it folded rags. If you cut a tendon and the blood vessel underneath is also severed, take three strands from the tendon and use them to tie off the wound. Then tie another knot in the tendon.
Then take two strands from the tendon and knot them together, leaving one end free. Then tie the free end of the tendon to a strap on the patient's belt or to the waistband of their trousers. One of the ends is tied around the posterior side of the hip to the back.
Take the second strand and tie it around the patient' hip, towards the genitals, with the ends on the thighs and the middle part around the hips or groin area. Instead of tying a knot, you can also burn the end of the tendon with fire to stop any bleeding.
Then, take a small, fine knife and burn the skin around the testicles to expose the white fascia that contains the spermatic cord. Be careful not to burn any sensitive areas. Then, place a heated iron on this image:
It should resemble the Greek letter 'omega'. Then, sew it back together with sutures and trim any excess tissue. Be careful not to burn or damage the spermatic cord or testicles.
Be aware that this procedure is safer and less likely to cause bleeding or damage than a cut (شق) or burning (كَى). If you encounter any obstacles or complications during the procedure, treat them with the appropriate therapies mentioned previously.
If the patient is weak or unable to tolerate the procedure due to its complexity, you can use cauterization instead. Follow the guidelines provided in the previous response for treatment.
Since the prostate is water-based, sit the patient on a raised chair and use a wide curette to open up the area around the bladder. Make sure the opening is large enough to drain out all the fluid. Then, place cotton wool on the area and wrap it securely with a bandage.
Let him drain the rest of the water and then treat it until the wound heals. If the water drains out in the meantime, while you are draining it, this is because the white membrane obstructs the mouth of the wound and thus prevents the water from flowing out.
Then, you should insert a feather or the instrument used to extract water from the eyes of animals (which has been previously described in the image) into the wound, or widen the opening of the wound slightly.
Be aware that water may return and accumulate after six months or so, if this happens, drain it in the same way and treat the patient in the same way.
Chapter 36
In making an incision on adipose tissue and treating it.
Be aware that making an incision on this fat is one of the most dangerous procedures, so I will describe how to treat it and the types of tumors.
I say that many tumors may occur in bodies that contain the structure of the uterus, and this is due to a number of causes: either from a fecal matter that is deposited in the uterus, or from a blow, and the color of the tumor is the same as the body, and there is no water in it.
The tumor may be static and sometimes it may be calcified, its color is like that of the ground and there is no feeling, it may be due to the پیچش of arteries as mentioned previously, or due to the swelling of veins, so whatever is the cause of the swelling of the arteries, it can be recognized by the disappearance of the tumor.
If you press it with your fingers, and it should not be exposed at all, and as for what is due to the swelling of veins, it does not disappear when pressed with fingers, this type may split up, and it will hurt all other tissues.
This is how to cut the skin of the testicles, then extend the egg above and remove it from the white fascia, free the fascia from the blood vessels and tie the blood vessels and cut the fascia after removing it from all sides of the egg. If the egg has attached itself to these fat tissues.
It is necessary to extract the egg and cut it, and if there is a union between something from the fissures or between the vessels, it is necessary to remove all this union and cut it in round pieces.
If it is a plant of meat in the place of attachment which is behind, it is necessary to cut all of it and extract the egg as we said. If your work was completed, then clean the wound with wool wet with oil of roses and drink, then treat him with all treatment until he heals, .
Chapter 46
In treating adderas which are with a daleah.
The daleah is a swelling that is twisted, similar to a grape cluster, with relaxation of the testes, making it difficult for the patient to move, exercise or walk. In treating this disease, from the general principles mentioned above.
But it is necessary to mention the work in it on what the previous did, I say that it is necessary for the patient to sit on a chair high then pay with the suspension of the testicles down then hold the scrotum with your fingers with the vessels which are close to the penis.
And he holds it with a servant who does not belong to you and extends it severely then opens it with an wide, sharp scissor according to the vessels beside it until it is exposed. And strip from all sides as I mentioned to you in stringing the arteries which are in the cheeks, then sew them with a thread.
And tie it at the beginning of the places which were exposed to the daleah and also tie it in the end, then open it in the middle on length according to the body and remove what has gathered in it from the mucous fluid foul.
Then treat the wound with other surgical treatments which you want to generate in it a period of time to drop the vessels that nourish one of the testes, there is no problem in that. If the daleah presented to all the vessels, it is necessary to extract one of the testes with the vessels so as not to miss the egg nutrition. By cutting off the vessels, they wither and are of no use.
Chapter 56.
In the treatment of intestinal adhesions.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a break that exposes the visceral surface of the abdomen, which extends towards the two iliac crests from the site of the navel, and the small intestine descends from this hernia into one of the ovaries.
This hernia is either due to a break in the peritoneum or to an extension of it, and these two types of hernia can be caused by various factors such as a blow, a jump, a shout, or lifting a heavy object, among other things. Its sign, if it is due to an extension of the peritoneum, is that it gradually increases slightly over a long period of time.
It does not occur all at once, and the swelling is even in depth before the peritoneum squeezes the small intestine, and its sign, if it is due to a break in the peritoneum, is that it appears as a painful swelling all at once and the swelling is evident under the skin near the surface.
This is due to the small intestine and its mesentery leaving the peritoneum, and it may be accompanied by the mesenteric fat, and this type of hernia can be with or without bowel音. It may block the passage of wind through the bowel, causing obstruction and leading to the patient's death.
This causes severe pain and noise, especially when it is squeezed, and the treatment for this type of disease is dangerous, so one should avoid falling into it. The treatment is to order the patient to push the small intestine back into the abdomen with his hand as much as he can.
Then lay the patient on their back between your hands, raise their legs, and then stretch the skin next to the iliac crests towards the sides, cutting the hair from the area with razors as much as needed to open the incision.
And the incision should be made to the extent that it can release the egg, and then peel off the membranes that are under the scrotum skin until, when all sides are exposed, then put your index finger in next to the egg.
To free the egg from its attachment to the second membrane, you should slide your hand between the white membrana and the scrotum skin that is behind the egg, and while doing so, you should bend it towards the inside of the scrotum with your right hand, and at the same time you should lift the egg along with the white membrane towards the incision.
Then you should order the assistant to lift the egg up and completely release it from its attachment behind, and inspect with your finger whether there is any twisted intestine in the white membrane, if you hit something, push it into the abdomen below.
Then you should take a needle with a thick thread that has been folded from ten threads and insert it at the last part of the white membrane that is under the scrotum skin next to the incision, then cut off the ends of the loop of the thread so that there are four threads. Then you should assemble some of them together in a stiff way and tie the membrane that we said is under the scrotum skin with it two tight bonds, and also wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly so that nothing can reach them. So that there is no chance for a hot tumor to form, and also make a second binding outside the first binding by less than two fingers, and after these two bindings, you should leave a piece of the white membrane that is under the scrotum skin skin, about the size of a thumb.
So that there is no chance for a hot tumor to form, and also make a second binding outside the first binding by less than two fingers, and after these two bindings, you should leave a piece of the white membrane that is under the scrotum skin skin, about the size of a thumb. Then cut it all out in a circular shape and remove the egg with it, and then make an incision at the bottom of the scrotum skin as mentioned before, so that blood can flow from it, and then use the wool dipped in oil and place it in the wound, and also use the binding we described.
And the white pericardium that we mentioned after cutting it with caution from bleeding, often presents this, and leave the ligature until it falls of itself, if its fall was delayed, let pour hot water on it and carry on it what makes him sweat until he falls down.
Then treat the wound with all the surgery treatments until it heals,.
Chapter 66.
In the case of a respiratory adder, this type of adder is what I have not seen anyone dare to treat with iron. The early books mentioned that one should make an incision in it as we described in the case of an adder with a daliah; namely, by tying the blood vessels gently below the.
Then make a cut in the middle and treat the tumor with what opens it until the vessels fall, and treat the wound on what we have mentioned until it heals,.
Chapter 76.
In the hernia that is in the ribs.
The hernia may show itself in the rib cage as we mentioned; it would be windy, and there would be no sign of the intestines falling; if any fell, it would be small, and would revert to its original position at all times..
However, if time passes and he becomes old, the incision in the pericardium will increase until the intestines and serosa fall into the cavity of the rib cage, which presents that type of extension of the pericardium that is in the ribs as we mentioned.. This is because the pericardium stretches, then relaxes and falls; this is the position that is windy; and its treatment is to burn it as we have mentioned its description..
And it can be treated with iron in this way: the patient lies on his back between your hands, then you make a cut in the swollen hernia with a width of three fingers; then you sew the skin underneath the cut..
Until, when the white pericardium that follows is exposed, you take a pot and put it on the site of the cut in the pericardium; then you press it down into the depth of the abdomen, and sew the two sites that come out of the skin at the edge of the pot from the pericardium and stick them to each other with the.
Then cut the head of the radius bone, do not cut the fascia at all, nor touch the yolk or anything else as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal adenitis and then treat it with surgical treatments.
If the sutures break, clean and patch the wound until it heals; for the fascia shrinks and the hernia does not increase in size.
And the bone is best in this case because it is closer to safety.
Chapter 86.
In the relaxation of the testicle skin.
This is often relaxed in some people, without the muscles inside it relaxing and becoming disfigured, so whoever desires to treat it should lie down on their back.
And cut all the relaxed skin on the thick skin, and gather the two halves together, and if you want to sew the skin first with three or four stitches and secure the sewing then cut what is between the stitches.
Then treat it with other surgical treatments until it heals, and remove the sutures.
Chapter 96.
Castration.
In our religion, castration is forbidden.
For this reason, I should not have mentioned it in my book and it is mentioned here for two reasons: one is that it may be useful for a doctor to know about it if he is asked about it and the second is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit.
As with sheep, goats and cats, and similar animals, I say that castration is done in two ways: either by circumcision or by cutting and stitching. The first method involves sitting the animal in hot water until its testicles relax, become soft and loose their tension.
Then gently massage it with your hand until it becomes soft and you cannot feel the testes, or in case of castration by cutting and stitching, you should hold the animal and squeeze its testicle skin with your left hand then tie knots and make a single cut across each sac.
Until the two testicles have emerged, then cut them after you have剥した彼ら、そして彼らが残していることすべてを去ってください。彼らに付着している薄いバリアが血管に付着しているだけです。この種のカストレーションは、圧迫によって行われるものよりも優れています。
Because pressure may have left some of the testicles intact, so the animal desires copulation, then the wound is treated until it heals.
Chapter seventy.
In treating hermaphroditism.
The hermaphrodite is in men of two types: one is that which appears as follows: space or pubic hair between the testicles, resembling a woman's vagina, and sometimes urine flows from that which is in the pubic hair.
And as for women, there is only one type, and it is above the genitals on the pubic hair, resembling a man's small testicles, projecting outside like a penis, and both are female. And the treatment of the three types.
The two types of men and the single type of women should have their excess flesh cut so that its effect is erased, then it is treated with treatment similar to that of other surgical wounds until it heals. As for the second type of man, from which urine flows in the pubic hair between the testicles, there is no action or cure to remove it completely.
Chapter seventy-one.
In cutting the clitoris and the flesh resulting from a woman' s vagina.
The clitoris may increase in size beyond the normal, causing it to protrude and become disfigured, and in some women it may spread out like a man' s genitals, and it becomes capable of arousal.
The clitoris should be held with your hand or a clamp, and it should be cut, and you should not be too harsh, especially in the depth of the origin, so as not to expose blood loss.
Then treat it with surgical treatment until it heals, and as for the meat that grows in the mouth of the womb, it fills it up.
Maybe he went out outside like the example of the thigh. And for that reason, some of the firsts call the disease "nafsiyah" (thigh), so it should be cut like the clitoris and treated until he recovers,.
Chapter 72.
In treating hernia.
Retting is when a woman's vagina is unperforated or the perforation is small, and either is naturally born with it or accidentally, the accidental one is from a pre-existing disease which has advanced, and that the accidental one is of excess tissue.
Or thin or dense mesentery, and it may be in the depth of the uterus or in its sides or in its top or bottom, and prevents sexual intercourse and the cord and childbirth, and maybe prevents menstruation, and knowing that is by the examination of the midwife.
If the obstruction is almost visible then inspect it with your fingers or a speculum, and if the obstruction is of thin mesentery which is close to the labia then proceed to cut it with surgery.
The woman is on her back with her legs spread apart, then she firmly spreads the labia apart until she punctures the thin mesentery, and the obstruction opens, then take a sheet of cloth and soak it in oil and put it on the affected area and have sex with the woman every day so that the area does not heal again.
If the mesentery is thick and dense, you should cut it with a wide curette like a leaf, and if the obstruction is of excess tissue, secure it with hooks and cut it, and let there be with you medicines that calm down bleeding without burning such as squills and myrrh and frankincense mixed with egg white.
Then use a wide reed tube to prevent the wound from healing quickly, hold it for days and use cotton thread of dry cotton then treat with all other wound treatment techniques until it heals, and it may be that another plant of meat appears in the uterus, so you should cut it on this basis.
If it is not a cancerous tumor, then the cancerous tumor that is in the uterus does not respond at all to iron.
Chapter 73.
In treating hemorrhoids, warts, and red blisters that appear in the woman's vagina.
While the hemorrhoids are an inflammation of the veins, causing them to swell and bleed profusely; if left untreated, they may turn into warts. We have already discussed their types and symptoms in the previous chapter, and we will not repeat them here.
What can be treated and what cannot be treated, I say: hemorrhoids and warts that are deep inside the uterus and have not yet emerged into consciousness do not respond to treatment with iron. Whatever is in the opening of the uterus and comes into consciousness is treated.
It is advisable for the woman to enter a cold house, and then to use an awl or a rough cloth to cut the warts at their roots, and then to sprinkle them with a sharp-edged blade that cuts the blood without blunting it.
For example, using a caulk, a saw, or a paste made of leather, and so on; then hang her legs up by the wall for a while, and then lower them into cold water; if the bleeding persists, sit her down in a simmering solution made with pomegranate seeds, date shells, and wormwood, and so forth; then take wheat flour and mix it with honey and vinegar.
And bandage it; if the bleeding stops, you may continue with the next step of applying a compress made of tar and wool on her back; if not, then apply a compress on the breasts without any condition, and then take a cloth and dip it in the juice of thorns or the juice of dates or the juice of oak leaves mixed with honey and vinegar.
And if the swelling has calmed down, treat the area with the ointment until it heals; as for the red blisters, they resemble small testicles that are rough in appearance, so they should be cut from what appears of them according to what I mentioned earlier regarding warts, whether at the opening or inside the uterus, and then treated until it heals.
Chapter 47.
In treating an abscess that presents in the womb.
It may present in the womb various kinds of tumors such as cancer, the calcified tumor, ulcers, syphilis, cancres, boils, hemorrhoids, fissures, warts, and the hot tumor. I have mentioned all these diseases, their types and symptoms in the division.
It is necessary that we mention in this article the hot tumor that presents in the womb if it is one of the tumors that collects a period How to treat it with iron, so you should look. If the pain of the tumor at its beginning is severe with pulsations, inflammation, and fever.
And I saw it red If it responded to touch Then do not rush to treat it with iron and treat it with something that promotes maturity until when these symptoms subside, then at that time you should make the woman sit on a chair with two seats and lean on her back.
And she gathers her legs towards the lower abdomen, and her thighs are apart, and she places her arms under her knees and ties them with a ribbon that suits her.
Therefore, then the midwife sits from the right side and uses the tool that opens the mouth of the womb which its image will come later, and it is necessary if I want to use this tool that I estimate with a rod the depth of the womb of the woman so as not to be more than the depth of the womb.
It will hurt the patient if the tool is more than depth, then it should be placed rafa'a on the rim of the womb's neck to prevent the entire entry of the tool in the depth of the womb, and it is necessary for the spiral that runs in the tool to be from the upper side.
And you hold the tool and the server turns the spiral until the womb's neck is opened, so if the abscess appears and is touched by hand and is soft, smooth, in a good position to cut it at its head with a wide tweezers, so when all the fluid is exhausted.
It is necessary that it should be in the wound a soft thread soaked in rose oil or green oil with some पकडet and the thread should come out of the cut at the neck of the uterus and make from outside on the uterus and on the perineum clean wool soaked in water which has boiled in caustic.
Then it is treated after two days with the ointment which is suitable for that until it heals.
And the uterus and wound may be washed by injecting water and honey then with water which has boiled in original sos or long pepper then return to the ointment, if the abscess is hidden hidden inside the uterus.
It is necessary that you should refrain from treating it with iron but treat it with what we have mentioned in the division.
Chapter 75.
In teaching midwives how to treat live babies if they come out not in the normal shape.
It is necessary for the midwife to know first the normal shape of childbirth, because from its signs if you see the woman lower herself down and long to smell air and it eases her what she is in labor.
And the baby comes out quickly, so know that this birth is on the normal shape and the exit is on his head and the placenta with it or hanging from its neck, so if you see these signs then it is necessary to squeeze her abdomen so that the baby comes out quickly.
If it is down on its head, the placenta comes with it and cleans itself of those impurities properly, and except for this birth, it is not natural and is condemned because the baby may come out on his feet and his hands come out before his head and legs.
One hand or one leg comes out, or the head comes out with its hand, or it comes out folded, and sometimes it turns upside down and other shapes of faults, so the midwife should be skilled and gentle with all this and be careful of slip and error.
And I explain each form, and how the trick is in it so that you may learn from it and stand on it, if the baby comes out on his head the natural way and becomes difficult for the woman and she finds delivery difficult, and I see that her strength has weakened, so I sit her on a chair and order women to restrain her.
And they add milk to the uterus with cooked milk and wet ointments, and then the midwife enters between her fingers with a small scissor and tears it with it or tears it with her nail until the moisture comes out of it and she squeezes the woman's belly until the baby falls out.
If it does not fall out, then the woman should swallow the milk of the cooked milk with the ointment of the shirj and then order her after the injection to clear herself and sneeze with a candal and hold her mouth and nose, and the baby will come out at its hour, if the baby's hands came out first, then they should be returned gently a little little.
If it does not come out, then place the woman on a platform and raise her feet up, and then shake the platform on the ground, and the woman holds onto it so that she does not fall down when it is shaken, if the hands did not enter and the baby died, then you should cut them off and pull the rest of the baby.
Or tie his hands with a cloth and pull them moderately, because he will come out, the baby comes out on his feet, if the baby comes out on his feet, then you should push them up, and then turn the baby over a little little so that it is even, and then take one of his feet and extend it a little little.
If they came out to the thighs, then order her to clear herself and sneeze with a candal, because it will come out, if it did not come out as we described, otherwise turn the baby over a little little until he is in the normal shape, because it will come out then smoothly, if it resisted what we have described all of it.
A piece of the saliva of the chetmah, and the saliva of the heleb, and oil of shirj, and gum-resin dissolved, and beat them all in the mortar well, then apply it to the woman's vulva and lower abdomen, then sit her in lukewarm water until the pus comes out.
If you see that he has become soft below, then make a suspension of vinegar and let her bear it, and if the suspension stays in place for an hour, then sit her on a chair, then sneeze her and cover her mouth and nose, and squeeze her lower abdomen gently, because the fetus will come out from its hour, the exit of the fetus is on its knees and hands,.
If it comes out in this state, then occupy a little in introducing his hands, then the woman lies on her back and hangs her legs down while lying on a bed and clutching her hands, and then squeeze above her abdomen a little bit,. then take out what is under her legs of the pillows until she is raised up, because if the fetus does not come out, then all four legs shake it vigorously, then squeeze above the pus a little bit until the fetus comes up, then the midwife puts her hand and straightens the fetus a little bit,.
And tell the woman to cover herself until the fetus comes out, the exit of the fetus is with its arm outstretched, occupy in returning its hand, if she could not return it, then make the woman sit and let her walk, if she could not walk, then lie down on..
her bed and shake her legs vigorously, then use the suspension that I described to you of saliva, if the labor took over, then sit her on a chair, then work in returning the hand and arranging the fetus naturally, sneeze the woman and tell her to cover herself until it comes out,.
The fetus comes out on its back with its hands extended, and its face is towards the back of its mother, The midwife should hold the fetus' hand, then turn it a little bit and arrange it gently, if it is arranged, then carry on what I described to you of oil and saliva..
Then let her move a little, and if she does so, let her sit in the chair and order her to lean to the right side then let her sneeze with the coundess, because it will come out, like the baby comes out straight on one side.
If it comes down to the uterus on this condition with the placenta and splits the placenta with your fingernail until it is emptied of moisture because if it hangs on the face of the fetus and its neck, cut it from the umbilical cord so that it does not choke and die, then push the baby inside until it is on what is appropriate.
And order the woman to sneeze several times because it will come out easily, like twins or many babies, they are born and live except that this is rare, and while five is something outside of nature, they do not live at all.
And they are surrounded by one placenta and separate with a thick membrane between them attached to the umbilical cord of each one, and it may come out as it comes out naturally and easily as a single fetus, or it may come out in a disgusting way as we have described.
If one of them is difficult to give birth and becomes what we mentioned from the unnatural shapes, treat it as described, and let the midwife be gentle and do what she does gently and slowly and tries her best to achieve safety,
What is imagined in the uterus of babies may fall, what is imagined in the uterus of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, may be true that a woman has fallen seven and another has fallen fifteen, all of them are imagined like this.
By the estimate of the Glorious Wise, all this is what the midwife should know, and perhaps it will fall on her one day, so she should face it with what is appropriate,
Chapter 67.
Chapter 67: In removing the dead fetus.
If you have treated the dead fetus as mentioned in the division of treatment, and it did not come out and forced you to work with your hand, then you should look at her. If she is a healthy woman with no symptoms that one fears for her damage, then she should lie on a bed on her back.
The head should be tilted towards the lower part, and her legs should be raised, with a servant holding her on both sides or tying her to the bed so that her body does not sway when the fetus is removed.
Then, the midwife should moisten the opening of the uterus with wet fats, with locust bean gum, licorice root, and flaxseed oil, and then she should oil her hands with these fats and juices. Then, she should gently enter the uterus with her fingers, then search for the most suitable places to insert the hooks, which are the sites that suit this matter.
Look, if the fetus is about to come down, insert the hooks into its eyes or its nape or its mouth or its jaw or under its chin or its larynx or in the places close to the ribs or under the shoulder blades.
If the fetus is about to come down on its legs, it is in the middle of the rib cage, and one should hold the hook with the right hand and bend it slightly while holding it between the fingers of the left hand, and then enter the hand gently and insert the hook into some of those places that we mentioned.
Until you reach an empty space, and then insert another hook or a third one if needed to make the pull even so that it does not lean towards one side, then extend it evenly, and it should not be extended on a single line only but should be moved in all directions.
To make it come out easily, as is done with the tooth when a toothpick is used, and it is necessary to relax the tension in between, so if it gets stuck from one side, then the midwife should oil some fingers with fat, and she should enter them from that side to turn what is stuck, and if some of the fetus comes out, then move the hooks to other places.
It is slightly higher than this, do so until the entire fetus comes out, if a hand came out before any other and could not be pushed back due to its compression, it should be wrapped in a rag and then pulled until all of it comes out, then cut off.
Either at the knuckle of the hand or at the elbow, so you should do in the other hand and in the legs, if the head of the fetus was large and there was a pressure on it to come out or there was water collected in his head, then you should enter between the fingers with a shaka knife.
And split it with it, so water comes out or it is split with the machine called the mashada which comes with its image with images of all machines in the door that is after this.
So you should do if the fetus was great-headed by nature, it is necessary to split the skull or beat it with the mashada as we said then pull out the bones with clamps, if the head came out and was pressed at the collarbone, so split it until the moisture that is in the chest drains.
If he is then the chest joins, and if the chest does not join and cannot come out, so cut on what you can, if it was lower abdomen warm or there was milk in it, so wrap it up until the moisture comes out of it.
If the fetus is on his feet, then drawing it is easy and making it to the mouth of the uterus is simple, if it was pressed at the abdomen or chest, so you should pull it with a rag that you have wrapped on your hand and split the abdomen or chest until the moisture comes out of them.
If you have removed all the organs and the head retreated and was trapped, the woman should enter her left hand, if the uterus mouth is open, she enters her hand in the neck of the uterus and asks it with fingers and pulls it towards the mouth of the uterus then enters a hook or two hooks and pulls it with them,
If the mouth of the womb has joined with a hot mass, it should not be forced open but rather wet and greasy substances should be used and bandages applied and he should sit in water that softens and moistens.
If the fetus is on its side, if possible, it should be straightened and the aforementioned treatments should be applied to the live fetus; if not, it should be cut and removed. Nothing of the placenta should be left inside, and after you finish treating it, use the aforementioned treatment for hot masses that appear in wombs.
If there is bleeding, let it sit in the reten water and use all the treatments. I have seen a woman who had conceived and then lost the fetus; she conceived again.
Then another fetus died, and after a long time a lump appeared in her breast and swollen until it opened and began to pus. She was called for treatment and I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal, so I put some strong gripping ointments on it.
A bone came out, then after a few days another bone came out; she was surprised by this, as the abdomen is not a place of bones; I thought that it might be from the bones of the dead fetus, so I examined the wound and removed several bones from the head of the fetus.
I continued following up until I removed many bones from it, and the woman is in the best of health; she has lived like this for a long time. This is what brought me here to present this rare case to you.
This is because it contains knowledge and assistance for the doctor who attempts to treat with his hand.
Chapter 77
In it are images of the tools that he needs in order to remove the fetus.
Image of a coil that opens the mouth of the womb:
This binding, which is equal in thickness to the books, has a roll at each end of the boards. This roll must be softer than the binding and made either of boxwood or of bois de buis; the width of each board should be equal to that of two fingers.
The boards, turned towards the thumb, should be a span and a half long; in the middle of the boards there should be two laths of the same wood as the board, bound to them; their length should be half a span or more; their width, about two fingers or more; and these lath
These are the two that enter into the mouth of the womb in order to open it by turning the rolls; a different instrument, softer and lighter, being used: it is called the "qibla".
It should be made of boxwood or of bois de buis in the form of laths; but it has two laths in the middle, as you see; the length of each of these lath is about a span; its width, two fingers; and if you wish to open the womb with it,
sit the woman on a bench, spread her legs wide; then insert these two laths rolled up into the womb while holding the instrument's bottom between her thighs as you would do with the cleats; open your hand with the instrument as you would do with the cleats, according to the degree of opening you wish to achieve. Until the midwife makes what she wants, a different roll that the first-mentioned scholars mentioned:
a roll used to push the fetus out
a cleat used to crack open the fetus' head
is similar to a cleaver with teeth at the end, as you see; and it can be made in the form of laths like the cleats, as you see; it has teeth like the teeth of a saw; it cuts and tears:
a roll also:
a fishhook:
This fishhook should be slightly stiffer so that it does not break when pulling the fetus with it; a hook with two prongs:
Two large scissors for cutting the fetus.
These instruments; all of them, with the more various kinds that are prepared by the maker will be quicker in his work and higher among people for their esteem; so don’t depreciate any instrument to have it prepared, because there might be a need for it.
Chapter 78:
In removing the placenta.
If the placenta retains after childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold her breath and then use the tongs to force her to cough. If it comes out with this method, great; otherwise, take a piece of bone or a sharp stone and remove it carefully with a handle of iron.
And pierce the cover with a hole, and place therein dried herbs for the mouth of the womb such as fodding, safed, shabet, baby's breath, marjoram, savory, centaury, and centaurium; all these medicines or some of them, and dip them in water and place them on fire. Then put a silver tube with one end on the hole in the cover and the other end in the mouth of the womb.
And hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the womb; then instruct the midwife to cough, as we mentioned earlier. If it does not come out after this treatment and did not come out, then order the midwife to dip her left hand in sheep's fat or line snot.
And then insert it into the vulva, and search for the placenta; if she has clung to the depth of the womb, insert the hand on what we have described until you feel the placenta; then, with caution, pull it a little bit at a time.
So that the womb does not fall due to a strong pull, it is necessary to move gently back and forth to the right and left; then increase the amount of pulling, because she will respond; if the mouth of the womb is clamped shut, we have described the treatment with coughing, the pot, and the herbs.
If you don't [make the patient] come out with all that we have described, then do not beat it and reinsert it [into the vagina], but it is necessary to tie what comes out of it to the woman's mouth to her thigh, and then inject it with the four-fold ointment, for it腐s after a few days.
And it will be dissolved and will come out, except that if it Putrefies, then a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head, and this hurts the patient, so it is necessary to use the smoke that suits it.
Therefore, and some of the first tried smoke of the tools and dried fig, image of the machine that evaporates it to the woman when she is prevented from menstruation and placental and so on:.
It is made of lead and resembles a funnel, or it is made of copper and placed, the thin end in the vagina and the wide end on fire, and the perfume is made on the coals, hold it until that fragrance goes and repeat it, .
Chapter 99.
In treating prostatism (enlarged prostate).
May be born many boys and their seats are not punctured may سدّها thin membrane, the midwife should open that membrane with her finger or otherwise tie it with a sharp ligature and beware of the muscle do not touch it.
Then she puts on it a wool dipped in the liquor and oil, then she treats with ointments until it is healed, if she fears that it will be blocked, then put into the hole a lead tube for several days and remove it whenever the child wants to defecate.
And may be the blockage of the seat is also due to a cicatrice or swelling, so it should be split that cicatrice, then treated as mentioned above with wax, .
Chapter 80.
In treating the hemorrhoids that occur in the bottom.
The abscesses that occur in the lower part are a complication and thickening that takes place near the anus from outside or in the space of one of the sides, and the abscess may be one or more.
If this complication lasts, it will open and run from it a watery white fluid or thin pus, and some of these abscesses may be discharging into the rectum and intestines, and not discharging, so the discharging may be known by what comes out with the stool and wind when using the medicine.
And perhaps it will come out from it the worms, and some of these abscesses may be discharging into the bladder and the urethra, and they may be discharged from the hip joint and the back of the thigh, and what is known with the absces that is discharged into the anus, also from the non-discharged.
Put your index finger in the anus and insert a thin probe into the abscess of copper or iron if there is no curling in the abscess, then if there is curling in it, put a thin probe of lead or horse hair.
Until you feel the probe or hair in your finger, because if you don't feel it at all and there is nothing coming out of the hole from the stool and wind or smoke as we have said, then know that it is not discharged and hurry to treatment.
And if the abscess is discharged into the bladder or the urinary tract, its sign is the exit of urine from it and its inability to heal with medicine, and as for if it is discharged into the hip joint or the back of the thigh, its sign is that the probe reaches there.
If it is not curled towards the bone and there is pain in a particular direction, and it consistently discharges pus, and none of its treatments or ointments can heal it, these discharged abscesses will never be cured.
And its treatment is useless effort for those who are ignorant doctors, and as for the non-discharged and not chronic abscesses, there is hope of healing them with iron according to what I describe and what has been experimented on, which is that the patient lies on his back between your hands.
He should raise his legs and tilt his hips towards his abdomen. Then, he should insert a copper or lead probe through the nostril if there is one, and feel for the spot where the probe exits; if the patient feels it near his rectum, he should insert his index finger into the rectum.
If, however, you feel the probe itself has entered, and it is exposed without any meat or fat between your finger and it, then you know for certain that it has entered; in this case, do not tire yourself out with it, as there is no cure for it as we have said.
They say that it may heal in some people, rarely; and one of the treatments that is hoped for is to heat a thin knife according to the size of the nostril as mentioned above and introduce it into the nostril until it reaches the rectum, and then remove it and reinsert it two or three times.
So that you know that all the excess meat that is tangled and resembles a bird's feather has burned; then treat it with a damp cloth in oil until that burnt meat comes out, and then treat it with the bandages that adhere; because there is a cure for it.
Or if you insert the probe and it does not enter your finger in the rectum, but there is a thick layer of meat or fat between it and your finger; and you see that the nostril is split from the first part of the nostril near the skin surface; then split the skin at that point. And pass the probe through the nostril while it is in the nostril until you reach the spot where the end of the probe exits, and the probe will come out and fall; then remove all that tangled meat that resembles a bird's feather; do not leave any of it.
Then treat it with the bandages that adhere until it heals; and if blood prevents you from working to cut off that meat, then do one of two things: either burn it with fire, which will have two benefits - burning that excess meat; or use a sharp medication to cut it off, because cutting it off with fire will benefit you.
And cut the blood and let the moisture dry up, then treat it with the wet cloth in butter or the powdered sulfur with oil until pus is formed on the site and those burnt meats are poured out in the pus, and then treat the wound with the salves that are grown for hard meat.
These are the medications that contract and dry up, because when it has healed, it has been cured; do not fear the return, if the ulcer has reached a depth in the rectum away from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the rectum and search for it.
If you feel a barrier of fat or meat between you and it, and it is close to the entrance, then the work in it is only on the path of hope and expectation, that is, you use one of three faces: either you burn it as we mentioned.
Or you tear it so that you reach the bottom to be able to introduce the cloth and treat from close range, and do not persevere in the tear so as not to cut the surrounding muscle of the rectum, which may cause the patient to have diarrhea without will, and then treat it with what we mentioned, it may heal as we said.
Or you pierce that barrier and make a hole close to the rectum as we mentioned, either with a probe or another sharp instrument, and then clean all those mixed meats that are in the tear as much as you can by digging.
Then rub the whole wound with the tear and mouth, until it closes and the ulcer remains open inside the rectum, which is easier on the patient, and the ulcer may burst due to this quality.
This is if you insert the probe in the ulcer, and it is on one side of the rectum close to the surface of the body with the skin, and the ring around the rectum, then take a probe with a hollow tip like an saddler's needle, and then insert it as described above.
And insert therein a thread twisted into five threads or something like that, and then insert the probe in the thread in the rectum until it reaches its bottom, if it has been pushed through the edge of the seat from within near by.
Then take the thread out of that hole by inserting your finger in the rectum and taking the end of the thread, gather both ends together and tie them tightly and leave it for a day or two, so whenever the thread is cut in the flesh, tighten it tightly until those tissues between the two ends of the threads fall off, then treat the wound until it heals and heals.
If the rectum's mouth is not pushed out, push it out however you can, except that it should not be deep, so you do not cut the muscle, then treat him as we have mentioned until he recovers.
The shattering image of the spine probe with which you make the orifices is extremely sharp and the other end is blunt so that it does not cut what is not needed as you see.
Chapter 81.
In the hole of hemorrhoids that bleeds, cutting it and treating fissures.
The hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the seat, resembling red pomegranates, or they are like grape bunches, and from them small and large ones flow with blood all the time.
And one is more and more, and is outside the seat, and at its ends, but this one that is outside the seat is often little moist, it flows yellow water or a little blood constantly, and is in the color of the body.
And the treatment of what is inside the seat is that you order the patient to defecate and stir until the seat comes out to you and you see the warts, so you fix them with the probes or grab them with your fingernail and cut them at their roots, if they have not been fixed by the probes because of their moisture and relaxation.
Cut it with a rough cloth or with a piece of bread, or pull it with your fingers then cut it, then sprinkle some sharp powder on it so that it stands for cauterization or burn it with the same as mentioned in the cauterization chapter.
Then treat it with all the treatment until it heals, if it does not respond to the medicine and does not come out, inject the patient with a syringe containing some burning liquid so that it washes what is in the rectum and comes out quickly when the patient defecates, then order the skin tags outside the rectum to be easy and gentle.
And that is that you take it with your fingernail or attach it to a hook and cut it, then treat it with what we have mentioned until it heals, and if you dislike cutting with iron, you should use the hole in this way; take a twisted string and insert it into a needle.
Then draw the wart up and pierce it with the needle at its root from the other side, and wrap the two ends of the string around the end of the needle, holding them tight; then tie the thread, taking out the needle; do this for all warts, leaving one; do not pierce that.
So that it will flow blood from it, then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or kerosine on the rectum and put it on the rectum and order the patient to be quiet, then leave him until it falls; when it falls, treat warts with ointments and all treatment until it heals.
As for the treatment of fissures, it is often found in the dry skin of the moron and the inhibition of the pulse; if it has persisted and does not respond to any treatment, it should be peeled with a surgical blade or your fingernail until it becomes moist and the upper scalps that prevent it from healing are removed.
Then treat it until it heals on what should be done; if it does not heal, repeat it with more severe peeling than the first time until it bleeds, but skin off and then treat it, because it will heal.
Chapter 82.
In the treatment of reversed nails, non-reversed nails, dry warts, and verrucae.
The nail is a round nodule on the color of the body that resembles a nail head, and it is present in all the body, especially at the bottom of the feet and fingers, and it causes pain when walking.
The nail should be split, and a tweezers or hook should be used to pull it out from its root, and if you wish, it can be burned with what has been mentioned in the book on skin diseases, and dry warts are small rough spots that are round and raised above the surface of the body.
It is often found in the hands of children, and its treatment is to extend the wart and cut it or bore it with a silk thread or a hair so that it falls, and if you wish, burn it with fire or acute medicine as mentioned above.
Warts may be removed with the tool I mentioned in the treatment of verrucae, and verrucae are a small, rough, raised spot on the surface of the body that goes deep into the flesh. If it is affected by cold, it feels like tiny fire ant bites.
It is found in all parts of the body, and most of it is in the hands, and its treatment is to take a tube from an eagle's feather or a hawk's feather, strong and resilient, and make that tube surround the verrucae on all sides then turn your hand with the tube so that it splits what is around the verrucae.
And you can make it deeper into the flesh and remove the verrucae from its root, and if you wish, do so with a copper or iron tube as follows:
The upper part of the tube is closed and tightly wound to make it easy for the fingers to hold it and turn it, and if you wish, burn the verrucae with fire as mentioned above in burning warts in the treatment section.
Chapter 83.
In the description of the instruments used for injection in the diseases of the rectum, diarrhea and colic.
The syringe may be made of silver, bronze or copper, cast or hammered, and it may be large or small according to those who use it. So the ones used for treating small children are made small, and those who have narrow or sore rectums have very soft syringes. The image of a large syringe:
The top of the cylinder to which the syringe is attached is wide, has a partition, and is made smooth as far as possible towards the edge; on one side it has two holes and on the other side one hole.
The size of the hole should be just a little thicker than the diameter of the rod, and the syringe containing the medicines is made of the bladder of an animal or of thin sheep skin. in the shape of a small tray; its diameter is one span.
And he drills many holes as it turns, and the distance between each hole is the thickness of a finger, and then he inserts a thick thread into those holes, and he gathers the syringe together like a tray with ten stitches or so. So when he puts medicine in it, he tightens it at the top of the syringe between the pebbles with a strong tension, and then he injects it, and this is the image of a circle of the syringe and the hole:
And the method of injecting it is to fill the bladder or bladder with the medicine while heating it as much as possible for the patient, and be careful not to make it very hot or very cold; then the patient lies on his back and extends his legs towards the ceiling.
Then a blanket or sheet is placed under him, and the top of the syringe is greased with oil or egg white or saliva of the milking cow or something like that; then he gently inserts it into the rectum, and then the servant of the syringe takes it with both hands and squeezes it strongly so that all what is in the syringe is emptied into the intestines.
Then the syringe is removed and the patient's legs are tied to the bed, and if the medicine prompts him to move, let him struggle as much as he can, and if he sleeps all night, it is more effective in relief, for if it is injected into the pains of diarrhea and urged to come out, let the syringe be adjusted until he recovers.
If it is in the rectum or painful tumors, let the syringe be very gentle and smooth of the syringes that are injected with children, and this is a picture of a gentle syringe pulled on it: .
Chapter 84.
in the treatment of wounds.
I have mentioned in the classification in treating what resembles scorching and I am here recalling its treatment with hands and drugs on completeness, I say: The surgeries differ according to the thing that is subjected to surgery and according to the location of the wound.
The things that are subjected to surgery are numerous, such as a stone fragment or a piece of sword or knife or dagger or an arrow or stick or bow or any other similar objects of many things.
And as for the surgeries according to the locations on the body, such as a wound that occurs on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and similar organs.
And I am describing the treatment of some surgeries to make them a model and a law for all other surgeries, and I begin with simple surgeries of the head because the composite will be mentioned in the first part of Volume 3 of this book.
I say that when a simple wound occurs in the head and it is not a bone fracture, I consider it, if it is a stone fragment or similar and the skin has only been stripped and the wound is large, and I am afraid of causing harm to the patient's health, so hurry and drain the blood from the site using the craniocerebrospinal drain on the position. And do not delay it and take out the blood from him according to his ability if it does not prevent bleeding, especially if the blood that is being drawn from the wound is small, and let the blood-letting be from the opposite side of the wound.
And [the patient] should beware of fullness, and drink, and coarse foods; for that which stops the flow of his blood is a means of decreased food intake, and he should not approach meat or drinks, and carry the wound if there is a hot swelling; cotton dipped in rosewater alone, or with the drink containing it [rosewater], bound to it.
And if [the patient] is free of a hot swelling, then carry the wound if it is still fresh with his blood and has not been changed by the dry wind which I will describe for you shortly, and as for if it has been changed by the wind, then carry some ointments on it.
until it discharges pus, and then treat it until it heals, and if the wound is large and from a sword or similar, and its edges do not come together with the sutures, then suture it as I have described in sewing abdominal wounds.
If the skin has exposed the bone and is hanging, and it is not held except by a few threads, then cut it and then treat the wound with medications that dry it up and make it hard, so that it is replaced by a solid flesh; and order for the patient to eat foods that have strength, such as heads and paste and other similar things.
If there is putrefaction in the skin and it has not stuck to the bone, then cut off the putrefied part and throw it away, and then treat the wound; and if there is a vein or a sweat gland which the blood flows from, and it has not been stopped by medications, then examine the vein.
If you have hit it, and it has not become detached, then extract it with a tweezers and bind it; and if necessity dictates, if these wounds are small, simple, and the patient's blood is flowing from them, then treat them by leaving them alone with this dry wind which I will describe for you shortly; and their treatment is finished.
before it is changed by the wind, the description of the dry wind: take a part of licorice, and two parts of gum Arabic or other gum, and three parts of burnt lime or unburned lime; grind them all and screen them, and fill the wound with it and tighten it firmly until it sticks to it tightly.
It hardens with blood, then it is tighten with staples from above and left alone until it heals, and ginger can do that by itself if the menthol and camphor are not available.
It can also do the same thing in many major surgeries if it is placed and tightened on it, and the surgeries are soft with their blood unless they change with air, and as for if they have changed with air slightly, especially if it is in the summer season.
Not at all, there is no effective meaning in putting this powder on him as we mentioned that it carries some of the lubricants or carries on it a paste of spelled flour made with water and honey until it drains pus, then treat it with all the treatment until it heals,.
As for if a fracture occurred in the bone and it was easy, pull it with the splint, and I have mentioned treating head fractures while they are healing in neck surgery, If the wound is in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a head wound if it is simple.
And as for if it has cut a nerve in the neck or a vein, there is no way to treat it except to avoid treating it with something that contracts strongly like zinc and salt because it hurts the nerve and shocks it.
And nothing is put on the wound that is cold at all because the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection with the brain, which is the most honorable organs, and it will be treated with soft drugs like rinsing with water, several times, oil or rosewater.
If it is also rinsed with fresh water and various metallic stones on this feature, and the lubricating ointments, and as for if the wound is large, use the sewing or binding his lips with staples, then treat him until he heals.
If the wound is deep and there is a pocket at its bottom where pus has collected, pack it in the lowest part. If a vein has been severed and you can see the blood flowing, cut off or tie or stitch it as necessary.
If the wound has cut some or all of the tonsils and the throat is safe, stitch the skin together on the tonsil bed, leaving it alone for a few days.
Then treat it with a paste that is drying and tightens the wound, until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, break it open; if there are any bone fragments, remove them all; if not, leave it alone until the wound has healed and the fragment can be easily removed.
If the wound is still soft, sprinkle it with the powder we described; if it has become putrid and turned to bone, operate on it as described in the section on chest and shoulder wounds.
If the wound is from a spear or a knife and you can see a pocket of blood, look carefully; if the wind blows out of it, know that this is a life-threatening wound. If it doesn't have a pocket and the blood is still liquid, don't sprinkle it with the powder or tighten it to prevent the blood from flowing into its depths.
Then it will turn to the heart and kill the patient. However, apply a sticky paste that attracts the secretions and change it twice a day; if you don't have any paste, put an old cloth in the wound to absorb its fluids and keep the patient asleep on top of it.
Let it flow, as it will have been three or more days since the wound occurred and the patient has not experienced any cramping or irregular heartbeat or shortness of breath; if you see that the patient's overall health is good, know that the wound has healed. Treat it with sutures and continue the treatment until it heals completely.
If it is difficult to see him and always extend the bandage, then know that he has become a Nasira and treat him from his door. The patient on the wound does not flow what gathers in it, even if he has gone to the chest or back wound, treat it with what came before.
If it is large or with seeds if it is small, if it has affected the bone and cut off some of its shatters then inspect the wound and hurry to remove those shatters if they are healthy, if they are not healthy then leave them until.
It turns green, because it is easy to remove, and the other wounds that occur in all organs are ruled by what we have mentioned,.
Chapter 85.
In abdominal surgery and the exit of the intestines and sewing them up.
The patch that is exposed to the abdomen may be large or small or medium, so the large one can exit a intestine or multiple intestines, so introducing them and sewing them up would be more difficult and challenging.
And the small patch can also be difficult from another aspect, so it is necessary to make it easier to introduce the intestine into its place at once, because it swells and thickens, so it is more difficult to introduce it, so for this reason, the medium patch became better than the other patches, because it does not cause difficulty in introducing the intestine as it does in these two types.
And know that sewing the abdomen is on four faces, the two general stitches are suitable for sewing the abdomen and all other surgeries, and the two other special stitches are used in all surgeries except they are more specialized in sewing the abdomen.
And I will describe them to you one by one with an explanation, I say if the wound is small and a thing comes out of the intestine and it is difficult to return it, then this is due to two reasons, either because the patch is small as we have said or because the intestine swelled due to cold air.
If so, it should be heated by dipping a sponge or wet rag in warm water alone, or if cooked in it, the anise, fennel and barley seeds, and with which the bowel is to be blunted until it softens.
It may be done with a drink that contains it, which is better than water alone in softening the wind, and if you see that the wind has softened, then rinse the bowel with boiled water or baklava, as this will make its entry easier with the least effort.
If it cannot be returned after this treatment, then make a small incision in the patch with the tool with which you make nostrils, and the first treatment is better if it succeeds, and it only forces to cut after necessity and exhaustion of means, and this is a picture of the tool:
It should be one-sided, with a curved end limited and the other side unlimited and the thin end should not be as sharp as the blade but slightly flattened and it is an instrument similar to a small chisel as you see, so if the wound widens and enters the bowel, its response to its natural shape.
And its special place if you can do it is better, and if the patch is wide and is in the lower abdomen, the patient should lie on his back and make his legs higher than his head, and if it is in the upper abdomen, he should make his head and chest higher than his bottom.
And the same if the patch is on one side of the abdomen, you should always aim and intend at the side where the surgery is higher than the other side, and thus it should be used in major surgeries and middle surgeries.
And in small surgeries, you should put it as much as you can get, and then prepare a helper with you to hold the patch with both hands, then he covers part of it with his lips and then reveals it bit by bit for the person who sews.
This is the characteristic of a simple stitch; that is, to take one or more needles according to the size of the wound and then leave the width of the thumb's width on either side of the opening in the skin, and sew with one needle without inserting a thread into the sides of the skin. This is the characteristic of a simple stitch; that is, to take one or more needles according to the size of the wound and then leave the width of a thumb' s width on either side of the opening in the skin, and sew with one needle without inserting a thread into the sides of the skin. This is done by gathering the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the flesh, forming four strands, and then tightening them with a double knot around the needle several times from both sides until the wound edges are tightly joined together.
Then, leave a width of the thumb' s thickness as well and sew with another needle, then intertwine it with the thread as you did with the first needle; continue doing this with as many needles as you need until you finish closing the whole wound. The needles should be medium between thick and thin.
This is because very thin needles cut through the meat quickly, and thick ones are difficult to enter the skin; therefore, it should be in the middle in terms of thickness and thinness, and it is not necessary for the needle to pierce into the skin's edge near here.
So that the meat does not cut quickly and the wound does not open before it heals, and do not remove the stitches too far so that the wound does not heal; then, cut off the ends of the needles to avoid hurting the patient when he sleeps, and make him cushions of cotton cloth on each side to hold the ends of the needles.
And leave it until you are sure that the wound has healed, and this type of stitch with needles is most suitable for small surgeries as it may be sufficient to sew with one or two needles or something like that.
Or the second general feature of the popular stitch is that you gather all four edges, that is, the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the flesh, in one stitch with a needle having an appropriately twisted thread in terms of thickness and thinness, and then, when it has passed through these four edges, repeat the same needle from the side where it began.
Let the thread lie entangled at the top of the wound so that the suturing is in accordance with the knitting of the kaisa which is tightened by it and placed between each stitch and stitch after thickening the little finger. This stitch is known to all people.
With this stitch, a surgery has been performed on a man in his abdomen who had been stabbed with a knife. The wound was larger than an inch and a half and had pierced his intestines by about two inches from the middle intestine. The wound was in the center of the abdomen.
He left it outside for twenty-four hours, after his intestines had come out of the wound. The wound healed in about fifteen days, and he was treated until he recovered. He lived a lot of years afterwards, managing all his affairs. The doctors were sure that he would never heal.
And it is strange that I did not treat him with a unguent, because I was in a place where there were no drugs at all. So, I would put old cotton on the wound twice a day and carefully wash it with honey water until it healed.
As for one of the two kinds of special stitching, I will mention it on the text of Galen: that you begin with the stitch from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside. If the needle passes through the skin and through the muscle going straight down the length of the abdomen, then it is complete.
I left the edge of the peritoneum on the side where I inserted the needle, and I inserted the needle into the other edge from the outside to the inside in the midline. If I passed it through, I would pass it again through this same edge from the midline towards the outside.
And leave the edge of the peritoneum that is in this side and insert the needle into the other edge from inside to outside, and as you insert it, insert it again through this same edge into the midline until it passes through all of it.
Then also begin from this side and draw the line with the edge which is of the peritoneum on the other side and take out the needle from the skin which is near it then return it in that skin and draw a line with the edge of the peritoneum which is on the other side with this edge from the eyes.
And take it out from the skin which is of him, and do that a second time and do it a second time to the end until you stitch all the surgery on that model, and the phrase which describes this stitching that the stitching of the tailors for the fur.
by stitching the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the skin and leaving it once from the other side until you finish, And as for the second type of special stitching which he also mentioned, this is his words in text.
Is that it Sews on a model What they sew, people of healers that gather every part to its counterpart by nature so they include the edge of the peritoneum to its other and the edge of the eyes to its other, and that is what I describe for you.
The needle should be sewn in the edge of the eyes near you from outside and execute it inside alone and leave the edges of the peritoneum then bring back the needle and execute it from outside to inside on both edges of the peritoneum then bring it also.
And execute it from inside to outside in the edge of the eyes other which is on the opposite side, and this blow of stitching is better than easy general stitching, and he said that stitching the abdomen with two needles, This is the words of Galen text, And some of them have said It may be made abdominal stitch that is that you enter in it one thread and begin to enter the needle from your side and execute it to the other side and enter the other needle from opposite side and execute it from your side according to stitch of tailors whether,
And know that if the breach is in the middle of the belly, then sewing it is more difficult than in all other places of the belly, and as regards the treatment of the wound, its rule in its treatment is like the rule of all wounds, namely that you recognize the wound fresh with its blood before changing it by air, and return the bowel and trace it and tighten it, so carry on it the powdered salt.
If the wound has been changed by air, then carry on it some of the ointments which you prepare until it drains and the threads fall off and the peritoneum heals, and then treat it as you treat all wounds until it heals.
If you do not have medications, carry on it from when it begins to pus old cotton wool and replace it twice a day as I have taught you until it heals, because you do not need another treatment in most cases if the wounds are simple, but if you fear that the wound will share the main organs with pain.
It is necessary that you immerse a soft sponge in moderate heat oil or rose oil and place it around the places between the ribs and the armpits, because if he feels pain or fermentation in his intestines, often that makes him vomit, so inject him with a black liquid antipyretic.
Especially if the fermentation has reached in the intestines and has become a perforated wound to his abdomen, and know that whatever was of the intestines thick is easier to heal and whatever was of them thin is more difficult to heal.
As for the intestine known as the small intestine, it does not accept healing from a surgery that occurs with it at all, because of its great number of vessels and their thickness and the softness of its flesh and its proximity to the nervous system, and if the thiirab that emerged from the wound has reached him fresh, then return it according to your return of the intestine.
If it has passed a period and it has turned green or black, then you should tie him with a thread above the place where it turned black to prevent bleeding blood because there are veins and arteries in the thiirab, and then cut what is below the knot.
Make the ends of the thread attached from below, after surgery, bring them out of it in order to facilitate you in taking them out and removing them when the hernial sac drops and the wound puts. He mentioned the wound that appears in the intestine; and while if a tear appeared in the intestine and was small.
It might close in some people because I have seen a man who had been struck in the abdomen with a spear and the wound was on the right side of the stomach; I waited for the wound to become a fistula that excretes stool and wind, so I treated it on the assumption that I did not expect him to heal. So I kept caring for him until he healed and the place closed up; when I saw that the site had closed up, I feared for the patient that an accident might occur to him in his gut, so no bad accidents occurred with him at all, and he remained in the best state. It is true that he eats and drinks, and enjoys sexual intercourse, and enters the bathhouse and takes a shower; some people of experience say that when a tear appears in the intestine and it is small, it should be sewed up in this way.
This is that a group of ants with large heads are taken, then the wounds are gathered and a large ant's mouth is placed on the wound edges; when it bites down, its head will be stuck and will not come off, then another large ant's mouth is placed next to the first one.
And continue to do that with several ants as the size of the wound; then return it and stitch the wound, and those heads will remain stuck in the intestine until the intestine becomes inflamed and heals, and the intestine can also be sewn up with thin thread.
Which is to let out of the animal's belly that adheres to it after it enters a needle, which is that a thread end is taken from the gut and wound up; then a cotton thread is tied at its end and a thin twisted cotton thread is inserted into the needle. In it, the mesenteric loop is sutured to the intestine and then returned to the cavity; this type of suturing with mesentery and intestines is done out of hope and expectation.
If the laceration is large and wide, especially in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy or cure for it.
Chapter 86.
In treating colds and nasosinusitis.
Know that any wound or tumor that has persisted and aged, turning into an ulcer, and keeps discharging pus indefinitely, is called a "nidus" in general terms; it is called an "ulcer." The nidus is called nasosinusitis when referring to the sinus.
It is, in truth, a complicated, clumped, hard, white mass without pain; it has a cavity like that of a bird's feather.
That is why some of them have named it  "feathers"; and sometimes it is moist, constantly discharging pus; and sometimes the moisture stops for a while; and the moisture may be abundant or scarce; and it may be thick or thin.
I have mentioned in the division, when mentioning surgeries, that any ulcer that does not heal and does not grow flesh, has one of nine causes; one of them is either a lack of blood in the body, or its thinness, or because there is hard meat inside it and on its edges, which prevents good flesh from growing. Either it is a source of injury and dirt; either the ulcer itself is putrid, and the material that fills it is of bad quality in terms of composition; either the treatment does not agree with it; either there has been an outbreak of a plague of some kind in the town; or because of a special characteristic of the town.
Either it is a source of injury and dirt; either the ulcer itself is putrid, and the material that fills it is of bad quality in terms of composition; either the treatment does not agree with it; either there has been an outbreak of a plague of some kind in the town; or because of a special characteristic of the town. As presented in the city of Saragossa, where it is difficult for diseases to mature and injuries to heal due to natural causes; or because there is a bone or several bones inside; I have all of these causes, their signs, and treatments with drugs mentioned in the division.
It is imperative that I inform you of the treatment for naso-sinusitis and rhinitis which occurs through manual labor, know that nasosinusitis can occur in all body organs; some end in large vessels or nerves.
or to mesenteron or to intestine or to bladder or to a rib of the ribs or to a vertebra of the vertebral column or to a joint of the compound joints such as the hand and foot; some lead to the proximity of a chief organ and so on.
Therefore, any nasosinusitis that occurs in this way is an extremely difficult disease to heal and is a source of great effort and ignorance; if there are nasosinusitis that have not reached these locations I mentioned here I beg and hope for their treatment.
I wanted you to reach the awareness of this, and if there is a naso-sinusitis that passes in a straight line, examine it with a copper or iron probe; if the nasosinusitis is tortuous, examine it with a thin lead probe because lead softens its body.
It splits when it enters and bends towards tortuosity, if the naso-sinusitis has several mouths, you cannot determine them with a probe; therefore, inject one of its mouths with a drop of fluid, and the moisture that you inject will flow into the other mouths and run.
of it, and then continue the investigation in any direction that you can; to determine if there is a bone or nerve, or if the naso-sinusitis is empty or not, or if it is a single nostril with multiple mouths, and stand on all of this with your full strength of examination and pain.
and the like of signs and causes that lead to the swelling, if you have stood on all this as a truth; therefore, proceed with confidence to the treatment, which is that you examine, and if it is .
The naso-pharynx appears either near or in a healthy place far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places mentioned above. Thus, he opened the naso-pharynx as I have described previously and removed what was inside it of mucus and decayed flesh and excess flesh.
And what grows in his mouth of flesh or warts and the like, and he treats it until it heals, because the naso-pharynx is far from the pit and is on a straight line, it should be opened to the depth that you can and then all its decaying flesh is removed.
Then he uses the twisted silk in acute medications and inserts it into the pit of the naso-pharynx, ironing it several times until the acute medication eats all that remains in the pit of the naso-pharynx of decay.
Then he forces it with ointments that grow meat healthy until it heals, and if it does not heal with that, then you go on to describe him, and if the cause of the naso-pharynx is a bone and it is right for you, then open and cut it as I have told you, if there is no obstacle preventing you from doing so.
Sweat, nerve, or major organ as we have said, and if you find bone exposed and there is some decay and blackness in it, then you remove that decay with file until it goes, and then you treat it with what heals it until it heals, and if it does not heal and continues to discharge pus as before.
So know that you have not reached all the removal of decay, so you uncover everything on it again and scrutinize it carefully with your best effort, then force it, because if it heals, and if not, know that that decay is in a deep place far from decay, so uncover everything on it again.
And scrutinize your file with your best effort, because the decayed bone is a small bone that you can pull, then pull it with gentle clips that are suitable for this.
If there are many bones, then examine and draw them all together, leaving nothing behind; exert yourself to the utmost; if anything stands in your way from beneath the bones, and it is not dangerous to cut them, then cut those ligaments and meat; if there is any. And free the bones.
If it is not possible for you to remove the bones at one time, carry on the wound what dries it up and leave it for several days until what is around those bones of meat and ligaments腐  腐 erodes; and keep the wound from healing so that the wound which you have made in the course of your work does not heal.
Or put on it, if you are afraid of that, a cloth dipped in sulfur powder and oil, or a cloth dipped in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments; because when those ligaments are腐腐 erodes and the bones are 腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐腐
If it is a single large bone such as the leg or thigh and so on, and that which has腐れたその顔だけなら、それを徹底的に研磨してその黒色と腐敗を取り除く。それから傷を縫合する。しかし、腐敗が骨の内部に広がり、骨全体に影響を与えるような場合は、骨を削る必要がある。
If it is a single large bone such as the leg or thigh and so on, and that which has腐れたその顔だけなら、それを徹底的に研磨してその黒色と腐敗を取り除く。それから傷を縫合する。しかし、腐敗が骨の内部に広がり、骨全体に影響を与えるような場合は、骨を削る必要がある。
If it is a single large bone such as the leg or thigh and so on, and that which has腐れたその顔だけなら、それを徹底的に研磨してその黒色と腐敗を取り除く。それから傷を縫合する。しかし、腐敗が骨の内部に広がり、骨全体に影響を与えるような場合は、骨を削る必要がある。
If it is a single large bone such as the leg or thigh and so on, and that which has腐れたその顔だけなら、それを徹底的に研磨してその黒色と腐敗を取り除く。それから傷を縫合する。しかし、腐敗が骨の内部に広がり、骨全体に影響を与えるような場合は、骨を削る必要がある。
If it is a single large bone such as the leg or thigh and so on, and that which has腐れたその顔だけなら、それを徹底的に研磨してその黒色と腐敗を取り除く。それから傷を縫合する。しかし、腐敗が骨の内部に広がり、骨全体に影響を与えるような場合は、骨を削る必要がある。
If it is a single large bone such as the leg or thigh and so on, and that which has腐れたその顔だけなら、それを徹底的に研磨してその黒色と腐敗を取り除く。それから傷を縫合する。しかし、腐敗が骨の内部に広がり、骨全体に影響を与えるような場合は、骨を削る必要がある。
And I was able to reach the decayed bone, and I think that there is no other decay in the bone that you cut and spread, and from which you have excised it, then I made the wound tighten with healing drugs for a longer period, so it did not heal, then I returned and revealed the bone again above the first exposure.
And I found the decay connected to the bone, so I spread what appeared to me of that decay as well, then I threw it trying to heal it, but it did not heal or stick together, so I also exposed it, but I kept cutting the bone piece by piece and trying to heal it, but it doesn't heal until I cut about a handspan of the bone.
And I took out its marrow, then I healed it with drugs, so it healed quickly and recovered completely. But this repetition in his work and his split was due to the weakness of the patient and his lack of ability and my fear for him because he used to happen to him in all times from excessive vomiting until he fainted.
And it grew solid flesh in the place of the bone, and his condition improved in his body, and his strength receded, and he dealt with his affairs without causing him any harm at all, if a bone was broken in a certain place of the body.
So it should be spread in this way: take a bandage and tighten it on one side of the نات bone, then order someone to hold it up from above, and make another bandage of thicker wool than the first bandage.
Then tie it on the meat under the bone, and spread its end so that the meat is attracted down, and you expose the meat to the place where you want to spread it so that the saw doesn't hurt the meat, and you put a board or panel under the bone from below securely.
Because if you do that, the saw won't be prevented from cutting the decayed bone, and it should be spread above the place of decay a little so that there is no decay in the cavity of the bone, and it does not appear in its appearance for the sense, so you have to spread it again.
If the bone is decayed and not ناتيا but connects some of it to each other and the decay in the middle or in some of it so youكشف اللحم from all sides of him then put الخشبة from below then spread it from the first side where the decay.
When you are finished with the spread, spread it from the other side and let the spread be a little distance from the decay as we said, if the decay is in a joint cut the joint itself decayed and spread the bone where connected to the other side.
If the decay is in the connection of joints there is no way but to cut it, if the decay is in the knuckle of the hand or knuckle of the foot the matter in its treatment is very difficult but you should peel the decay wherever it appears and grind it and clean it in any way you can.
And with any way that is right for you when it does not oppose you عرق or nerve, and know that the choppers and saws for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones and their elevation and thinness and size and smallness and hardness and brittleness. So therefore you should prepare for each type of work a tool that fits that work.
And know that the works themselves may indicate the type of machine you need if you have a long experience and knowledge of the arts of this industry because the art of the industry is a witness to types of disease. may deduce for himself what matches from machines for each disease and I am painting for you in the last of this book several machines.
make her examples that you follow on, and measure it by measuring it with others if God wills, a picture of a saw:
a picture of another saw:
a picture of a small saw:
a picture of a large saw:
be the head of this abstract in the shape of a screw head cubed and its pattern is the pattern of the escallop, and it only fits to rub with joint heads if decayed or large wide bones, a picture of another smaller abstract:
Figure 1: A broad outline.
It is made of a curved iron blade and a wooden handle with a convex hollow.
Another pleasant, broad outline.
Another curved, pointed outline.
A small, needle-like, pointed outline.
Another small cross-sectional view.
And its tip is like an axe, used for various positions of breaking bones; a figure of a saw that is suitable for sawing what has been punctured from the bones:
Its sharp, triangular tip is made of Indian iron; thus should all that we have mentioned of jahrads and saws be made:
Chapter 87:
In cutting off limbs and spreading out the bones.
The limbs may become decayed either from a cause from outside or from within; if you treat this decay with remedies and therapies, and yet it does not improve, and you see the decay spreading in the member, unprevented by anything..
It should be cut at a level where the decay has reached, so that the patient survives and avoids a great disease which is greater than the loss of the member; and a sign of this is when the member becomes rotten until it seems as if fire had burned it..
Or becomes rotten after the blackness, until that decay spreads to what is next to the member and takes hold of the whole body; so you must quickly cut it off; likewise if the cause of the decay was from a sting of certain insects such as the sea scorpion or snakes or the sand snake and similar..
If the decay or sting is in the tip of a finger, cut off the finger; do not let the decay spread to the wrist, even if it takes hold there; and if it has entered into the forearm, cut it at the origin of the elbow..
And if he takes the arm, then cut the arm at the elbow joint itself; if it is permissible to destroy and you see him going towards the shoulder, do not cut the shoulder at all because in that there is the death of the patient. And use other treatment according to capacity.
And do the same with the leg if corruption takes place in the toe, then cut the toe at one of the phalanges; and if it takes place in the metatarsus, then cut the leg as a whole because it goes up to the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.
And if corruption has reached above the knee, there is no way but to leave him and turn the patient towards death, and the characteristic of cutting a limb or spreading it out is that you tie a bandage at the lower end of the place you want to cut, and another bandage above the joint.
And the server of the bandage extends to the lower end, and another server of the bandage extends above it, and you strip all the flesh between the two bandages with a wide scissors so that all the flesh is exposed, then cut or spread out, and it should be that you put cotton wool from all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the correct place, which would cause the patient additional pain and a hot swelling, and if blood flows during your work, then quickly stop it or carry some cutting powder to stop the blood, and then continue your treatment.
Then tie the injured member with a bandage that suits it and treat it until it heals, and I will tell you an example that happened to a man in his leg of this very condition that I describe to you, namely that there occurred in his leg blackness with burning resembling fire.
And that corruption was first in his finger, until the man took all of it, so he walked on his own when he saw the corruption pursuing him in the member with great pain and burning, then cut it at the joint, and it healed up.
And after a long time had passed, he saw the decay in his little finger of his right hand with his own eye, so he came to me and I crushed the decay with what I carried on my hand of medicines after I cleaned his body, but the decay did not retreat and he kept seeking in the other finger.
Until the decay took hold in his hand, and he called upon me to amputate his hand, but I refused, hoping that I could cure the decay with medications, and I was also afraid for him when it came to amputating his hand, as his strength had been on the decline, so when he became discouraged from me, he returned to his hometown.
So he informed me that he had been cured by amputating his entire hand, and I told this story to serve as a reminder of what can happen with such an illness and to provide a lesson for others who might face a similar situation.
Chapter 88.
In Treating the Abscess and the Method of Injecting Medications.
If a lump develops in a mucous membrane part and its duration extends until it collects for a long time, then it bursts or drains all the collected fluid, leaving the area empty as if it were a vessel.
And the skin that covers it is like a rag and has become thin, and it has not reached the bone or affected the nerve or the ligament; for this reason, it deserves to be called an abscess, unless its duration becomes long enough until it affects something of these organs.
It is then called a boil or a puss, and its treatment is to cut off all that skin, especially if it has become thin like a rag, and be sure that it does not adhere to the affected area due to decay.
If you wish for the skin to adhere, and it has not reached that degree of decay where the meat becomes thin, then treat it with the injection technique; that is, look at the abscess to see if it is large, and if the puss that drains from it has a bad smell, then inject it with Egyptian medication.
The which is a paste of alumen, oil and honey and calamine parts, mixed together in an vessel and cooked on the fire until it thickens and comes to the consistency of honey. Then take what you need from it, thin it with water and honey, and inject it into the wound. Secure the opening and leave the medicine inside for two hours.
Then press it out by squeezing, do this for several days until the wound is cleansed and the odor goes away. If you don't have this medicine, you can inject it with ash water. That is to say, take the ash of olive wood or oak wood and mix it with water.
Then strain it and inject it until you are sure that the wound has been washed, if not, there is a possibility of success for the Egyptian medicine and ash water. If neither of these is available, inject it with water and honey mixed with a little ground calamine.
Or inject it with honey and alcohol mixed, because honey has the ability to purify and wash, and alcohol adheres to the wound well, especially if it is a little tight and dry. If you do this several times and are sure that the infection has disappeared, then inject it with something that promotes the growth of flesh.
Like taking the marham al-nakli (a type of ointment) and diluting it with rose water and a tightening agent, or injecting it with a few drops of other medications and ointments that we have proven their properties in the article of ointments. If the opening of the wound is narrow and does not allow the syringe to enter, then
Broaden it a little with an iron or place a thread wisp in the Egyptian ointment or sirapon ointment so that it becomes wider. Also, if the mouth is wide, then join the lips together with a stitch and leave a space for the syringe to enter without additional.
And in the same way, if his mouth from which the pus flows is raised up towards the sky, then split it in the lowest place so that the pus flows down because when the pus is injected into a depression in the wound, it prevents the flesh from growing there.
If you cannot make an incision in the flap towards its bottom according to what you want, then fashion a way for the pus to flow out easily as it pleases and ensure that nothing is retained therein.
As for the external lubricants to be placed on the flap and how to place them upon it: Take one of the lubricants that is similar to what you want, spread it on a cotton pad, and let the pad cover the entire flap. Then cut an opening in the flap with the scissors, making it slightly larger than the mouth of the flap; spread another of the soft lubricants on another cotton pad and place it over the opening, keeping a slight distance from the mouth of the flap; do not remove the large pad until the pus has easily come out.
Several days, and the ones on the mouth of the flap are those that you remove at each time so that what has accumulated therein can flow out and you can know whether it is pus that is flowing or not, and its consistency - whether it is thick or thin -.
And also, examine the location of the flap itself: does the patient feel pain in it or not? Is there swelling or not? Is there an enlargement or not? If your treatment continued as such and you saw the material that comes out is small on the mouth of the flap.
be aware that the flap has adhered or is about to adhere, so then remove it the next day or on the third day; and when you opened the wound, replace the pad and renew the lubricant; if pus comes out after a long period of time, but it is thin, do not lose heart from its adhesion.
He will recover soon because some people's flesh grows slowly in their wounds, and others are the opposite; if pus comes out after many days that is not thick, then know that the flap has not adhered because the flapping does not lag.
And his illness increased, so he increased the drying of the medicines, and let the medicines be wet in their constitution and dry in their strength like the palm butter if it had been added to it an increase of qullqatar, and among the most effective things to treat is to take the palm butter.
And he rubs it with geranium and sprinkles on it the old wine of moderate consistency, then kneads it and uses it, and may do the same thing if the palm butter is not available. If you cook honey until it hardens and use it or take myrrh, and crush the two together and sprinkle it on the honey while it is on fire. Then you put it on a cloth and tie it to the trunk or you paint it with honey that has been cooked until it thickens, sprinkle on it medications, and place the cloth on top of it.
And may be used in the same way zorand the long and origin of the SASMOGIONIC and ground the krsenh and pomegranate seeds, single-used them or a group crushed, sifted and sprinkled on the honey that I described, if the trunk has not healed with this treatment, then know that corruption is in its腐敗.
And has affected the bones or the other hard nerves or ligaments, treating the nasour as described above.
Chapter 98.
In treating the Dakhso and the nail that has fallen out, cutting the extra finger, and splitting the fused fingers.
Dakhso is meat that grows under the thumb nail of the hand or foot, and may grow in all the fingers, if its condition is prolonged and neglected, it will swell and turn hot.
Or rotten and smelly, until it eats the root of the nail, and may destroy it all, or the decay reaches the bone until it has a purple color, and the tip of the finger is wide, and its color is like mad, so if you treat it with what we mentioned in the division, and your treatment is not successful.
It is necessary to cut all the excess that grows out from the nail with iron, and then burn the wound; for cauterization in this case is very beneficial. If, however, the bone is healthy and the nail also healthy...
And if the angle containing the nail has contracted the meat to the inside and made it sneeze and bleed, then it should put a thin blade under the angle of the nail that sneezes the meat and raises it up and cut that meat gently...
And put on what is left of the meat of the burning, corroding drugs until it all goes away, then treat it with ointments until it heals; but if corruption has affected the bone, then you should cut that bone and take it out because it will never heal as long as there is corrupt bone.
If you see corruption and decay seeking in the nail, cut it in one of the phalanges as mentioned above, then treat it until it heals; if the nail has been struck by a blow or injured and caused severe pain, then you should clean the wound first.
Then split the nail with a sharp scalpel, making a slanted cut from above to below, and be careful not to reach the meat under the nail, because you would cause great pain to the patient and be a reason for excess meat growth in that area; then treat the affected area with something that relieves pain.
And the extra finger that develops in some hands may be all meat, and sometimes there are bones in some of them, and sometimes there is a nail, and the growth of some of them is at the base of some joints.
Or it may grow in some of the phalanges, and those that grow in the joints of the fingers do not move, and what is made of meat only can be easily cut at its root; this is because you cut it when it is at its root with a wide scalpel.
And as for that which grows in the root of the joint, its treatment is painful and it should be avoided without cutting it; but as for that which grows in the finger at one of the joints, it should be cut first, by cutting its flesh roundly towards the bone, then the bone should be spread with one of those saws that are suitable for this.
And then treat it until it heals; and as for the union that exposes some of the fingers to each other, it often occurs and is what is born with him and is when a wound or fire burns and so on, so it should be split this union.
until the fingers return to their natural shape, then place between them a thread or a rope dipped in rose water so that it does not quickly heal and separate between them, or you can put between them a thin lead plate so that the site heals as it should.
And likewise, if the union of some fingers with the hand is exposed, split this union according to what is appropriate and suitable to restore the shape of the member.
Chapter ninety.
In cutting the soft tissue around the joint.
The veins are twisted, thick and filled with blood, they occur in most of the body's organs but are most common in the leg, especially in the calf and the achilles tendon, the carrier of the message, and the hammer and anvil bones, so it should be used first, the skin
then skin the owner of the leg, and as for its treatment with iron, it is done in two ways: one is to split and drain out the black blood, and the other is to sweat it out completely, but splitting it is done according to this feature that the leg is first peeled with hot water, yes.
until the thick blood dissolves, then tie the injured person's leg with a turban from above his hip to below his knee, and split the sweat in one place or in two places or in three wide splits.
Then, with your hand, drain the black blood from below the leg to above, and from above to below, until you remove as much of the blood as is sufficient or what the strength of the patient can bear. Then tie it up and order it to avoid foods that generate the black bile, and vomiting and bloodletting are repeated.
When the veins are filled, and it hurts the patient, and as for draining him, it is done in this way: if the patient's leg has a lot of hair, then his leg is shaven, and then he is bathed with hot water until his leg turns red and perspires or undergoes a strong exercise.
If a bath is not available to heat the member, then the skin is split lengthwise in front of the sweat, either at the knee or at the heel, and then the swaddles are opened and the sweat is stripped from all sides until it feels to the touch.
When it appears, you see it red and bloated; when it is removed from the skin, it looks like tendon, and then a tube is inserted inside until it rises and comes out of the skin; then it is hung on a blind hook made of smooth string, and then another split is made next to that split by three fingers.
Then the skin is stripped off the sweat so that it appears, then it is raised with a tube as you did and hung on a hook as you did first, and then another split is made or splits if necessary.
Then drain it and cut it at the heel in the last split, then pull it out from the second split, and then pull it to the split above it, and do this until you pull all of it from the splits, then cut it.
If it does not respond to pulling and draining, then insert a needle with a strong thread, double it, tie it, and pull it, and then insert a tube inside it and twist your hand until it comes out, and be careful so that it does not break.
And the sick person is affected by it, so if you remove all of it, put a pad on the site of the wounds that has been soaked in alcohol and oil or olive oil and treat it until it heals; if Dalia is stiff and has creases and twists in different directions.
And it is not straight as we have said, so you should split it when each of its creases and twists, then hang it on the hooks until you remove all of it, and be careful when you split it to cut the vein or wound it because it will be difficult for you to remove it, save your effort. ,
Image of the shattering that you split with Dalia:
Image of the blind hook:
Not have it a prop as the other hooks and is not sharp at the end so that it does not wound the vein and be stiff in bending because if it is thin, it cuts the vein with its thinness but it should be thick, as we have said,.
Chapter 99
In Shattering the civil vein.
This vein is born in the legs in hot countries such as Hijaz and Arab countries and in hot countries, few skin patches, and sometimes it may be born in other places of the body other than the legs due to a infection that occurs under the skin.
As it happens inside the living bodies, worms and the shell must be removed between the skin and the meat, and the sign of the beginning of the occurrence of this vein is that there is a severe inflammation in the leg then it swells up at the site and then the vein starts to come out from that place.
As if it were the root of a plant or an animal, so when its side appears, it should be wrapped on a small piece of lead that is its weight from a kilo to two kilos and tie it up and leave the lead hanging from the leg.
And whenever something comes out of it to the outside, wrap it in lead and tie it up; if it lasts a long time, cut some of it off and wrap the rest, and do not cut it from its root before all of it has come out, because if you cut it, it will shrink and enter into the flesh and cause swelling and putrefaction at the site and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it should be managed and pulled a little bit at a time until it comes out from the end of it, and there is nothing left of it in the body; and sometimes this sweat can come out in some people in length up to five cubits and ten.
And it has reached me that it has come out for a man of twenty cubits, so if it stops for you at some point in your treatment, insert a tube into its opening and tighten it with the body for a long time until it is emptied of all its substance; and try to putrefy the site with medicines for days.
Then treat the tumor with the treatment of tumors, and this sweat may have many branches, especially if it appears in the joint of the leg or in the leg itself, so that it has many mouths, and it comes out from each mouth a branch, as we have mentioned in the division and what has come before.
Chapter 92.
In the cut for the worm that develops under the skin, which is called cow disease.
This disease is called, in some of our countries, cow disease, because it often affects cattle; it is a small worm that develops between the skin and the meat, and it burrows into the body all over, going up and down.
You can notice its sensitivity to touch as it crawls from one organ to another until it breaks out where it broke out in the skin, forming and coming out of putrefaction of some mucous secretions as it also occurs in worms and snakes and pods in the abdomen.
And what is expected from its harm, that if it crawls in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open it and come out, thus ruining the eye; this often happens. Therefore, if you want to treat it and remove it, it is only at the time of its crawling and appearing on the sense.
It is necessary to tighten with a strap what is above and below it firmly then open on it and take it out, if it sank in the flesh and did not find it carry on the place of burning with fire until he burns her, and the most expected that she will corrupt the eye as we said.
If you see it has become in the head near the eye tighten under it on the forehead firmly then open on it and take it out, It is necessary for the patient to care for purifying his body with medicines that facilitate the pus and bad rotten matter, and be cautious from foods that generate pus.
Chapter 93.
In the opening on disease known as navar.
This disease, which is called in our country navar, is a pain that occurs in some organs and then moves from one organ to another; I have seen it on what I describe for you:
I was called to a woman patient in some boories; she exposed her arm and showed me a slight swelling in the vein of the arm; after staying for an hour, I saw that swelling moving with the arm up to the shoulder at the fastest possible speed, it is like mercury:
If it leaks from one place to another, the pain will disappear from that place and remain in the shoulder; then she sat for an hour, and it circulated all over her body until it became in the other arm, and then she told me that her body spins all over as she has seen.
I was surprised by the speed at which it moves from one organ to another; I had never seen this disease with my own eyes like this before; I have only seen groups of people experience pain that moves from one body part to another, and I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
And I did not estimate this except that the woman is from the boories, dried-up body, exposed veins; and this is what caused the sense of the moving wind; it is necessary that it does not appear in this way for the people of comfort and moist bodies, hidden veins.
If you wish to treat it and the owner feels pain, then he will appear to you as we have mentioned. So tie him up quickly above and below him and split him open until that accumulated wind comes out and make the wound.
If you do not see it with your eye, then treat it by shaking the body and what drives away the winds and softens them like hay of rotten meat, scabs of sheepskin, and similar remedies.
Chapter 94
In removing arrows.
The arrows may differ according to their types, and according to the locations they occur in the body. As for their difference according to their types, some are large and others small. Some are hollowed out and some are solid. And some have three edges and some have four edges.
And some have tongues, and some have shards. As for the members which she falls in, they are of two types: either they are main hollow members such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestine, bladder, and so on. When an arrow falls in any of these members and you see the signs of death which I will describe for you later, then it is inappropriate to remove that arrow from her because death will overtake its owner in most cases. And when those bad signs do not appear on you and the arrow does not hide in the depth of the member, then remove it and treat the wound. One of the signs of the brain if an arrow falls in it and pierces the bone and wounds the membrane covering the brain, then severe headache, dizziness, and fainting occur.
And when those bad signs do not appear on you and the arrow does not hide in the depth of the member, then remove it and treat the wound. One of the signs of the brain if an arrow falls in it and pierces the bone and wounds the membrane covering the brain, then severe headache, dizziness, and fainting occur. And redness in the eyes, redness on the tongue, convulsions and confusion of mind, muttering and sometimes loss of speech and voice, and water coming out from the site of the wound similar to lean meat porridge. It also comes out with it like a water flow.
If these signs appear to you, then stop treating the patient and removing the arrow if it has not yet come out, and as for the signs of the arrow when it falls on the heart and is near the left breast, and feels like it is stuck to something solid, not to something empty.
And perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to the pulse, and blood comes out black from the wound, followed by the cooling of the extremities and cold sweat, so know that death is inevitable, and the sign of the arrow when it wounds the lung is the emergence of foamy blood from the wound.
And the vessels that follow the neck swell and the color of the patient changes and he breathes loudly and asks to inhale cold air, if the arrow has hit the diaphragm in the chest, then it is near the small ribs and breathing is great with severe pain.
And he sighs and all the members of the shoulders move, and if the arrow has hit the liver, then severe pain follows, and blood comes out of the wound similar in color to the liver, and if it has hit the stomach, then perhaps food comes out of the wound that is not digested.
And his order is clear, and if the arrow has hit the abdomen and lodged in it, and something of feces comes out of the wound or pus or a ruptured intestine, there is no hope for his recovery or for removing the arrow, for if the arrow has hit the bladder and urine comes out.
And something comes out to the outside, and the pain on the patient becomes severe, so know that he is doomed, and as for the other members such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, forearm, back, chest, thigh, and legs, they may be affected to a greater or lesser extent.
When the arrow does not hit a vein or a nerve and the arrow is not poisoned, I will tell you about some of what I have seen regarding these arrows so that you can use it to heal yourself, namely that an arrow had struck a man in the pupil of his eye at the root of his nose.
So he took it out from the other side under the skin of his ear and healed, and I removed another arrow from a Jew who had hit him in the skin of his eye below the eyebrow, and the arrow had hidden, and I only managed to get its small end that attached to the stick.
And it was a large arrow of the composite arrows of hard steel, smooth, without ears; and he healed the Jew, and nothing bad happened to his eye; and I took out another arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic.
That is the one who has ears, so I split it between the temples; and he had sunk into his throat, so I softened it until I took it out, and the Christian was safe and sound, and another arrow that had pierced a man's stomach, and we thought he would die from it.
When he had stayed for about thirty days or so and there was no change in his condition, I split the arrow and plotted against it, and took it out, and he was healed; and a man's arrow pierced him in his back, and the wound became well established on him.
When it was after seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh; and I saw a woman whose arrow had pierced her stomach, and the wound had become established on her, and she did not find any harm in her natural actions.
And I saw another man whose arrow had pierced his face, and the wound had become established on him; and he did not find much pain in it; and there are many like that. And I took out an arrow for a leader of the sultan's army, who had an arrow in the middle of his nose, which leaned slightly to the right side.
And the arrow disappeared completely; so I was called to treat it after the arrow had happened for three days; and I found the arrow wound very narrow, so I opened it with a thin probe, and I did not feel it; and he felt a twinge and pain under his right ear.
I hoped that the twinge was from the arrow, so I bandaged the spot with a strong adhesive and ripening, hoping for me that the spot would swell and appear like the arrow sign; and the wound did not happen in it, indicating that the arrow had reached the spot.
If you bandage it and leave it for many days, there will be no incident, then seal the wound in that time and the patient will recover from its discharge for a period until he feels the arrow one day inside his nose, so he told me the news and I put on the wound the harsh sharp medicine for many days.
Until it opened and probed, and I felt the thin end of the arrow that adheres to the stick, then I increased in opening the wound with this harsh sharp medicine until it appeared to us with the appearance of the end of the arrow and went with me for a while about four months.
Then, when the wound widened and I was able to enter the hooks in it, I pulled it and moved it, but it did not respond to come out, so I continued to soothe it and turn it with some tools until I caught it one day with a set of tight hooks as its image comes at the end of the book.
And the doctors ruled that the cartilage of his nose could not be repaired, so I patched it up and the patient healed completely, with no harm at all, and I tell you about how to remove some arrows so that you can make a measure and evidence for what I did not mention.
Because the parts of this industry and its details cannot be understood by description or filled by a book, and the skilled craftsman measures little by little on what is present on what is missing and infers a new work and a new tool for unusual emergencies.
If I leave this industry, I say that the arrows do not come out of the organs in which they are embedded except by two types: either by pulling from the position in which it entered, or from the opposite side, from where it entered.
Either that the arrow is protruding in a soft spot and it is pulled out, or that it does not respond to come out from its time in which it entered, so you should leave it for days until it decays the flesh around it, which makes it easy to pull and remove, and likewise if it is embedded in a bone.
Do not force it to come out, so leave it also for days and return to pull and shake it every day because it will come out, if it does not come out after days then you should pierce around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a gentle drill until it expands the arrow and then draw it and take it out.
If the arrow that has entered into the bone of the head and has gone deep in one of the hollows of the brain and some of those symptoms that I have mentioned to you have appeared from the wound then hold back from pulling out the arrow and leave it until its matter is well healed after days.
Then occupy in pulling out the arrow, if it is very deep and does not respond to pulling then use the drill around the arrow as I have described to you and then treat the place until it heals, and as for the arrow that has hidden in a place of the body. And has gone out of sense, and then inspect it with the probe, if you feel it then pull it with some tools that are suitable for pulling it, and if you cannot reach it because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow and there is no bone or nerve or blood vessel.
Then split it until the wound opens and you can grasp the arrow, and if it has two ears grab them so that you can remove the hanging muscle from all sides by any means possible to you, and occupy if you cannot remove the muscle.
And if you try to pull out the arrow in any place it is then use your hand with pliers in all directions so that you remove it and be gentle as much as possible so that the arrow does not break and becomes difficult for you to pull out and take out, and if you cannot reach it from your time.
Leave it for days until the meat around it decays and then try again, because it will be easier at that time; if anything obstructs you, bleed and use what we mentioned above in its treatment, and preserve yourself from cutting a muscle, nerve or tendon, and use a trick.
In any way you can remove the arrow, and let that be done with care and diligence and fasten it as I have described to you; and it is necessary for you to use when you draw out the arrow that the patient be in the same position as he was when the arrow entered him, for that is more suitable.
If you cannot do that, then use what you can of shapes; and as for the arrow that comes out from the opposite direction either something has emerged from it to the outside or you can feel the edge of the arrow by touching the skin from above, and you see it coming out.
Then split it and let the split be of a size that can accommodate the hooks, then pull it out; because it will be easier to come out, and if it clings to bone, hold your hand on a turn so that the arrow affects the bone and expands for itself, and then pull it out.
Otherwise, leave it for a few days and then try again to get it out; if the arrow's shaft is stuck in it, push it in; because if the arrow's shaft has fallen and you want to use pushing, introduce the hollow instrument into its butt so that its cavity enters the hole, and then push it with it.
If the arrow is hollow, push it with an instrument that enters into its cavity; because the arrow will thus be easier to come out, and if the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary for you to curl up the meat which has become poisoned, all of it, if you can do that, and then treat it with what is suitable for that.
If the arrow has entered the chest or abdomen or bladder or rib, and it is close to what can be felt by a probe, and you can split it, split it and preserve yourself from cutting a muscle or nerve and take it out.
Then sew the wound if it needed stitching and then treat it until it heals, image of the hooks which attract with them the arrows:
Her ends are made like a bird's beak, half round and half flat, as if they were a cooling tool, for seizing the arrow or some other thing, leaving it not; and various sizes can be made of them, large and small and medium, all according to the size of the arrow and its width and narrowness.
Image of the hollow tube:
Image of the solid tube:
This is closed at one end like an iron bar, to make it easy to enter into the hollow arrow and push it.
Chapter 59.
On draining veins.
The veins which it is usual to drain in the body are thirty; of these six are in the head: the two pulsating veins behind the ears, known as the auricles, and the two arteries in the temporal region, apparent; and the two veins at the eye pits, known as the ocularies.
And the arteriovenous artery standing in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose, and the carotid arteries which are in the neck, and the two veins in the upper lip, and the two veins below the lips; these are known as the jugulars.
And the veins which drain in the arm and hand are five; one is called the cephalic, which is on the lateral side and named by the common people the arteriovenous blood vessel of the head, and Akhlah (or Akhl) , which is in the middle, and is composed of a branch from the basilic and a branch from the cephalic; and it is called by the common people the body vein.
And the basilic, which is placed in the lateral side and named also the antebrachial, and it is called by the common people the vein of the belly and the back of the arm; and this is that which sticks to the wrist and appears clearly above the thumb; and Al-Asilm.
The vein between the ring and middle fingers has two branches, and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one, which is below the adductory part of the knee from the lateral side, the second is the plantar and its place is at the heel from the medial side, and the third is the peroneal vein and its place is behind the calcaneal bone from the lateral side.
In the other leg, there are three veins like them: and the two veins behind the ears benefit from draining them for chronic colds, migraine, leprous sores, and chronic bad headaches; and their method of drainage is as I have described.
And he should shave the patient's head, and rub its back in the place of the two veins behind the ears with a rough cloth, rubbing it well; then the patient should choke his neck with a turban until the veins appear at the back of the ears in the lower part of the head; you should feel for their pulse under your finger, and wherever you feel a pulse, mark it with ink.
Then you should take a surgical knife, which is known as a neshl; then insert it under the vein in the skin until it reaches the bone; then raise your hand with the vein and skin up to above; and cut the vein along with the skin in one piece, the length of the piece being equal to two clenched fingers.
Or something like it, and send the amount of blood that you want; then tighten them with tourniquets and leave them to heal, having mentioned at the beginning of the book their cutting and kneading; and as for the two arteries in the temples, their benefit is to drain them for chronic migraine headaches, severe headache, permanent blindness, and acute leakage of fluid into the eyes.
And their method of draining them is as I have described; and the patient should choke his neck with a turban until the veins appear clearly by touch, and you can feel their pulse under your finger; and wherever you feel a pulse, mark it with ink; then raise the skin from above the vein to above the head with your index finger.
And the probe enters the canal from below and raises the sweat to above and cuts it as you did in the other two sweats, and you send blood according to your need, and then you remove the tourniquet of the sick person and put your finger on the sweat for an hour.
Then you put a cotton wool and a bandage on it, tighten the bandage from above, and leave it until it heals, although we have mentioned them and cut them and strung them in the beginning of the book, and as for the felling of the forehead sweat, its benefit is after the felling of the temporal sweat for chronic diseases of the face such as leishmaniasis, ulcers, and hemorrhagic blushing.
And the way to fell it as I describe it to you, the sick person's neck is choked with a turban until the sweat appears, then you take the tool that is called the axe. This is its picture: [Image of an axe].
You put the spike that is at the top of the axe on the same sweat, hit from above with a comb or something else in its direction, and leave the blood running according to what you want, then remove the tourniquet of the sick person and tighten it until he heals.
And he may open it with a wide probe, except that the probe should not be sharp at the end like all probes, but rather slightly thick in the end and fells it on the deviation because the bone is close so it might break in it if it was thin.
And the two sweats that are in the temples, their benefit is for eye diseases such as leishmaniasis, hemorrhagic blushing, and spittle, and facial diseases; and as for the way to fell them, it is that the sick person's neck is choked with a turban, then you fall them while standing on his head, and let the felling be towards the length a little with a small wide probe.
If the probe is not covered with meat, it may break if it is thin, then send blood according to your need and put a cotton wool on them and tighten them for one night, and as for the felling of the nose sweat, it is beneficial in the acute fever.
A severe headache and certain facial diseases, such as the red rash that appears on the nose, especially if it is chronic, and the nature of its cure is that the patient should stretch his neck, then grasp his nose with your left hand and take a thin, long scalpel.
And pierce it in the middle of the bridge of the nose, between the nostrils on an even line, because sweat does not appear to the sense there so blood appears from it immediately. It should be that your hand is sharp with the scalpel a little and send from blood your need then bind it for a night, because it solidifies quickly.
As for the ears, their benefit is to relieve the shortness of breath and the beginning of leishmaniasis and the black diseases that appear on the surface of the skin, such as the black vitiligo, the ringworm, the poor scabs, and the boils, and the nature of their cure is that the patient should stretch his neck with a ribbon under him, and the craftsman stands on the head of the patient.
The patient sits on a chair, then sweat appears to the length, so spread it wide a little, and then draw from the blood the moderate capacity or according to what you see of need to that, and then do the same with the other sweat, then loosen the ribbon.
And tighten the two sweats moderately so that the patient does not choke, and leave it until the next day, because it heals the wound. As for the arteries of the jaw, their benefit is to benefit from leishmaniasis in the mouth, faulty teeth, bad sores, and small splits in the lips and bad sores.
Which are in the nose and around it, and the nature of their cure is that the patient sits in front of you and tightens his neck with a turban, then turn his lips and look at the two sweats which you see one of them on the right side of the lip and the other on the left side, and distinguish them by their blackness.
And also that there are about them thin black veins, so cut them off with a cut that is severed, if it shaped itself upon you and you did not know what it was, then intend to cut the largest and most apparent of them, and thus do in the two veins in the lower lip.
And as for the two veins that are under the tongue, their benefit is that they are severed after the severing of the palatine pouch for the nerves that form in the throat from the disease of the uvula and the diseases of the mouth, and how to cut them off: that the patient lies down on his side next to the sun and raises his tongue and looks under the tongue from one side with a vein and from the other side with a vein, and their color is towards black.
And cut them off and preserve, do not insist in cutting them, because there are veins under them, so it may happen that blood flows from those veins, and as for the three veins that are severed in the elbow, it is customary among all people to sever them, and their severing is done on two faces.
Either by sewing with a reed surgical instrument that is wide or olive, up to the thinness, or by splitting with a skewer surgical instrument, and this is what its image looks like: The wide Reed surgical instrument image:.
It is wide as you see it to fit opening the hollow veins that are bulging, apparent, thick and containing thick, dark blood, and this is what the olive surgical instrument image looks like: The olive surgical instrument image:.
And this surgical instrument is narrower and thinner, it suits cutting the thin veins that contain blood that is pale yellow, and this is what the knife image looks like: The knife image:.
This knife, which suits splitting and is of various widths and thin types, according to the size of the veins, and can be used as a reference for others, and it is well-known among craftsmen.
And as for the basilic, which is one of the three veins, its benefit is that it draws blood from ailments that are under the throat and neck, up to the chest and abdomen, and the person who cuts should be careful when cutting, and he should hold a hairpin over him, because there are two veins, so if he made a mistake and increased the incision of the surgical instrument, he would cut that vein.
If blood flows, then it is necessary that he not remove it with a needle for suture, but rather that he removes it with a split of the knot. If the bazelika does not appear clearly, then one should avoid it and modify to another or request some of its branches.
Or you should wound the place with a strip of the arm, because it is clear and split with the needle as we said. If you want to sew it with its own eye, before tightening the arm, you should probe the place until you recognize the pulse, then you should mark it with ink.
Then tie the arm and split the vein with a split of the knot as we said, and be careful that the blow is away from the site of the artery. And when you see, when you tighten the bandage, blowing in the place where you marked with ink, then this blowing is the expansion of the artery, so leave it.
If you see the blood when you bleed, it rises like urine, and if the blood is thin and red, then know that it is arterial blood. So, rush to put your finger on it for a long time, and then remove your finger, and if the blood stops, then tighten the arm.
And leave it, and warn the patient from neglecting it, and let it be on a neck, and do not let him move it for a while until it heals, if the blood does not stop and confuses you and there is no medicine with you in your time, then cut the artery if it appears to you.
Or take a shell of fench and split it, and take half and tighten it on the site of the vein with bonds and splints until another day, if the blood stops, otherwise treat it as mentioned above by placing the roots that stop bleeding, and cutting his blood is not difficult in most cases.
For the small wound, tighten the bandage on the arm, so know it. And as for the thicker vein, sewing it has the advantage of drawing blood from the top of the head and the bottom of the body because it is composed of a branch of bazelika and a branch of Kefal as we said.
It is necessary that the surgeon be on a branch of his own sex; for under him there is a nerve, and if it increases in the stitch of the needle and hits the nerve, there will be numbness that cannot be seen, and perhaps never heal at all; and this nerve is often felt.
If it is hidden in some people and is thin and cannot be seen, it is necessary that you make your bloodletting a cut with the needle and avoid the nerve as much as possible; if the vein is between two nerves, split the vein lengthwise; as for the veiny [head], the benefit of bloodletting from him is that he draws the blood from the head.
It is beneficial for eye diseases and it is necessary in this vein especially if you want to let him bleed; let him bleed with the olive needle or with the broad rosemary needle because it is safer for all veins because there is no artery or nerve under it.
However, it is necessary for you when bleeding to avoid the needle in the head of the muscle only and ask for the soft place, and it does not hurt him if he did not hit with the first shot; he may swell in some people if he did not bleed in the first shot.
But it does not hurt him that swelling at all, and as for the method of bleeding and its effects and what should be brought forward in its repair; first, you must know that bleeding is either used to preserve health only.
or that it is used in diseases and which is used to preserve health and maintain it and guard against the occurrence of diseases, that bleeding is in one of the three veins in the elbow, namely Qayfal, Akhal and Balsyq, and that bleeding is in the first spring when the signs of fullness appear.
and the bleeding is on Sunday or Thursday after it has passed three hours for the day, and as for the bleeding that is used in diseases, there is no limited time but whenever need and necessity call for it from night or day.
And at every hour and at every time, it is not appropriate for boys to bleed until they are fourteen years old, nor should the elderly who have passed sixty be bled, so if anyone intends to bleed for any reason.
It is necessary that he purifies his intestines before bleeding with a soft syringe if there is a lot of stagnant gas trapped in them so as not to flow into the veins from the intestine putrid foul waste that harms the main organs, and does not bleed the overheated or drunk or drunk until they are gone.
And he should be careful not to bleed after a fainting fit, vomiting, alternation of the sexes, excessive sexual intercourse, fatigue, exercise, late nights, fasting, and anything that strengthens physical or psychological power, then examine to thin the humours before that if the blood is thick.
By food, drinks and medicines if he can, then enters the bath or performs some light exercise so that his blood thins out and his bleeding takes place in the early part of the day as we have said, and strives to free his chest that day from all psychical negative influences.
such as stresses, anger, fear, and all physical influences such as excessive fatigue, sexual intercourse, etc., and prepare his company with types of incense, perfumes, entertainment, and whatnot, according to each person's ability.
Then the bleeder sits on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the bleeder sits, then he rubs his arm with the bleeder's hand twice or three times, and tightens the tourniquet, folding it two or three times, and let the tension be moderate.
Because if the tension is not moderate, either by excessive tightening and it stops blood flow, or if it relaxes too much, it also stops blood flow, then after tightening, one should rub the bleeder' hands with each other.
Until the veins swell and can be felt, then the surgeon soaks a blade in old oil, especially, and places his left index finger on the same vein below the place he wants to cut it slightly so that the vein does not hit the cut. Because some veins you will find are like a wound that is injured when cut, and some of them are full of air, so when the blade is placed on them, it will go down under the blade, and will deceive the one who cuts it, and the blade does not open the vein, if it opens it, then its opening is narrow.
Therefore, the surgeon should be firm and patient in all these things, then he lowers the blade, if the vein opened from its first time, and otherwise, he will repeat it again a little below that place or above it with haste if that place did not swell.
If it swelled or ached, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, because it might cause a hot wound, and he will not enter the bath, then he will repeat the cut if he wants, because opening the blade with a small opening and the blood flows slowly.
And I am afraid that the amount of blood that you want will not come out, so prepare the blade in the same hole, gently and straight, and increase the opening a little, and do this with haste before the place swells, because in many people, the place may swell when the small opening is made.
If he sees that it has swollen, do not go near it because it will not benefit you, put something of aged oil on it, because it facilites the flow of blood and is better in this place than oil itself or any other oils, and likewise.
So use aged oil in all your cuts on the veins when the blood does not flow easily, and it may be that taking Farouk medicine or Shaqzna'iya will do that, because when one of them is put on the place, the blood will become thinner and firmer if it was thick.
If a lump develops in the place of the leeching, it often happens, especially for those who have leached only once or whose vein was small; then he should quickly put a sponge soaked in warm water and salt on the lump and tie it for an hour, as it will dissolve.
It should be done after the blood has completely come out from the very vein or another vein, for if it stays in the place for a few days, a little black or green will remain, which does not hurt; if you like, carry a little ground pepper and dissolved turpentine on it.
Or something like the juice of worts, and often a lump and swelling happens after leeching the basilic; then put your hand on it; if he crunched when you pressed him, then it is bad blood, so be careful not to put anything on it.
It may bleed from a vein, but bind it with one that contracts to stiffen the place, then treat it with all treatment until it heals, and it should be taken out of blood according to its strength, and what appears of the color prevails in the blood.
If the blood is black, let it out until it becomes red, and if you see it thick, send it out until it thins out, and if it is sharp, get rid of its sharpness; whoever is strong and needs to remove blood all at once.
That he broadens the vein of leeching, and the blade is wide, and if he is weak, then the opposite is true; it should be removed in sessions, and the hole should be narrow, and what is most used for leeching the veins is that it is heated and turned, and not stitched.
This kind of leeching is free from bleeding and cutting a nerve, which is more beneficial than leeching by width and length; whoever is accustomed to it at leeching should eat something before leeching, a soaked piece of bread in raspberry water or skirrah.
If he is constipated and draws out blood in three or four times, then let him take bread soaked in wine of the myrrh or in honey perfumed with pomegranates or in a perfumed drink with basil.
If he becomes faint during the bloodletting and it is because a lot of blood has come out, then one should give him water mixed with meat soup and perfumed drink that softens the chest and use all that we mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting.
who is prone to vomiting, and as for the one who wants to refresh his arm and restart his blood circulation after a bleeding session, if he has had a lot of vomiting and his strength is weak, then it is necessary that those who have bled should restart their blood circulation little by little according to their strength on successive days.
As for those who want to refresh their arm and restart their blood circulation after a bleeding session, if their body is strong, they should do so in seven or nine hours from their first bleeding, and as for the one who wants to draw the blood out of his body into the opposite direction of what it has tilted, then he should give it time on the second or third day.
As for those in whom there is a lot of blood in their bodies, which has become hot and fierce and caused fever, then one should draw out the blood in one go, drawing out as much as possible, and widening the cut until fainting occurs after checking all the conditions of bloodletting. And that you place your hand on his pulse when the blood is flowing to prevent death from occurring where there is fainting, for it often happens like this if the phlebotomist is ignorant and neglects, and it is not allowed if you want to refresh your arm and restart your blood circulation after a bleeding session.
And the mouth of the sweat has closed and it is difficult to draw blood, then you should pierce it with force or twist it strongly, for that is very disgusting, but you should either leave it until it bleeds again, or you should move the scalpel blade away from what has hardened of the blood in the sweat's mouth.
If there is any salt in the water that has dissolved, or if he carries on him some of the antidote for the leech [biting an insect], or some of the drugs called Shakhiznay and stabs it gently until blood comes out, if the sweat [a fever] has swollen, leave it.
And do not touch him until the swelling subsides, for if necessity requires that blood be let again, and there is no choice but to let it, then either let it flow from the same place or from another vein in the other arm or from another sweat.
And as for the method of checking the vein of the arm, he should put his hand in hot water until it turns red and the sweat appears clearly, then tie a knot above it slightly tight.
Then let the sweat run slightly, not wide or long; and make the opening large and let his hand be placed in the vessel with water that has turned red, and let the blood flow in the water.
until it meets your need, for if it is in summer, you may do without putting the hand again in hot water, and most of what makes the blood flow in the water is during winter, and checking this sweat is safer than all the veins. Because there is no blood vessel or nerve under it, and as for checking the Asalim vein from the right hand, it is beneficial in treating liver diseases; and its method is to tie the wrist with a bandage or with your hand after putting it in hot water until it swells.
Because there is no blood vessel or nerve under it, and as for checking the Asalim vein from the right hand, it is beneficial in treating liver diseases; and its method is to tie the wrist with a bandage or with your hand after putting it in hot water until it swells. And it will be very clear to the sense, and then let him bleed a little on a slight twist; and if he cuts it all, there is no harm in it, and take care not to put your hand in the probe, for under it are the nerves of the fingers, and the place is bare of flesh, and then return the hand to hot water.
And let him run blood; for if you do not put it back in hot water, the blood will freeze in his mouth and he will be prevented from running; but if you take out of the blood what is needed, put on the sweat ointment and salt so that it does not quickly clot.
And thus you should also do with every narrow branch; as for benefit, it is beneficial for the diseases of the spleen, and so you should also do with what is slaughtered with the left hand, for it is beneficial for the splenitis; and likewise you should do with what is slaughtered in the second way, both in terms of benefit. As for the draining of the saffan, its benefit is for the diseases that are at the bottom of the body, such as the diseases of the wombs.
And the retention of menses, and diseases of the kidneys, and chronic sores of the hips and legs, and similar diseases; and the method of draining it: let his foot enter the hot water, and carry upon it the massage until the veins drain out, then tighten above the ankle with the tourniquet and sweat at its place at the heel, visible towards the thumb.
And it branches out from it in front of the man; then drain it in the widest branch of it or at the heel where it meets, which is better and safer; for if you drain him in the face of the man, then be careful of the nerves that are under his face.
And make your drain for him by misdirection as if you were about to amputate it, and the blade should be a sharp one; and if blood does not come out at the first attempt, let his foot run in hot water and leave the blood to run in it until it is emptied; and if the cadge misses the sweat at the first attempt.
And let him drain a little above, for the place is safe and there is no danger if you are careful of the nerve as we said; and likewise do with the saffan of the other leg, and as for the sweat of the woman, its place is as we said at the heel from the inner side.
The benefit of the bandage for hip pain if it is due to hot blood, and the method of making the bandage: Bring the patient into the bath, and hurry and tighten his leg from the hip to above the heel with four fingers using a thin long headscarf. It only appears in this way.
If it appears, make the bandage on any case, you stay or make a deviation, which is better, or cut off his leg or split him because his place is healthy. It is in most people very light, so if you don't find it.
And did not appear at all to the sense, bandage some of its branches, which appear in the back of the foot towards the thumb and the middle finger, and preserve from the nerves, and send the amount of blood that you want.
Then loosen the tension and put a cloth on the place of bleeding, and tighten the place, for he will recover quickly soon.
Chapter 66
In bloodletting and the method of using it.
The cupping cups may be from the horns and from wood and copper and glass, and bloodletting is done in two ways: with a condition and drawing blood, and without a condition.
And this bloodletting, which is without a condition, are two faces.
And the cupping of the back and the two sides of the neck all, cupping of the chin is under the lower jaw from the mouth, and cupping of the shoulders, and cupping of the pelvis on the root of the loin, and cupping of the upper arms, and cupping of the legs, and cupping of the shinbones.
And bloodletting does not draw blood from the small veins that are spread in the flesh, and for this reason strength does not drop by bloodletting, nor should bloodletting be used with fire or without fire in one of the diseases which is filled up until the body is emptied completely.
If the need arises for cupping therapy due to a disease or from habit, we use it at any time during the first month and the last, and in the middle, and at any time.
Since some people, when their blood is abundant to the point that they need to release it through cupping therapy, will find a weight on their head and headaches. Others will find redness and swelling in their face, head, and neck. Some will experience itching in their face and buttocks, as well as blurring and inflammation in their eyes. And some will scratch at the site of their ear.
Some will find themselves laughing more often, while others will taste blood in their mouths and notice bleeding from their teeth. Some will have increased sleepiness, while others will see blood, redness, swelling, and wounds in their dreams, along with other similar visions. So we should pay attention to any of these signs.
Especially in the middle third of the month, we should perform cupping therapy after two or three hours have passed since daytime. As for the benefits of cupping therapy on the neck, it relieves head weight and contributes to alleviating eye issues.
However, this cupping therapy should be performed after the body has fully digested its food. Such cupping therapy can replace head bleeding, and one must beware of using it on those with a cold brain or those who recently suffered from an illness, as it could cause significant harm.
Therefore, it shouldn't be used on the elderly or those with cold-related issues in their heads, nor should it be used by those who are accustomed to using it, as it may lead to memory loss.
Therefore, the cupper should lower their hand with the cups slightly downward to prevent memory loss, and cupping therapy on the back can replace bleeding from the jugular vein or bleeding from the palatine tonsils.
It is beneficial for asthma, shortness of breath, cough, feeling of fullness, and raising the back slightly as it doesn't cause weakness in the heart and stomach if performed upward.
And as for cupping the temples, it is beneficial for the headaches, red eyes, headache, and pain in the roots of the teeth. It is a substitute for bleed-out of the basilic vein, and you should order the cupper not to deepen his hand by condition so that he does not cut a vein and cause bleeding.
And as for cupping under the chin, it is beneficial for the ulcers in the mouth and the decay of the gums and other diseases that are in the mouth. It can stand in for bleed-out of the jugular veins that are in the lips. As for cupping the shoulders, it is beneficial for the palpitations that occur from fullness and heat.
And as for cupping the inner arms, it is beneficial for that which benefits bleed-out of the three veins: the basilic, the acal and the ciqual. Because it draws blood from all those thin veins in the flesh, and draws those thin veins from other thicker veins until it reaches the thick veins.
You should order the cupper not to deepen in the condition because the site is naked of flesh and there are nerves and veins underneath. And as for the single cup that is placed on the coccyx, it is beneficial for hemorrhoids of the rectum and wounds of the lower body parts..
You should order the cupper to make the cup large, and it should be made of copper because the site needs a strong suction, and a glass cup might break and require a lot of conditions. As for the cups of the legs, they decrease swelling significantly..
Because it draws blood from all the body, and is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder. It also helps bring on menstruation and benefits from drawing blood from the soles of the feet. Cupping the Achilles tendons is beneficial, but it weakens the body greatly, and fainting occurs in most people. The benefit of cupping the Achilles tendons is similar to that of cupping the legs..
The way to apply the poultice is to first put the poultice cup empty and suck it moderately without extending the time of application but quickly place and remove it to accept the pus uniformly and continue doing so repeatedly and continuously until you see the site turn red and open.
When you see the blood appear, then you should make an incision and repeat sucking slowly and then examine the condition of the body, and whoever among people is cheap meat, loose flesh, the skin should be opened with one incision only so that the site does not get infected.
And order the herbalists to widen the incision and make it slightly deeper and adjust the sucking gently and smoothly, and if there is a thick blood, then you should make two incisions, while in the first one open a way for the leech blood and its water, and in the second one to get rid of the thick blood.
If the blood is very murky, then we will make one incision to achieve our goal, and if we want to remove a little blood, we are content with one incision, but if we want to remove a lot of blood, we will make more incisions, and if we estimate that the blood is thick.
It is appropriate to make an incision that reaches the depth of the skin only, and it is not appropriate to use ointments when applying the poultice, nor what the surgeon should avoid, while whoever has a tough, hard skin, narrow pores.
It is appropriate to apply ointments that soften, soothe, and dissolve the area around the incisions, while in summer times, use olive oil or violet oil or almond oil or sweet poppy seed oil.
If it is winter, use oil of marjoram or oil of wild mustard or oil of poppy or violet, and if the wound is thick and cold, use oil of wormwood or oil of pigeon milk or oil of fig tree or oil of calamus.
If the person being bled has large pores, then the meat should be tightened and the fat should be prevented from flowing. Those who bleed should wash their cups after bleeding with rose water or cold water or water from wolfberries or water from squash or water from mallow and so on. But as for those whose blood is very moist.
In the case of someone with large pores, wash their cups with vinegar or water from ash and sumac and so on. But as for those whose blood is very sticky, wash their cups with old wine or water from marjoram or stewed mustard or chamomile and so on. It is also necessary to be careful with bloodletting in the bathhouse and after it.
It is also necessary to use something after leaving the bathhouse within an hour or two, and no one should sleep after bleeding, what should be prepared by the person who is going to bleed before and after bleeding.
You must first look: if the person who is going to bleed or the person who is going to be bled has a yellow complexion and blood is generally sharp and inflammatory, then he should take cooling agents such as watermelon, dandelion with vinegar, lettuce, altheae, and glib and make his diet chicken and lamb meat, and dried fish, and curd-rich foods.
And if the person's disposition is cold, he should drink honey and manna or honey and altheae seeds, and fragrant wine of moderate quality, and be ordered to eat less food, and make his diet chicken, pigeon, and sparrows, and dried fish, and curd-rich foods. It is also necessary that the drink on the day of bleeding and bloodletting be more than the food.
And it may be necessary to drink, at times, for some people from the cure of al-Faroq or musk medicine or shilthah before bleeding and bloodletting, or after them, to strengthen the main organs and thin the blood, and it is not appropriate to drink them for those who are hot.
And as for the plasters that are placed without condition, these are the plasters that are placed on the liver and spleen and breasts and on the abdomen and navel and the place of the kidneys and the right hip because these organs do not bear condition upon them, and they are intended either to attract blood from an organ to another.
For example, we place the plasters on the breasts in the case of bleeding, or we use them to clear the organ of a cold breeze that has lodged in the organ; as for placing the plasters on the abdomen and navel, they cause the organ to loosen and heat up and relieve the pain by clearing it of the breeze.
And the plasters may be placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stone, with a strong draw, it might open the blockage or remove the stone from its place; and so too when placed on the liver and spleen if there is wind that disrupts them, these plasters can be used empty of the leech only.
And they can be used with fire, and they can be used filled with warm water, in the case of foot pain; for example, let us fill the plaster with hot water alone or with water that has been cooked with some herbs that are suitable for this purpose.
Then it is filled and placed on the site, held down and removed and redone as needed; this is a picture of the plaster that is used with fire:
It has the capacity of two fingers opened up, as we have described, and its depth is half a palm; it has a small hole in one side, about the size of a needle, made of Chinese copper or yellow copper, thick-walled.
It is smooth and flat so as not to hurt the organ when it is placed on it, and there is a bar of copper or iron in the middle, where the fire is placed, and this plaster can be made larger or smaller according to the diseases.
And the age at which it is used, so that the grinders of children and the lean are not the grinders of men and the limp bodies, and as for the method of placing this grinder on fire over the organ, it is to take a strand of cotton thread from a tight cloth or a small candle of wax and place it on the middle of the erect penis that is in the middle of the grinder.
So that the fire ascends to above towards the bottom of the grinder so as not to burn the body of the sick person, and then it is placed on the organ and the finger on the hole we have mentioned until we grab the grinder, so we do not need to remove the finger.
And the steam comes out on that hole and the grinder remains in place, then you bring the strand of cotton thread to the fire and repeat it if you need to do so, as for the grinder used in disease with water there is no erect penis or hole.
And it is not used except that it is filled with water and placed on the organ only, and this is its image: [Image of a grinder]
and this grinder, the more it is large so that it contains a lot of water, the better, and
Chapter 79
in hanging the ligature.
The ligature is used in most cases in organs that cannot accommodate grinders due to their small size, such as the lip and gum, or because the organ is bare of meat, such as the finger and nose, etc.
and the method of using it is to intend from the ligature that is in fresh pure water free of impurities then leave it for a day and night in the fresh water until it becomes hungry, and nothing remains in its cavity. Then the body is emptied first by bleeding or cupping, then the member is wiped clean.
until it turns red, then place it on it, and if it is full, it falls down, and if possible, suck the site with the grinder, that is more beneficial in benefit, and otherwise wash the site with vinegar then with plenty of water and massage and squeeze it, and if blood flowed after the fall of the ligature, it was a leak, so a piece of cotton cloth was soaked in cold water.
Place it above until the discharge stops, and if there is a lot of blood, add powdered alkaline or something similar to constrict it until the blood stops flowing, or place crushed half-pumice on the affected area.
Leave it to stick to the area, and the blood will stop flowing, and if it is necessary to re-apply the paste, do not apply that paste if another can be used, because if the paste does not stick, rub the area with fresh blood.
Or insert an needle into the area until some blood comes out, and then put it on, because if she feels something of the blood, she will stick to the place, and if you want it to fall, sprinkle it with something of tar or salt or ash, because it will fall on the place.
The third door.
In surgery.
This is also a door from and what needs it in the craft of medicine, which is to repair the fracture and the broken jaw bones.
Know, my sons, that some people may claim that this door is a secret for doctors and laypeople, and those who have never studied or read a letter from the ancient scholars about it.
This is why this art has been lost in our country, and I have never found anything good about it. And I only benefited from it because of the long reading of the books of the ancients and my effort to understand them until I managed to extract the knowledge from them, and then I stuck to experimentation and practice for all my life.
And I have drawn for you from it everything that my knowledge extends to in this door. And my experience has passed on it after I have brought it close to you and cleared it of the people's words, and I have shortened it as much as possible, and made it clear in its explanation, and I have illustrated for you many pictures from the tools used in it.
When it comes to making things clear, as I did in the two preceding chapters, there is no power except by Allah, the Great, the Mighty.
Chapter 1.
In the first chapter, we will discuss general principles and outlines related to fracture and dislocation before moving on to specific members one by one. At the outset of this book, it is necessary to mention certain phrases and passages that are essential for understanding the following discussions. Firstly, you must understand her and grasp her essence, both you and those who are earnest in learning this noble art.
When a person experiences a fracture, dislocation, or injury resulting in bloodshed, you should first attend to the following: either hasten to stop the bleeding or to make it flow, or do both. If there is no obstacle, such as a lack of strength or if the injured person is a child or an elderly person who is bedridden, or if the time is extremely hot or very cold, then:
Then, for a period of time, he should restrict his diet to cool legumes and bird meat, avoiding dairy products and meaty foods that fill the stomach and cause it to distend with blood. This should be done to prevent swelling and to ensure that no more fluid will drain into the injured area.
When the bone begins to heal, the patient should return to his regular diet, which should consist of thick, nutritious, and solid foods that are easy to digest, such as porridge, rice, and the meat from heads and carcases of cattle. And if it is a broken bone in a mature man or an elderly person, then know that these bones will never reconnect and heal to their original state. However, with the right treatment and care, they can heal correctly and stably.
Due to their tendeness and lack of stiffness, the bones of children can sometimes heal and unite in a way that is similar to how they were originally connected. However, this is not the case for mature bones, which can become stiff and difficult to heal properly. Instead, nature fills the broken bone with a substance that acts like glue, binding and holding it together until it heals.
And he binds some of them to some so that it comes in the ultimate strength and tightness as it was at first so as not to hinder anything from his actions, .
For this reason it was necessary that the food of the patient be the foods in which there is strength, viscosities and thickness as we have said, and know that the fracture may differ according to the difference of the organs because the fracture of the tibia is contrary to the fracture of the skull and the fracture of the chest is contrary to the fracture of the back.
And so do all the organs, each one is contrary to the other, and we will come to the explanation of each type of fracture in its own section in detail without the other, and the type of fracture of the bone may also differ in itself.
Because it may be that his fracture is bending without causing him fractures, and may be a fracture along the length of the bone and has fractures, fragments and residuals, curating and non-curating, and the fracture is with a wound and tearing of the skin, and the fracture is a slight crack.
And each type has a special trick in repairing it as will be mentioned in detail in its section, and what is used to recognize the fracture of the bone is its curvature, and the feeling of confusion and the sound of scratching when you touch it with your hand.
So when there is no apparent curvature in the position, no scratching or feeling at the patient's bone when you touch it with disturbance and the patient does not feel much pain, then it is not a fracture but can be a soft tissue bruise or a slight crack that does not require movement by stretching and poking.
But carry upon it the medications that will be mentioned later when it matches the position and then tie it gently, and know that the bone is broken into two parts without causing him fractures except that all parts have been removed from his owner.
So you should hurry to correct and straighten it before it happens hot swelling, because if it happened hot swelling, then leave it for a few days until the swelling subsides, and then straighten it with any face that you can, by means of care and skill.
And know that repairing and leveling it is easier than the bone which has occurred in it shards, then bind to what will come, if the bone has shards, there must be extended the broken member from both sides hand was or a man.
Either with your hands if the member is small, or with two strings and either with the string and hand, and let you put the member on a place level on its natural shape until when extended part of the broken bones then cut off those excesses in their places with all means you can of cunning and tenderness.
And strive hard that you do not cause the patient pain or discomfort by your action, and strive hard that you join one of the bones with its companion on the best shape, and it should be in that time that you touch them and feel them with your hand, if you saw there anything مخالف أصلحته وسوّيته with all your power.
And be careful of the strong stretching and hard poking as is often done by many fools, and they often update their action in this way and fire a hot or time in the member as you have seen that from their act many times.
Then force after leveling and finishing and tightening that member rest and quiet, and warn the patient to move it in time of his wakefulness and sleep and when he turns and disturbs and all his movements end and strive that the member is set up so that he is safe from pain with him.
And that because he will feel in the case of setting up the member pain or pain that he moves it to a non-set to the one which does not feel with him, and strives with that his setting is level straight.
So that does not happen in the member of distortion when it is healed, and as for the way to tighten the broken member is on what I describe you, know that the broken members differ in their size, and they are small like the arm, finger, forearm, etc..
The rolls of the wrappings should be flat and soft, and whatever is tough like the thigh, back, and chest, the rolls should be broad and hard, because the broad ligature requires a large organ and binds it from all sides with equal tension without allowing any deviation.
Then you begin to carry the paint after you have finished leveling it. In a soft chisel on the break spot, then you begin to wrap the bandage on the same break spot three or four times depending on what the organ deserves, and you tighten your hand slightly with the bandage, then you go to the upper side of the break spot.
With less tension than you apply to the broken spot, then you separate a little from the break spot and ease the tension slightly until you get a good piece from the correct spot, then you take another bandage and wrap it on the broken spot too.
Rolls, then go to the bottom side of the break and let your action in the tension and ease of wrapping as mentioned in wrapping the first upper one. Then put between the rolls a soft chisel or cloth to correct any deviation in the break.
If there is any deviation, and otherwise, do not put anything in it; then wrap another bandage on top of it, then level the roll with the hard splints from your watch if there is no swelling or hot swelling in the organ.
If there is swelling or hot swelling, carry on him what calms that swelling and gets rid of the gas and leave it for a few days, then tighten the bandage when you are ready, the splints be half of the cane broad chisels prepared wisely or be splints made from cypress wood.
Which is made of cypress, or palm leaves, or acacia, and whatever is available from that, and let the size of each splint be on this image and shape in particular.
Except that the cast placed on the fracture itself should be thicker and wider a little than other casts, and as for the length of the cast, it shall be made according to what is suitable for the broken member in its size and smallness, the image of the cast:.
Then bind the casts with another bandage according to your first tight grip then tie it with the tightly woven threads according to what we have mentioned about the grip, which is that your grip on the site of the fracture should be tighter. And the more you move away from the fracture, the less the grip.
The threads should be medium in thickness and softness, and they should be from wet cotton cloth especially because if the threads are thick like what I have seen from the foolish people making their threads from rolled cotton strips is a great mistake.
Because the grip with it is outside the balance and also the very thin threads do not suffice because you do not reach with it what you want to reach, and it should not be less than a finger between the cast and the cast.
If the patient feels pain in the ends of the casts after making the right grip then make under it from the soft leather or fluffy wool so that nothing hurts him from that, and as for if the fracture was accompanied by a wound and there was a breach in the skin then we will come to mention it separately.
And know that not every broken member needs to be placed in casts from the first day because if the member is large, it should not be placed with casts until after five days or seven or more on according to your security from the occurrence of the hot swelling.
This is the characteristic of the bandages that the first ones were put on to break the fracture, the jaw and the wound, a general short bandage that breaks the fracture and suits most types of skin, especially children and women because it is one that cannot be overcome by heat or cold.
Take some of the dust from the mill, which is the heart of flour that clings to the walls of the mill with the movement of the grinder, and knead it as it is without stirring it with egg white and make the dough neither thick nor thin, then knead it.
The preparation for a compress to heal fractures, dislocations, and sprains; take horse hair, wool, date palm fibers, oak galls, myrrh, and sap from the aram tree or Roman cypress; each ingredient is worth ten dirhams, marjoram is worth five, and clay from Armenia or Rome is worth twenty. All of the ingredients are ground and mixed with water from the aram tree or egg white if the patient's constitution is hot; then this compress is used as it is a good compound that quickly heals broken bones and suits most people due to its moderation.
Another compress that is beneficial for fractures and dislocations; take myrrh, horse hair, wool, date palm fibers, and white khatt (a type of plant); each ingredient is worth ten dirhams, marjoram is worth five, and Armenian clay is worth twenty. All of the ingredients are finely ground, sieved, and mixed with water or egg white, then applied to the body.
A compress for joints and bones that have come out of place, to relieve pain in these areas and reduce bone noise and fractures; take woven wool, dip it in vinegar and oil, and apply it to the affected area. This compress does not have a strong healing property.
It is, however, beneficial for easing warm swellings and relieving pain, especially; another compress to heal a broken bone; take date palm fibers and wild poplar leaves, grind them together, and apply them as a paste; another brief compress that can be used when a bone fracture has healed partially.
And if you want to reduce the remaining swelling, take a part of khatt (a type of plant), chamomile, violet, and orgeat syrup; grind them all and mix them with paint if the member is not hot, otherwise mix it with coriander water or plain water and use it.
A different bandage, stronger in its effects than the first, is used when a hard tumour forms at the site of a broken bone. It is made from a combination of marjoram, flax seed, and plantain leaf; as well as chamomile, hyssop, and mugwort; and finally, violet and lavender flowers.
The various ingredients are ground and then mixed with either a hot or cold broth, or water, depending on the temperature of the injured part and its level of movement. However, Hippocrates does not mention in his book that this bandage should be applied to a broken bone when it heals.
Except for the caulk made of wax and oil, he thought that something with a bit of heat should be used on the injured part when it heals, such as myrrh, styrax, and resin; and also thing like those we mentioned earlier.
A bandage that is good for weakness and pain is made from mugwort, wheat germ, and human hair; or bird feathers, horsehair, and salt; ground and sieved, then mixed with oil. The amount of time the bandage should be left on is not mentioned.
Then, if there is no improvement in the patient's condition, and there is no pain or itching, and the broken bone does not move, do not remove the bandage for many days. If, however, there is severe itching or painful jerking movements, or swelling, then remove the bandage.
Act quickly and remove the bandage, then take a clean cloth or sponge and wet it with lukewarm water; wash the injured area with this to soothe the itching and ease the pain. Then leave the member alone for an hour.
Then, carry it with a soft woollen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil; and wrap it lightly, leaving it to rest for the night so as to prevent hot swelling and ease any pain in the member. Then, you may gently bind it again using a loose bandage.
And attend to it carefully until it heals, if you see that the lump and redness and pain and swelling and all the symptoms have completely disappeared and the bandage and tension are no longer needed, then prepare it as you did before, whether or not something has happened in the organ of what we mentioned.
Do not remove the dressing until after three, four, five or seven days - or twenty days if possible - all of this depending on what appears to you of the condition of the member as we have said. Until such time that the fracture is set and the flesh is beginning to heal.
And increase at that time also the tension over all of your first tension and also increase in thickness of the food of the patient as we have mentioned, if you see the site of the fracture has dried up and weakened more than it should then know that the food is prevented from reaching it.
Then dip it in warm water each time you remove the dressing, and do this every three days, and slightly decrease the tension, for by this action food is conducted to the member and it heals quickly, and as for what the ignorants of the plasterers do from breaking the member again.
For if it does not heal first as it should and heals crooked, this is a mistake on their part and a great deception; and if it were correct they would have mentioned it in their books and I did not see any of them having anything to do with it at all. And the right thing is that you do not work with it,.
The second chapter.
In the fracture that occurs in the head.
Types of the accidental fracture in the head are numerous and its shapes are different and its causes are diverse; so from the fracture is one that is due to a sword blow and it is either that it will break all the bone up to the point where it ends at the membrane below the bone. As with the arrival in wood.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called a "natural fracture" and if the sword's cut only hits some bone and doesn't go through to the end, this type of fracture is called a "complete dislocation", and the wound in these two fractures can be large or small.
And from the fracture, there is one that is a break or a knock and its cause is a blow with a stone or falling on a stone or similar This type of fracture can be either piercing, having approached the membrane below the bone, or it may be in the face of the bone.
And the wound in these two fractures can be large or small. And there is a type of fracture that is hidden in the bone, which is very thin hair, and it is a crack that moves.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called  "hairy" , and there is a type of fracture that is due to falling or hitting a stone and similar, which enters the bone's page into the inside and becomes for the place to be twisted as it exposes to copper if it has been hit.
And more of that is what it is in the moist head bone, like the heads of children, and there are all these types of fractures by inspecting them, we will come to their treatment in its place, and we will recognize all these types of fractures by examining them.
And inspect it with spatulas and remove the rotten meats from it, And as for the  "hairy" type, it is known by examining the bone and rubbing it on the ink, then the fracture appears black, And as for the treatment of the fracture, you first look at the patient's symptoms.
If you see from his symptoms what indicates a clear indication of fear, such as bitter vomiting, expansion and loss of mind, cut off the voice, fainting, and reddening of the eyes, and similar symptoms, do not approach the patient or treat him because death is definitely inevitable with these symptoms in most cases.
If you see symptoms that do not scare you and you pray for the injured person's safety, then take him in for treatment. For if the wounded person comes to you in the first days of his injury, and this is in wintertime.
So one should strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day under all circumstances, and if it is in summer days, then one should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day before the decay of what is under the bone from membrane, so that those symptoms that we have described.
If the bone fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain, and there is a concussion and injury, then one should cut off the injured part of the bone as I have described to you, which is to shave the head of the injured person.
And expose the bone in any way possible for you and according to the shape of the wound and what is easier on the injured person, if it shows you blood discharge or a hot swelling, then respond to that as should be.
That is to stuff the place with rags soaked in wine and oil, and scrape the wound until the swelling goes down and the blood stops, then you take in shaping the bone and removing it, this is done in two ways of work.
While the other is that you cut the bone with a sharp, narrow blade, and this is its picture:
Then you use another cutter wider than the first one, and this is its picture:
Then you also use another cutter wider than the second one, and it is necessary that you have a set of different cutters, some wider than others, and some shorter than others, and their tips are very sharp, and they be made of good Indian iron or steel.
And use gentleness in hitting the cutter so that the head does not shake and harm it, if the bone is strong and hard, then you should drill around it before using the cutters, they call them non-penetrating drills, but they call them non-penetrating drills.
For it does not go beyond the limit of the skull bone and what is behind it, because the trepanation has a round letter on what is below his sharp head, resembling a collar or a small circle, which prevents him from diving and going beyond the thickness of the bone.
You should take from these trepans several ones that each one of them is suitable for the amount of thickness of that bone until you prepare for each skull a trepanation a side it is sharp in length and short according to the thickness of that skull, and this is a picture of three types. From trepans large and medium and small: .
And as for the method of drilling around the broken bone, it is that you make the trepanation on the bone and rotate your fingers until you know that the bone has passed then transfer the trepanation to another place and make after each hole a distance of one thickness or more.
Then you cut with the saws what is between each two holes and do that in order to what you can of it from gentleness as we said until you remove the bone either by your hand or by another thing from some of the tools that I have prepared for that.
Like the tongs and the tweezers, and you should be careful about all caution that the trepanation or saw does not touch anything of the membrane, so if you have broken the bone and it has healed from being glued to it and has come out, then you should strip off.
And the roughness of what is left in the bone is smoothed with another tool that is similar to the saw, except that it must be thinner and lighter than all other saws, and if there is any remaining small bones or fragments, you take them gently with whatever tools you have.
Then you treat the wound after that by sewing and ointments that comes in its mention, and as for the other side of the work, it is a side that is easy to bet on and far from the difficulties, mention that: "Ganges mentioned him and praised him greatly". This is what he said. You should first begin by exposing the bone part of the place that has broken most and most famous ... until you expose this part, you put the lens edge under this piece, and its image looks like:
The lens part of it should be smooth and not cut anything, and the sharp part of it on its sides going in length as you see so that the lens part is resting on the membrane and the sharp edge of the cut in the bone, then you strike at the cut from one side only.
With a small hammer until it cuts all the bone gently as it rotates, and you are secure from the membrane, no terrible accident ever happens, even if the healer is the ignorant people and the cowardliest people yes, and even if he was tired.
If something remains necessary for the bone from the membrane in some places of the bone, then you peel it off with the lens edge of the cut and get rid of it gently, because it gets rid of it without harm or fear.
And if the bone fracture has not reached the membrane, and what was cut from the bone is its face, and there remains in it roughness and shavings of dust, then you should strip off that roughness and peel off those shavings with a gentle chisel, which I have taken from her different proportions to be able to use them in every place most suitable for her and most correct on the basis of what leads you to work.
And the same shape of the broken bone, and it is necessary to use in your inventory first for the bone; You put on this chisel then use after him thinner, and you continue to do so repeatedly until you reach using its thinnest and most delicate.
And as for the other small hairline cracks and the gentle fracture, you should use a treatment according to what leads to its repair, which is something that is not hidden from anyone who has even the smallest experience in this craft, and stopped on what we wrote and clarified in the large fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed when you remove the bone, you should take a piece of gauze the size of the wound and dip it in rose oil and place it on the mouth of the wound. Then you should take another piece of gauze folded or trifolded. Dip it in a solution of rose water and oil and place it on the first piece of gauze, making it as loose as you can so that it doesn't weigh down on the fascia. Then use a broad strip of cloth above it, and don't tighten it except to the extent that it holds the wound together.
Leave it with this treatment for a day or two to prevent the hot swelling, then remove it and continue using the drugs that come with it, such as ground pomegranate seeds, ground acacia, ground kashur grass, and saffron. This is done by making a powder of these drugs.
Powder the drugs and sprinkle them on the wound as it is dry, in large quantities. Take great care that the wound be clean when you are treating it; don't allow any oil, dirt, or pus to accumulate in it.
Because pus that collects on the membrane of the brain corrupts and fouls it, which leads to a great catastrophe for the patient. And it may occur in the fascia of the head when it is exposed by the removal of bone, especially if treatment is overlooked.
If it is black on the surface, examine it carefully; if it has appeared due to a drug that was applied to it, and this drug had the power to cause this discoloration, then it is likely that the patient will die anyway.
Take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them well, and put them on a piece of gauze; then place it on the fascia and continue with the treatment that should be taken to heal it completely.
Chapter 3:
In repairing the nose when it is broken.
Be aware that it is not broken from the nose except both its upper parts or one of them because they are bones because the lower part of it is cartilaginous and does not break, but rather suffers injury, deformity, and fracture.
If one of its upper parts breaks, then you should insert your little finger into the hole in the nose and level out that break from the inside with your index finger and thumb from the outside so that the nose returns to its natural shape. Let this be done by you gently, and be careful not to cause pain or a deformity on the patient through your action, and let it be.
If the break is in the upper part of the nose and the finger does not reach it, then it should be leveled with a slightly thicker rod, and if the break is on both sides, do the same, and he should hurry to repair it on the first day of the break.
If it is possible, and if not, then after the seventh or tenth day at the time when the swelling subsides, then you should insert into the hole in the nose a thread of cotton fabric if the break is on one side, or two threads if the break is on both sides.
And let the threads be slightly thicker than what fills the hole in the nose, and some of the early surgeons mentioned that they should be soaked in oil and changed every day. I do not see this as necessary, but it is better to soak the threads in egg white mixed with powdered chalk.
Then leave the threads in place until the bone heals and the cartilage hardens, and you may insert into the nose at the site of the thread some goose feathers after wrapping them with a soft cloth, so that the insertion of the feathers to repair the broken nose is more effective and the patient does not suffer from difficulty breathing.
And this is not necessarily necessary if you wish to do so, and if not, then bandage the nose with kirtle or a cotton cloth soaked in vinegar and oil and wax, or something from diacetyl모노즈나트 (dyacylmonozene).
If there is no hot tumor, then it should be wrapped from the outside with fine semolina and finely ground myrrh that has been kneaded with egg white, and then a soft splint should be placed on it and nothing should be bound to the nose at all, for if the bones of the nose break, they will break a little.
Or if it is broken, it should be split and removed with the instrument that is suitable for it, and then the split should be sewn and treated with what heals and heals with ointments that are suitable for this, because if there is a wound in the inside of the nose, it should be treated with winding and used lead pipes. until it heals.
Chapter Four.
In repairing the lower jaw.
If the lower jaw has broken and there is no wound, consider that if it has broken from the outside only and not broken in two places and sunk into the inside, its knowledge will be easy to know.
If the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your index finger from your left hand into the mouth of the patient. The same applies if the fracture is on the left side; you should insert your index finger from your right hand and raise the fracture fragment gently from the inside to the outside.
Your other hand, from outside the bone, should control it and straighten it, because if the jaw has broken in two places, you should use the rod from both sides to straighten it until it is fixed, and if it has happened in the teeth, growl.
Or if it is separated, tighten it as much as you can with a gold or silver thread or abaris, then put the quraytı (a type of clay) on the broken jaw, and then put a folded cloth and a large, tight jibbeh (a type of splint) or a piece of leather the size of the jaw. Then tie it up from above according to what seems right to you and agrees with fixing it until you don't change anything about its shape on any of the faces, and make the patient's food soft. If you suspect that something has changed about its shape on one of the sides, act quickly to correct it on the third day.
Then tie it up from above according to what seems right to you and agrees with fixing it until you don't change anything about its shape on any of the faces, and make the patient's food soft. If you suspect that something has changed about its shape on one of the sides, act quickly to correct it on the third day. Then, you shall repair what has been included in the dust of the mill with the white of eggs or with semolina after removing the kerite from it and you shall place a soft cloth on the bandage. As long as that bandage clings to it and does not change in condition for the bone, leave it.
Do not remove it until it has healed and the fracture has strengthened; often this fracture will strengthen in three weeks, and if during that time there is a hot swelling, use what we have mentioned repeatedly to soothe it until it goes away.
And if the fracture is with a wound, look; if the bone has been cleansed of a shard or shards, soften them in what suits you to remove them from the tool. If the mouth of the wound is narrow, widen it with the probe according to your need.
Then, when you have removed those shards and there is nothing left, line the mouth of the wound if it is wide; otherwise, carry on one of the pastes that repair this. And seam up the wound until it heals, .
Chapter V.
In mending the shoulder when it is broken.
The most common place for the shoulder to break is from the front of the shoulder blade, and the fracture occurs in two places without causing shards; it is easier to mend it.
Or for there to be shards in the fracture, which is more difficult to mend; and if the fracture is with a wound, the work, if the fracture is without a wound, is that you prepare two servants: one to adjust the forearm next to the broken shoulder blade, and the other to extend the neck towards the other side.
Then, you shall level the fracture with your fingers until it reaches its proper shape and there is no depression or sharp point; if you need to extend it further, you should place a ball of cloth or wool under the armpit.
And let the bone be of the size that you need. You stretch and raise the scapula and press the ball with your hand until the break is levelled as it should be. If you are unable to pull the edge of the scapula outside, because it has gone deep into the body, then the patient should lie on his back.
And a cushion of average size should be placed under the patient's elbow. The server should press down on the elbow until the scapula that is deep rises up. And then the break is fixed and made level with your fingers.
If you feel that a piece of the scapula has broken off and is moving around, then you should split it open and carefully remove that piece. If the piece is stuck in the bone, then cut it out with one of the knives you have prepared for this purpose. After the bone is fixed under the scapula, the instrument that preserves the fascia is placed. This is an instrument made of wood or iron, and this is its image:
It resembles a spoon without a handle, and its width is determined by the size required for the bone. The length should be determined according to your ability to work. And let one side of it be wider and the other narrower, as you see.
If the wound you have made by splitting open to remove the bone fragment is wide and you have prevented the heat wound, then stitch the edges of the wound together. But if the split is shallow or you fear the heat wound, then patch the wound with gauze and bandages according to the size of the split.
If there is a hot wound, then soak the gauze in rose water and vinegar or drinks, and carry it on the bone. But if the bone is not broken, but there is no wound or split, then carry on the bone the bandage made of ground rye with egg white. And you place the soft splint on it, and then you take a long bandage that is a palm wide or about that, and you wrap the splint and bandage with it, and then you take a plaster from a thin board. The splint should be the width of three fingers and as long as that; then place it in a cloth, and then place that cloth with the splint inside the turban in the position on the turban that is over the fracture; then tighten the turban around the fracture as you rotate. Wrap it around his neck and under his armpit on the correct side, and under the patient's armpit; then tighten it several times on each side as you see that tightening the bandage ensures a secure hold on the fracture, which is not hidden from you.
The important thing is that the splint does not shift from the fractured bone. Therefore, you should examine the patient every day; if the bandage relaxes and you see that the splint has come off, repair it and tighten the bandage, then let the patient sleep on his back and put a small cushion under his armpit while he sleeps at night.
Let his shoulder rise up from his side, so that the fracture of the clavicle rises with the deltoid; or bind his arm to his neck; do not loosen the bandage unless an accident occurs, such as itching or swelling, for a period of twelve days.
Then renew the bandage if you see a reason for it. Then tighten it and leave it until the fracture heals, becomes more difficult, and gets stronger, which takes about 28 days. This may vary in some people with less time.
Chapter Six.
In the process of breaking the shoulder joint.
You can do your best to return it to its natural shape, then load the affected area with chalk powder mixed with egg white and a soft paste, and put a turban on top of it.
A piece of cloth the size of the shoulder or a little wider, if it is under the bandage, make a hole in one of the shoulders and level that hole with a soft bar so that the bandage lies flat, then tie it with a long turban.
Tie it tightly and securely so that it does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day; whenever it becomes loose, tighten it and level the bandage if it moves from its place, and let the patient lie on his correct side, and the shoulder will heal in twenty.
A day or fifteen days; if this number has been completed, the bandage will come off and you will be safe; because these are bones which do not have any fear of their being smashed or broken apart, and if a splinter comes out from the bone it will stick into the skin and can be easily pulled out. And do as I mentioned in regards to breaking the collarbone from reducing the swelling if something like that happens, and...
Chapter seven.
In bandaging a breast bone break.
The chest can break in the middle, and this is not common; however, its ends are more likely to break and become fragmented; one of the signs of a broken chest is a sudden tilt towards the bottom, severe pain, difficulty breathing, and coughing.
And sometimes it may give blood, and the swelling can be felt in the broken bone; its treatment is for the patient to lie on their back, a pillow is placed between their shoulders, the ribs are held together with hands from both sides, and they are gently levelled as much as possible.
And agree until the shape of the bone returns to what it should be, then put the bandage and soft bar on top of it, and place a light bandage made from bamboo or dates and similar light materials on top of it after wrapping it in a cloth. Then make it easier to tie her to the broken bone so that it doesn't come off, and pass the rope around the spine several times and tighten it tightly, then check the rope at all times, and whenever it relaxes, tighten it again.
And if necessary to remove it when there is pain or swelling in the place, then hurry to remove it and peel off the bandage and treat whatever has been exposed from that with its treatment, and then put on the bandage again if you see that for it. Face it and tighten it firmly until it heals.
Chapter VIII.
In the suturing of ribs, if they break, know that the ribs, due to their fibrous nature, are susceptible to injury and this is not hidden from sensation when felt with the fingers.
And to repair it, by making the fracture even with the fingers on a secure basis until the shape is level as it should be, and then bandage and tighten the broken bone with a splint if necessary, for if the rib fracture is inclined towards the inside, it will cause severe pain for the patient.
And like the ribs that expose those who have a splinter, because the bone may expose the diaphragm and also cause difficulty in breathing and coughing up blood, which is difficult to treat, and the early people had devised many tricks for it.
Some say that the patient's food should be what causes wind and gas so that the abdomen swells and stretches, pushing the fracture towards the outside, and we dislike this so as not to cause the formation of hot swelling if it hasn't happened yet, and if it has happened, it will increase it and confirm it.
Some say that a stopper should be placed on the site, then squeezed strongly, which is more like measurement, but they are afraid that the stopper will draw dust to the site due to its weakness, and some say that the site should be covered with wool that has been dipped in hot oil.
And make a vestment between the ribs until it is filled, so that the ligament is flat if you wrap it on a roundness, and then treat the patient with the treatment of the shawls of food and medicine, if he seems weak to me a matter severe that he does not endure. And the bone was sticking into the diaphragm painfully, and we were afraid for the patient, so it is necessary that we cut on the place and uncover the broken rib, then put under it the machine that keeps the fascia which has been described before, and cut the bone gently and take it out.
Then we sew the wound if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it heals, if a hot swelling appeared during that, hurry and soak garments in ghee and put them on the place and treat the patient with what calms the swelling from inside as well.
And he lies on the side that is easier for him to sleep, until it heals,.
Chapter IX
In repairing the spine and neck
If the vertebrae in the neck are broken, and what is exposed to that is less, and what is exposed to it is more, and also the vertebrae of the spine, if you want to know whether it will heal or not. Then see, if you see that his hands have become relaxed and numb and dead, and he cannot move them or stretch them or close them, and if you prick them with a needle or stick them, he doesn't feel it, or find pain in them, then know that he will not heal, in most cases, he is doomed.
And if he can move them and feel pain when pricked or stuck, then know that the marrow of the bone has escaped, and the patient will heal with treatment, if the spine's hernia is like this, and you want to know whether it will heal as well or not.
Then look at his legs, if you see that they have become relaxed and what has happened to the hands has happened to them, then, when he lies on his back, wind and stool come out without will, and if he lies on his stomach, urine comes out without will. And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate, he cannot do so, so know that he is doomed, so don't worry about treating him, because if there was nothing of this for him, the matter would be lighter, and the treatment of what has happened is that you want to soothe the hot tumor.
By putting rose oil alone or with roasted egg yolks on the sore place, three times a day until the hot tumor is soothed, then carry a strengthening, dry dressing on the place and tie it with a ribbon, and order him to rest and remain still.
And he should not sleep except on the side that does not cause him pain until it heals, and if a splinter or something has entered the bone, then it is necessary to cut his skin and remove that bone. Then the wounds are sewn together if they are large, and then treated with binding creams until they heal, and if the last hipbone broke, which is the hunchback of the anus, then the index finger of the left hand should be inserted into the anus.
And the broken bone is leveled with the hand, as much as possible, and then a dressing and support are applied if needed, then it is tied up.
If you feel a splinter inside the bone, cut it open and remove it, then treat the wound with the treatment mentioned above until it heals.
Chapter 10.
In repairing a hip fracture.
The hip bones are rarely broken, and if they are, they may crack at the ends or split in half, causing pain for the patient and joint instability. The patient may also experience swelling, bruising, and a decrease in range of motion.
And repair it by passing your hand over it until you determine the nature of the fracture, and if the fracture is in the ends only, then level that fracture according to what is convenient for you until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is in length or has turned inward, lie the patient on his stomach until it is convenient for you to set that fracture. And when you have straightened it, you carry the dressing, and then put a splint of wood or skin over it and tighten it with tension.
Do not fear that the fracture will move or that the splint will disappear and the depression from the folds will fill itself up until it takes the strain on the straightened state, and order the patient to sleep on his back or on his correct side, for if he has a hot swelling.
Then stop extending and setting it until the hot swelling subsides, and carry what calms it as mentioned above, then return to setting it and tightening it as it should be, for if there is a fracture in the bone or fragmentation of its parts, it should not be removed.
And do not touch it with your hand, but leave it straightened from the outside as we mentioned and leave the tension until it heals.
Chapter 11th
In setting a fracture of the humerus.
The عضh is what is between the elbow and the shoulder head; if it breaks, then set it with one of two methods: One is to take a smooth wood rod of average thickness on this image:
And tie two bindings on its ends, and then hang it from a high place, and let the patient sit on a chair, then throw his broken arm over the rod until his elbow is stuck in the middle of the bend of the rod, and then hang something heavy above it.
Or have a servant extend it downward, then the doctor sets the fracture with his hands together until he returns the fracture to its proper state, and the other face is for the patient to lie on his back and hang his hand from his neck with a ribbon.
Then order two servants to adjust what is above the fracture with their hands and the other to adjust it below and extend each of them towards his side, and if you want the extension to be stronger, tie a ribbon under the fracture and above it, and have each of the servants extend it in his direction.
If the fracture is near the shoulder blade, then the tendon should be placed under the armpit and the other under the fracture towards the elbow, and likewise if the fracture is near the elbow, then the tendon should be placed on that point and on the elbow itself.
Then the fracture is gently straightened without violence until it is well aligned and has a good union, and then it is tightened if it does not show swelling of heat, but if there is swelling of heat, leave tightening to the seventh day and put on a soaked lambswool with vinegar and rose water.
Until the swelling subsides, and then it is tightened; the method of tightening is to carry the bandage on the fracture and then carry a new cloth scarf on the bandage and then gather the arm on the elbow itself and put his hand open on his armpit, .
And carry the scarf and tighten it on the elbow and arm so that the arm performs the function of splints if there is no impediment to your doing so from the broken bone, and if you fear that something will change with it, then use splints.
This is that you place on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than all other splints, and let there be between each splint a width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture by three fingers on each side.
Then tighten the splints with the tension that you mentioned in the first door.
This is that your tension on the site of the fracture is more intense.
And as the fracture is farther away, the tension is less, if you see that you are placing the splints and tightening as we mentioned it when you set the member from your time, do it.
If you are afraid of swelling of heat, leave the tension and splints to the seventh day as we mentioned, then check the tendon every three days to prevent chafing or swelling or preventing food from reaching the member due to excessive tension, then make all that is right according to what we have mentioned.
If you are certain that nothing of the sort will occur, do not remove the bandage until many days have passed, and let the patient lie on his back with his hand on his stomach. A sock filled with wool and trimmed to fit the armpit should be placed under the forearm.
And check at every time, whether day or night, that the form of the broken member has not changed or that the bandage has relaxed; correct all this with your own effort. Let the patient's food be soft at first, so that when the bone is about to harden, it will be firm.
The food should be made thicker, for the arm and leg usually harden in forty days; at that point the bandage should be removed, and he should use the bath and be treated with the ointments suitable for this, if the fracture is gross and deformed.
Do not remove the bandage from him until fifty days or two months have passed, or
The second chapter.
In setting a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the radii; one is smaller and lies next to the thumb, and the other is larger and is placed under the small bone from below; so that it may happen that one or both of these bones break.
If the small upper radius bone has broken, then setting and healing is easier and faster; and if the large lower radius bone has broken, then setting is more difficult and healing slower, and the worst case is when both bones break at the same time. If the bone which has broken is that of the arm which lies under the little finger, then setting is more difficult and healing slower than if it were that of the arm which lies next to the thumb, and the most difficult case is when both are affected.
The doctor, when setting it, should make the motion of stretching it easy and gentle so that he straightens it out; and if the large radius bone has broken, then he should make the motion of stretching more severe and firm; and if both bones are broken, then he should make the motion of stretching very strong.
The shape of the hand should be set when it is repaired and extended on a cushion; the thumb should be above all the fingers, and the little finger below all the others; and the convalescent should sit with his back resting on the bed.
The cushion should be at the same level as the hand being repaired to prevent the patient from having to make any efforts.
Then the servant of the arm should be extended from below, either with his own hand or with a bandage, and another servant should be extended from above in the same way; then the doctor should make the bone straight again as much as possible, and if there are any fractures of the bone, they should be reduced.
Every fragment should be put back in its place; if there is one that stands out from the skin and cannot be fixed, it should be split open and pulled out as described above. If the break is accompanied by a wound, I have dealt with that separately.
Then take the treatment for that from there; if, when you repair it, there is a swelling of hot poultice, cover it with a cloth made of qur'aŷ - a prepared paste of rose water and white wax - which should be in the middle between thick and thin, and tie the cloth lightly onto it until the swelling subsides.
Then remove the poultice and apply the prepared dressing made of ground raisin with egg white; then put on the splints; the number of splints for the arm is six in most cases.
If the fracture is in one bone of the arm or in both together, then you should make your tightening at the site of the fracture stronger and more rigid; and whenever you turn to tighten it towards the top, you should make the tightening a little looser as mentioned above at the beginning of this book.
The cloth wrapping the fracture should be soft and moist; it should not be too stiff, and the thread used for tightening should be made of a special kind of cotton that is neither too thick nor too thin as we have described; and after a few days, check the member and the ligament.
If something happens that needs to be fixed, such as an itch on the member, it should be rinsed with warm water until the itch goes away and the member is left unrestrained for a night so it can rest, and then retightened.
If the tie has relaxed and the bone has disappeared or something similar, fix it all yourself, and see also, if food cannot reach the member due to excessive tying, then loosen it a little and leave it for days so that food reaches it, and then tie it again.
If there is nothing mentioned above that affects the patient, it should not be removed except after twenty days or so, and then hang the patient's hand on his neck, let his arm be moderate, and preserve his effort from turbulent movements, and make his sleep on his back.
and know that this fracture of the arm is fixed in thirty days or in two and three dozen, and perhaps it is fixed in twenty-eight days, all of this depends on the conditions of the humors and the conditions of strength,.
Chapter 13.
in repairing a fracture of the hand and fingers.
The palm of the hand and the phalanges are less likely to break than other parts, but they are more likely to be injured, so when there is a fracture or an injury on the hand.
The patient should sit upright with a chair in front of him at the same level.
Then the bone should be placed on a bandage and straightened out by the doctor so that it is well aligned, and then a splint should be placed over it if there is no hot swelling, and then a cast from above, at the level of the injury.
It may be inserted in a soft cloth, and if the fracture is towards the bottom, towards the palm of the hand, make a half-sphere from the cloth and instruct the patient to tighten it with his broken hand, then tie it with a long cloth.
Let the plaster be of skin which is soft, so that the skin may conform to the bending of all the hand and tighten it on what should be; if the fracture is outside, then let a plaster be made from above and another plaster from below in the hand, so that the hand remains open and erect.
Then the tension should be carried out as the hand turns, and tied with a cable between the fingers; if the break is for one of the phalanges, then let it be levelled on what should be, and then tightened with the hand, and if you like that he should make a small standing plaster to support the fracture.
And he should not move, if the break is for all the fingers, such as the middle finger or the index finger or the little finger or the ring finger, then it should be levelled and tied with the next correct finger, or they should all be tied together on what is right, this is better, or you can put a small standing plaster on it.
As we have said in the thumb, and examine when you set it and its distance from the heat swelling, so that you encounter what should be when something happens as described repeatedly.
Chapter 14.
In setting a hip fracture.
The thigh bone often breaks and can be felt because it moves forward and backward; its plaster is made by tying a cable above the fracture and another cable below, and the patient lies on his face.
Then each cable servant should be extended to its side on what is right, this if the fracture is in the middle of the bone; and if it is near the root of the thigh, then a soft cable should be tied, whether from wool or similar.
At the root of the thigh towards the genitals so that the stretch is up, and the other cable should be under the fracture, and likewise if the fracture is near the knee, then the bandage should be near the knee so that the stretch is down, and then the doctor should level the bone with both hands until he returns it to the natural example.
And the bone comes together in a good union; so then it is necessary that the bandage and tightening should be carried out if there has been no heat swelling in the member. If there has been a hot swelling in it, leave it for days until the heat swelling subsides, then go back to its treatment,.
As for its tightening, it is necessary that a hard and wide bandage be wound around the fracture twice or three times and what remains of it, then the leg is wound until the heel is at the root of the metatarsus and a long thread is inserted between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, and the ends of the thread are brought from above from both sides..
Then you turn on the leg and thigh what remains of the bandage, then you make on the thigh in the place of the fracture the giblets and you make of them one giblet on the bone of the leg then fill the gap between the thigh and the leg with soft rags to even out the tightening..
Then start with the strong tightening from the middle on the place of the fracture three turns or four, and whatever the distance is of the bandage from the place of the fracture, your tightening should be less and softer and looser..
Then go to the ends of the thread that you have inserted between the thigh and the leg to bind with what follows it from the giblets which are above, then pass the ends of the thread down until they end at the achillean tendon then tighten them too with the opposite ends of the giblets..
So that the bandage does not move from its place, then you leave the tightening on it as long as there is no heat or swelling or puffiness and so on, if something of this happened, then hurry to solve it and fix all that has happened as we have mentioned several times..
If there is a splinter in the bone, it should be levelled if you can, otherwise rip it out and treat the wound with like what we have mentioned above until it heals, and this fracture may be tightened from the thigh without adding the leg with giblets..
As we mentioned in the forearm and arm, except that repairing it like this will not expose the patient to difficulty walking, even if repaired alone without adding the leg, there is no choice but for the owner to walk with a limp forever.
And know that the thigh heals in fifty days, or increases a little or decreases a little, all of this depending on the difference in humors and other conditions.
Chapter 15.
In the fracture of the kneecap.
If the kneecap is broken, it is not often exposed to the fracture and is often exposed to injury, in which case it may be a split or a fracture of its parts, and this happens with or without a wound.
And stand on all of this by sense, repairing it by making what is separated from its parts come together with the fingers until it comes together and associates according to what it can achieve in terms of ease and craftsmanship, then cover it with a bandage and support it with a splint if needed.
And tighten it from above with the tension that is appropriate for that, and then take care of all the conditions we described in other fractures, such as hot swelling, etc., by meeting each symptom with what is suitable for it until it heals.
Chapter 16.
In reducing a broken leg.
(There are two bones in the leg, one thick called the femur and the other thin called the shin, and both are subject to the same types of fractures as the two arms.) (Therefore, its reduction is the same as that of the arms and the work is one. If both bones break, the leg will turn in all directions, and if only the thinner bone breaks, it turns forward, and if only the thicker bone breaks and this happens from below, it is something that is not hidden from you.)
(So use extension and leveling and tie the splints according to that. However, if the leg fracture is severe and has many shards, then the extension should be less and lighter and take care with your efforts to heal it.)
(And there is one additional work in the leg compared to the arm, which is that you should make two feet from pine wood used in flattening rooms placed between the slats or be made of palm paper or something like it.)
(And choose from them what has a little thickness and is not thin, and let its length be the length of the leg from the knee to below, then wrap two pieces of cloth on each one at the length of the leg and place one on the shin and the other from the opposite side.)
(And let them be from the knee to below the foot, then tie the two feet in three places on both ends and in the middle, so that this strap prevents the leg from turning right or left, and it is securely fixed. And a piece of wood can be used as a downspout along the length of the leg.)
(And put it in to protect it from movement, and the most that should be done is to examine the leg every day and pay great attention to swelling or puffiness or anything else.) (So when something happens, confront it with what is necessary until it heals, and the femur can heal in thirty days or so...)
Chapter Seventeen:
In Breaking the Bones of the Hand and Foot.
While the heel bone should never be broken, and while fractures of the bones of the foot are relatively uncommon, fingers are more likely to suffer from injuries than breaks, with most cases being due to trauma.
If a fracture of the foot is suspected, the patient should put their weight on the foot, with the toes pointing forward and the heel supported. The doctor then places their foot on a raised surface to provide stability and straightens any bent joints.
Then, once the joints have realigned and the foot is wrapped securely, apply a splint to the outside of the foot to provide additional support.
If three or four days have passed, remove the bandage to check on the bone's alignment. If it has healed properly, or if the fingers have simply come loose, follow the instructions for finger injuries as described in the text on hand injuries.
Then, for a finger with a single fracture, make a splint that is slightly wider than the finger. Under the foot, place the mentioned panel and secure it tightly. If two or more bones are broken, make multiple splints to support each bone section separately.
For each broken finger, use a soft cloth to make a splint that covers the entire finger and secures it to the foot with a tight bandage. The panel should rest on the bottom of the foot, with each head resting outside the foot's heel to provide proper support.
Make sure to remember all the mentioned details regarding foot fractures and address each symptom as needed. Apply appropriate treatment to each finger fracture.
Chapter Eightzehn:
In Breaking the Bones of the Thigh and Pelvis, and Mention of Male Fractures.
When a woman's pelvis fractures, she should be seated, leaning slightly towards her back, and the midwife should fill her vagina with cotton to support it and prevent any further damage.
Then the woman is shaken and her pelvis is raised a little at a time, and that cotton comes out until it is at the door of the womb like a ball and the fracture of the bone returns, then you put a bandage on her back, so whenever she wants to urinate, she takes off the cotton gently so she can urinate.
Then she returns it to the way she first entered it, and then she returns to her first bandage, she does this for seven days or so, it heals, and if you want to take a sheep's bladder, you tighten its mouth with a tube of the trachea and enter all of the bladder into her vagina.
Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder swells inside the vagina, and the fracture will return, then stuff it with cotton and stand for days on what we have described until it heals, and as for when a hip bone breaks in a man or woman, it is used to repair it.
And smooth it out what we have described in the hip bone, and is not hidden from you the right in these strange fractures that are rare to fall, especially for those who have some experience and understands my book in this yes, because the fracture itself guides you in most of the cases.
On the path of righteousness in repairing it and tightening it, so understand, and as for the mention of a man if his hip breaks the throat of a swan, put the penis into it then place on it a bandage from a cloth and tie it up and leave it for three days or so until it heals, and.
Chapter 19.
In repairing fractures of the bones if they are with a wound.
It is appropriate for anyone who has a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large like the femur or humerus or similar, that you hurry and drain it from its time if it helps you the conditions of bleeding as we have presented.
If the wound is bleeding, you should hurry to cut it by pouring on it a powdered acid if another does not come, and then take in repairing the fracture on that day only and do not delay it.
If no hot swelling occurs, if a hot swelling does occur, leave its repair to the ninth day until the hot swelling subsides and do not come near it on the third and fourth days at all, for he will suffer from poor symptoms.
If the broken bone protrudes through the skin, it should be repaired and smoothed with your hands gently and a small amount of wire, and if it cannot be repaired with your hands, then repair it with this tool; an iron tool whose length is about seven or eight fingers. And expose it to the extent of the wound.
For this reason, the doctor should take three or four of them as needed for treatment in each type of fracture; they should be round, with a slight thickness so that they do not bend when pressed upon during operation.
And have a sharp end, with a curve in one end, and the thickest part at the top, gradually tapers to the thinner part from halfway down; this is its appearance: [Image of a tool with the described characteristics].
And are called in Greek "perimereidion", a small wedge, so that its sharp end should be positioned on the edge of the protruding bone and pushed with it once; until the bone returns and becomes slightly straightened, then ram the broken ends together.
If the broken end of the bone is thin and has not been taken over well by the tool, then cut that bone edge until the tool can reach it; if you are unable to repair the bone with what we have described above, then cut it with similar tools that we mentioned.
Or saw it with one of the saws as you can; then peel off what remains in the bone of roughness and tiny scales, because when you repair the bone and find that there is a severe and painful ache after repair, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you can set it back in its natural place, do so, for you will greatly benefit the sick person. And when your dressing is complete, dip a cloth in a black astringent and apply it to the wound. Especially if it is summer, do not put any fragrant oil or grease on the wound.
So that it does not rot and spoil, then proceed to the dressings as soon as you are finished setting the bone. And leave the wound open by piercing the bandages with needles to allow air to reach the wound.
Be very careful not to tighten the wound while it is broken, for many ignorant physicians have done this to their patients, causing either death or gangrene. Your tightening should be loose and relaxing, opposite of how you would tighten the rest of the breaks.
If the wound is bad or it is a large wound and you are worried about some adverse symptoms that we have described, and if it hurts in the affected area and is unsettling, then do not put any dressings on it. Instead, make bandages for him out of stiff cloth in the place where the dressings would be, and tighten them to him.
If, after a day or two, you see that the wound has begun to generate pus, remove the cloth that you put on it with the astringent liquid. Then, use the sutures and ointments that we normally use to treat wounds, such as the quadrational ointment and others like it. You should also loosen the bandage.
Check the wound every morning and night until it heals. It is necessary for the member to be positioned so that the pus flows down easily. If after several days the wound has not healed and there is no decrease in the pus, then know that there are small pieces of bone still present.
Then, inspect the wound with a probe. Remove and extract any pieces that have come loose and are no longer attached to the bone. If some of the pieces remain stuck to the bone and cause pain, carefully cut them off with a knife or scalpel.
If there is a cold sore, or putrefaction, or another kind of corruption and decay in the wound, then each of these should be met with its own treatment, as has been described above in its own section.
And what you should remember and keep in mind is that if a large bone breaks and the splinter enters the member, such as the thigh bone and the femur, and so on from the large members, you should not try to pull it out or extract it. Often, this will lead to death; so leave it until it rottens, because it may fall out by itself after twenty days or thirty.
So, when you see a place that can be treated, then treat the wound; otherwise, leave it alone.
Chapter 20
In treating the complication that arises after a certain kind of fracture.
Often, this complication occurs after the fracture has healed, especially that which is near the joints; it distorts the shape of the member and may prevent the member from performing its normal function.
If the complication is soft, then use medicines that contract, such as aloe, licorice, myrrh, and aniseed; take some of these or all of them and mix them with a contracting solution or egg white or vinegar.
And carry it on the complication in a sling and tighten it well and leave the tension undissolved for several days, then dissolve it and repeat it without it, until God will take away the complication; or you can put a sheet of lead on it tightly.
If the complication has become hardened and severe, and the need to remove it has become necessary, then split it from above and cut off the excess or file it down with a file until it goes away; then treat the wound so that it heals.
Chapter 21.
In the treatment of a fracture that has healed and the member remains thin after that from its first nature.
If a bone fracture has healed and the member remains thin and weak afterwards, this is due to a number of reasons. One of these is either due to the many loose ligaments and tying them more than they should be, or due to excessive tightening of the ligaments so that food cannot flow to the member, or due to excessive stretching in an improper time, or due to a lack of blood in the body of the patient and its weakness.
Treatment for this is to feed the patient and enrich his body so that the blood increases in it, use of steam baths, introducing joy and happiness, and so on. Then, bearing tar on the member to attract the tar and draw a lot of food, or continue stretching with lukewarm water. So that food can flow through it and return to its natural shape.
Chapter 22.
In the treatment of broken bones that have healed and become bent, preventing them from acting as they should.
When a member that has healed after a fracture becomes crooked or deformed, or the bone is misaligned and disfigured, But the member has not been prevented from its natural function, so it is not necessary to accept the word of those who claim to set a bone from the top, when many ignorant doctors and splint makers in our country used to do this.
This action is highly deplorable and can lead to great harm, but if the curvature and distortion are still soft, it should be soaked in water that has been cooked with herbs that soften, such as khol-e-shtar, and olive leaves.
It should be bandaged with soft plasters, such as a well-made diacetyl monolactide plaster, or take the secret of khol-e-shahr, and beat it with chicken fat and olive oil, and bandage it with this. Or take cooked tamarind and grind it with sheep fat and olive oil, and bandage it with this. Or take dried dates and grind them with hamam leaves and goose fat, and bandage it with this. These are drugs that soften the bone and promote healing.
When the deformity has begun to resolve with gentle, regular massage of the hands and the joint is moved in all directions at all times, but if the deformity has set in, increased, and become fixed, then it is necessary to treat it with a splint.
The wound should then be treated with the methods mentioned above until it heals, taking care to avoid any pressure on the bone.
Chapter 23.
The jaw is a joint that comes out of place, hindering movement and deforming the member, causing severe pain and discomfort in the patient. Therefore, when any of the jaws is affected, one should promptly restore it to its position.
Don't delay it at all, because if it is delayed, the joint swells and hurts badly, making it difficult to restore the jaw. Therefore, there is no reason to delay or move or extend it while it is swollen, as this often causes severe pain and discomfort in the patient.
However, if it occurs, one should promptly bleed the patient and then leave him until the swelling subsides slightly, after which the joint can be moved with hot water and oil, and then restored gently. Each member should be treated as mentioned above in its own position.
The jaw chapters have also been arranged according to what has been mentioned above in terms of fractures from the upper part of the body to the lower one:
Chapter 24.
In the treatment of the jaw of the lower lip.
The jaws rarely dislocate, and when they do, they either move a little out of place and become stiff or completely dislocate, causing the jaws to relax. If the dislocation is towards the chest, causing saliva to flow from the patient's mouth and preventing him from holding it or speaking clearly, he may be able to reposition himself in most cases with the slightest effort.
And if the dislocation is complete, then you should hurry to restore it without delay: The servant of the patient should hold his head firmly and the doctor should insert the thumb of his hand into the root of the jaw inside the mouth if the jaw is only on one side.
Or he should insert all his thumbs if the jaw is on both sides, and he should order the patient to relax his jaw and let it go so that it moves in any direction, and the doctor will level the jaw and push the jaw back into place.
If it is difficult to restore it, especially if both jaws are involved, then use hot water compresses and oil until it becomes easier to restore them, without delay as we mentioned earlier. If they have been restored and have become level and tight, then put strips of torn cloth on them with a mixture made from wax, oil, and resin.
Then bind them gently with a loose bandage, and let the patient sleep on his back with his head elevated between two pillows so that he does not move to the right or left, and he should not try to chew anything, but rather make his food soft.
Until the pain goes away and the jaw is firm, he can eat whatever he wants, but he should be careful when opening his mouth for eating, drinking, or clearing his throat, so that the jaw heals properly.
If the jaws do not return to their places after they have become disconnected at any time, it often happens that this leads to fever and constant headaches, and sometimes the patient's stomach becomes upset and he vomits repeatedly. If you see this, know that there is damage.
And many people die from this complication within ten days.
Chapter 25
In Repar ing the jaw at the shoulder and the armpit.
As for the clavicle, it is not disconnected from the inner side due to its connection with the chest, and it may be disconnected to the outside, and this is apparent to the sense, and the patient must be made to lie on his back and extend his arms.
Then you press the area with your hand firmly, and it will return, then you place the bandage and splints on it and tighten them. As for the end that is next to the shoulder and connects to it, it does not come off except in rare cases, and if it came off one day, it should be put back and made level as we have mentioned and what is prepared for you.
Then you place the bandage, splints, and tighten them, and order the patient to stay in bed and rest until he recovers. With this specific treatment, you will be able to restore the shoulder blade if it has also come off its track.
Chapter 26
In Reconstructing the Shoulder Blade
Be aware that the shoulder blade can only be dislocated in three ways: it can move towards the bottom of the armpit, towards the chest, or even above the shoulder blade, and this is rare.
It cannot be dislocated behind the shoulder, nor can it be dislocated in front due to the presence of nerves, and it is most likely to be dislocated and come out below towards the armpit, especially in people whose muscles are thin, as it can easily slip out and back in.
As for people with thick muscles, it is the opposite; it is difficult to slip out and hard to get back in. Sometimes a person may suffer a blow or a fall that causes swelling and a rise in temperature, so one should test to see if it is dislocated.
Then you should start the treatment process, and the shoulder blade will be recognized if it is towards the armpit; if the dislocated shoulder blade coincides with the healthy one, you will find a noticeable difference between them, and you will find that the head of the shoulder blade is depressions like an egg.
The sick person cannot raise his hand to his ear or move it in all its movements, and the same is true if he turns towards the chest or upwards; you will find that this is obvious to the touch and not hidden.
And this jaw may be easier to reduce if it is soft or the patient is a child; reduce it by having a servant raise his hand up, then you make your thumbs under his armpit and raise the joint with force up to its position, and the servant raises his hand and extends it upwards.
Then let it drop down; it will quickly return, if not as we have mentioned above and there are many days since the jaw has been injured, then the sick person should bathe in hot water and use what relaxes and softens, such as cooking the root of khatami, hulba, and akليل (rosemary) in water and using it.
Then the sick person should lie on his back, and a ball of wool be placed under his armpit, moderate between being soft and stiff; then the doctor should put his heel on the ball and grasp the patient's hand with his own and extend it down.
And push the ball with his foot; he will return to a position, and if you wish, he will return it in this way: having a man taller than the patient stand beside him and bring his armpit under the patient' side and lift his armpit up until the patient is hanging in the air. And another servant should pull the patient' hand down his stomach; if the patient is light, then he should be hung with something else to weigh him down, so the jaw will return immediately, and it may also return in another way.
This is that a long wood should be fixed in the ground, its head round like a hammer handle, not too thick or too thin; then a soft cloth be placed under the patient' armpit, and the patient stand up along the wood.
Then he extends his hand down from the other side and also extends his body strongly from that side, then the joint returns to its place quickly, if it was difficult to return it with all of what we mentioned, then use this treatment, that is, take a wooden stick whose length is about two arms. and its thickness is the thickness of two fingers, it has a round head that facilitates its entry into the depth of the armpit on this image: .
Then he ties on the round head a soft strip so as not to hurt the stick, then he makes it under the armpit and extends all the hand and the arm on the stick down and ties the stick on the elbow and forearm and the hand's end.
Then the arm is placed on a bar. A bar is placed across, and the hand is extended down while leaving the rest of the body suspended from the other side. If the joint enters at all, a ball of moderate capacity should be placed under the armpit with sheep's wool.
Then he carries the bandage prepared from ground of the grinder with the resin and the white of eggs on the armpit all as it rotates above, then the ball is tightened tightly under the armpit and the bandage is tied from above on the bandage and hangs his hand to his neck.
And he leaves it not to move his hand for seven days, and it should make the food of the sick patient small so that the joint becomes stronger; it is faster to heal it, then he solves after the seven or five days and trains with movement, if it did not relax and did not recover.
If the joint dislocates many times due to moisture it is exposed to or due to another disease, then it should use cauterization with three blades as mentioned in the cauterization chapter, if this has been done and the bandage has been removed after seven days and the joint did not recover.
I re-bandaged and tightened it several times, but it still didn't hold; it fell and relaxed, and I couldn't raise it back up. So know that the nerve in the scapula's head has either been severed, stretched out, or relaxed; at that point, you will know that the joint will never stay in place on its own.
As for the jaw that's towards the chest and breast, and behind it, it should be pushed back and stretched by hand until it returns to its place; all forms of tightening and treatment should be used until it heals. If it starts to hurt after healing, then inspect the affected area and slow down its movement.
So let the patient take a warm bath several times until that sore spot becomes softer and returns to its original state.
Chapter 27.
In treating an elbow joint.
The elbow joint dislocates easily, and so does the re-location; it dislocates towards all sides, especially towards the front or back; its location is not hidden from you as it is right in front of your eyes and can be easily felt by touch — no matter which direction it dislocates.
And if you compare the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, it will be clear to you with a noticeable difference by bending the joint; the arm cannot bend or touch the shoulder as it is stiff. You must act quickly and realign the elbow from its dislocated position before a hot tumor develops.
If a hot tumor develops, it will be difficult to treat and recover from; this is especially true if the dislocation is towards the back, as it is the worst case of dislocation and the most painful; it often leads to death.
And its repair, if it is something that can be fixed, is to have a servant extend his hands and arms with both sides facing upwards; or for the doctor to push the elbow joint with his thumb on top of the elbow or at the base of the thumb while keeping his arm steady.
And if the jaw is forward, it may be returned by bending the hand once until it hits the base of the wrist that borders it, and if the jaw does not return with this, then use a strong push with great force; that is, extend the arm servants.
And the patient should also be held by two servers so that it does not move when pushed, and then the arm is rotated on its hand with a rolled cloth or a wide cloth, and when the doctor begins to treat the joint, he rubs it with oil so that it is easy to slide the joint.
Then the joint is pushed strongly until it returns, and after its return, it should be wrapped in a bandage that includes clapping and drying with egg whites, and it is tightly tightened, and the arm is hung from the neck of the patient and left for days.
Then remove it, and if the joint has not been strengthened, leave the bandage and the strap and leave it for days until it is strengthened, and then take it off, and if you see that the joint has not been strengthened, leave the bandage and the strap again for several days until it is strengthened, and then remove it.
And if it is difficult to move, use hydration in the bath and gentle massage, until it softens, or put a fat lamb's foot on the joint and tie it and leave it there for a day and a night, then remove it and enter the bath, and if it sweats, sweat the joint with moderate massaging.
Then repeat the use of the lamb's foot once and twice and thirdly with entering the bath until it softens, and if you want to make it soft by putting cow foot on it wet and slightly with fat, and tie it to him, do this several times, because it will soften and return to its original state.
Chapter 28.
In the treatment of the wrist joint.
The wrist of the hand often comes apart, and the refixation of its joints is easy compared to other joints, except that it should be refixed as soon as it comes apart, before it swells or becomes hot.
Refix the joint by placing the injured wrist on a board and extending the servant’s hand; then place the doctor’s hand on the joint and push it back into place, unless you see that the joint has separated to the inside of the hand.
Then let the patient place his hand on the board when extending and returning it; and if the joint is protruding to the outside of the hand, then let him put his palm-side hand on the board so that the doctor’s hand can be placed on the same joint ridge; for if it returns at that time, otherwise bind it with a compressive dressing to reduce swelling.
And leave it alone; he cannot tolerate it, and you cannot fix it after a few days have passed; except that the joint remains in its place, and does not harm the patient unless the hand becomes weak and unable to grasp anything.
Then you will know that the nerve has been cut or crushed; there is no remedy for it except to bind it with a compressive dressing, which may or may not be useful; then, when the wrist is fixed, carry on binding it as described and tighten it and leave it for five days.
Then it is released, and the hand is trained; if movement is difficult and there is something wrong with it, then soften it with hot water and massage it several times until it softens, then:
Chapter 29.
In the treatment of finger dislocations.
Fingers may come apart in any direction; when one finger comes apart towards the palm or away from it, extend the finger and push the joint back into place with your thumb, then tie the tip of the finger and hang it in the direction it has come apart.
Leave it for two days then release it and extend it until it stands upright on its own on that day. If it is at night, tie it to the same description. Do not remove it during the day and practice moving it. Tie it at night and do this for days until it strengthens.
And do the same with it if it comes apart to the palm of the hand, tying it in the direction of the same side. And do with it your first action until it is healed, as well as do with it when it comes apart to all directions.
Chapter 30
In treating a dislocated spine.
When a bead of the spine or neck has dislocated, or when many beads have come off their places, there is no cure for it, because death will quickly overtake the patient.
And a sign of that is that the patient's stool comes out without his will, which he cannot hold back, and often his limbs relax, some of his legs or arms, or one of them, and that a single bead coming off its place often comes off.
And its disappearance is into four directions, and what disappears towards the back is called a hunchback. As for its treatment, if it is that a hunchback has occurred due to being young, there is no cure or recovery from it at all, and as for the one that happened because of a fall or a hit, or similar things.
They have mentioned it with various treatments, using a lot of words that do not bring much benefit and may be unnecessary. I will briefly mention what is most important and beneficial from what they mentioned, and I will explain and illustrate the machine differently from what they described and explained.
I say that a hunchback that occurs in the front of the chest has no cure or recovery from it, as well as the one to both sides. And there is no benefit in treating it, but what I will describe and explain is the one that happens in the back especially since I am describing it, which is that the patient lies on his face.
On a platform at the foot of a wall and spread a damp blanket to avoid hurting his chest, then place a wooden beam upright in a hole in the ground at one end of the platform towards his head and another wooden beam towards his feet at the other end of the platform.
And a servant holds the beam and let it be not secure in the hole, and another servant holds the other one in that form then you wrap on the chest of the patient under his armpits with a soft and strong cloth and extend the side of the cloth to the beam at his head and tie it to it.
Then tie with another cloth above his hips and above his knees and at his knee caps, then gather all the bindings and tie them to the other beam at his feet, then each servant extends his beam with the binding, and the beams do not move from their fixed places.
But they are not secure as we said, and the doctor places his hands on the block with strength so that it returns or he puts a board, then he leans on the board with his feet until it returns, for if it does not return with this treatment, you take a board whose length is about three arms.
And you dig in the wall that we said is near the patient's place to enter a side of the board, then place in the middle of the board on the hump, and the doctor puts his feet on the other side, and he tightens it very much until he presses the block.
And it returns to its place, and if you want to make it with the winding hand that twists by hand, which is that you dig in the ground at the head of the patient near the end of the platform a pair of beams whose length is a cubit, and at his feet near the other end of the platform too.
And let there be a distance of a cubit between each beam, and after that, he makes in each beam a hole, and the winding hand thread passes through these holes and secures the beams to the ground firmly, yes, so that it does not move at all, and he enters an axis twisted with the binding thread in the two holes.
And in the end, a hole was drilled into the end of the staff, about an inch wide, and a stick about a foot long was screwed into it. And in the other two wooden poles, do the same, then tighten the rope that you secured to the sick man's chest with the loop that is at his head, and the ropes that you secured to his legs with the loop that is at his feet.
Then, at each loop, the servant will twist his hand with the twine that twists the loop and the doctor will level the hump as we have said before. And this is a picture of the loop, the plank, and the sick person:
Then, after the servitor has returned and the position has been made even, it is necessary that the drying bandage be carried with egg white then the plaster then a splint be placed on top of the bandage from a panel whose width is three fingers or so and whose length is as much as it takes the position of the hump.
And on some of the correct pebbles then ties with the rope that should be and uses the sick person a gentle food until he recovers, if there is still some roughness in the place at the end of healing, it is necessary to use the drugs that relax and soften while using the panel we have described for a long time.
And it can be used in that regard a lead plate, and may be exposed roughness at the end of the back pebbles so that it is mistaken for a collapse and it is that an extra bone has grown and it does not have to expose it with this treatment otherwise death may occur,.
Chapter 31.
In treating a dislocated hip.
Know that the hip joint and shoulder joint only are exposed to dislocation, and do not expose what is exposed in other joints from slight loss and recession. The hip joint dislocates in four directions..
And that it dislocates to the inside and outside and in front and back, and most of what it dislocates is to the inside and less what it dislocates to in front or back, and the sign of its dislocation to the inside is that you when compare the healthy leg of the sick person with his diseased leg you will find it longer..
The knee is more extended than it should be, and the patient cannot bend his leg at the groin. The position that follows the groin is warm and hot to the touch before the head of the femur has reached that position.
The sign of the hip that is displaced outward is that its symptoms are opposite to these symptoms, and the sign of the hip that is displaced forward is that he straightens his leg completely except that he cannot bend it without pain at the knee, and if he tries to walk, he cannot do so in front.
The urine is repressed, and his groin hurts. And the sign of the hip that is displaced backward is that he cannot straighten his knee without bending the groin first, and when he tries to walk, his step is on the heel, and the hip that is displaced backwards is shorter than the other leg.
The groin is relaxed, and the head of the femur is visible at the position of the iliac bone. As for the types of this hip that can be corrected, if it is old and has been with the owner for a long time without trying to correct it and has remained in its state, there is no cure for it.
Do not expose it, but if the hip has recently dislocated and is of any type of the four types from the hip (dislocation), hurry to bend the joint and extend it inward and outward, and move it right and left. Perhaps it will recover.
It returns without the need for any other treatment, if it does not return in this way, you should prepare a strong and able assistant who extends his leg from below either with his hands or with a bandage tied above the knee on the leg, and another assistant who extends it from above.
Enter your hands from under his armpits and then tighten a soft bandage on the root of the femur, and another third assistant should hold the end of the bandage, and this assistant extends it either forward from the groin to the shoulder or backward from behind to the back.
And they should all be extended at once so that the patient's body rises from the ground and remains suspended, for this type of extension is a common type for the four types, unless the jaw returns with what we have said, otherwise there must be a specific treatment for each type among those that I mentioned.
As for his specific return if the jaw is inward, the patient should lie on their correct side then a bandage should be applied to the root of the thigh between the head of the femur and the location under the pelvis.
Then the bandage should be extended up from the pelvis side towards the shoulder blade then a second assistant with strong arms takes hold of the thick part of the thigh of the ill patient and extends it sharply, it will return to its position.
This type is easier than the other types of treatment in which this member is returned, if it is difficult for you and does not respond to this type of treatment, then you should tie all the patient's legs together with a strong loose bandage on the heels and knees.
And it should be four fingers apart from each other for each of its owners and the ill leg should be extended more than the other leg by two fingers, then the patient should be hung on a wooden beam in the house that is two arms away from the ground.
Then you should order a strong servant to hug the head of the thigh and hang on the patient, another servant should push the hugging thigh with force, if the joint returns to its position quickly, and if it returns to an outward jaw, then a different method is required.
The patient should lie on the platform according to what we described in the case of the hernia patient, and the bandage should be tightened on his ill leg and chest, then two beams should be placed, one under the legs and the other under the head, and an additional beam should be placed in the middle of the platform with a strong fastener.
The bandage was wet to prevent the patient from being hurt; a wooden splint was placed between the legs so that it would not pull down when the leg moved during the tide, then each assistant extended their arm towards their side and the doctor straightened the hip with his hands, and if it responded by returning to its normal position.
Unless it is to the patient's side, and if the dislocation is forward, the leg should be extended while the patient lies on his back; in this case, the splint should be placed on the table.
The doctor places his right hand on the patient's iliac bone and then presses it with his left hand while keeping the pressure directed downward towards the knee; if the dislocation is to the back, the patient should not be extended downward.
The splint should be placed on a hard surface, and the ligaments should be tight while the patient lies on his back on the table; the leg should be extended with the foot raised slightly off the ground.
Once the hip has returned to its normal position, as indicated by the patient' leg moving freely; at this point, the doctor should use the splint on the same side that the dislocation occurred.
If you see them both stable and the patient can bend and straighten his leg without any difficulty, then know that the joint has returned to its normal position; at this point, you should align the hips and secure the bandage with a tight scarf.
The patient needs to rest for three or four days before removing the bandage and comparing the legs; if they are similar in length, then know that the reduction has been successful and the patient can start walking; however, if you notice any relaxation in the joint, replace the bandage and continue with the treatment.
Then wrap it and tighten it according to your first tension, and leave it also three days then undo it and slow down walking on it for days until it gets stronger God willing.
Chapter 23.
In the treatment of knee dislocation.
The knee can dislocate in three directions: inward, outward, and downward; it never dislocates forward. The sign of a knee dislocation is when the patient is ordered to flex their leg towards their thigh.
If it does not adhere to the thigh, know that the knee is dislocated, and set all the aspects of its dislocation by having the patient sit, with his legs extended if he is able, and have you sit behind him, supporting his midsection and slightly bending him backward.
And press your back against his face and make his leg between your legs then clamp it with your hands, intertwining your fingers on his knee. Then tightly wrap both sides of the knee with your hands, while another assistant extends the patient's leg until the knee returns to its normal position.
The sign of its recovery is when the leg adheres to the thigh smoothly and without resistance, then wrap it and attach the leg to the thigh, and secure it with a bandage for three or four days, then release it. It should only be used for light walking for a few days until it heals.
If you cannot restore it with the previous description, then use the strong force with the straps that we have previously described in the treatment of the hip until it returns, and do not stop trying.
Chapter 33.
In the treatment of heel dislocation.
The heel can move slightly or completely dislocate, and the sign of a dislocated heel is when you see the heel swollen and protruding in the direction it has dislocated.
If it is possible to remove the splinter gently by hand, it should be done so; if not, the patient should sit up and have a strong attendant hold him firmly from behind, supporting his middle.
Then, with your right hand, grasp the foot from above using your left hand from below at the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and push it with your left two or three times; finally, extend the foot with your left hand while pushing the toe towards the leg with your right.
Do this twice as described above and, on the third occasion, push the toe towards the leg while pulling at the ankle; if it returns in one or two tries and the foot is level, you are done. If not, repeat the procedure.
If the foot still does not return to its place, lay the patient on his back on the ground and drive a wood-shave (a narrow wooden stick) firmly into the ground between the patient's legs; then wrap a cloth around it to prevent injury to the patient and secure it in place. Then, have an attendant adjust the leg.
Then, have another attendant extend the leg in the opposite direction by holding onto a strap around the patient's neck, while keeping the rod in place between the patient's legs to prevent him from falling forward; then, the doctor should adjust the foot with his hands.
And have another attendant hold the healthy leg down; then, the doctor should adjust the foot quickly; if the jaw returns and you can confirm its stability, wrap it with a bandage and secure it with several tight straps; make sure to protect the nerve that runs above the heel from behind.
To ensure the bandage is not too tight and does not hurt the patient, then leave it for two or three days; if it loosens, tighten it again; and then remove it on the fourth or fifth day; the patient should not walk for forty days.
If one walks before this time has passed, it is not safe that the jaw falters upon him and ruins and does not accept treatment after that, then an warm mass appeared on him, it should be used in calming it what we described in another place of treatment and dislocation until it goes.
Chapter 34.
In the treatment of a man's finger jaw.
The jaw should be made even what has separated from it with a slight amount of force, as this is easy to do; if the jaw is in some pieces of the heel of the foot, the patient should place his foot on a level place on the ground.
Or on a board while standing, like a walker, and then you place your foot on what has been removed from those joints, and then kick it with strength until it returns and you see it has become even and there is no trace of it in the place.
Then make a board under the sole of his foot that takes the whole foot, it should have two heads, and then tighten it firmly and securely for three days, and then remove it and keep it away from walking for many days until it is strong and safe to return, if God wills.
Chapter 35.
In types of the jaw that is with a wound or with a fracture or both.
When something like this happens, and one seeks to treat and repair it, often it leads to death.
For that is why one should not proceed in treating such a thing except from one who is skilled in the industry, long experienced, gentle and compassionate, taking his time, and not hasty or bold; and he should use in the beginning of treatment the drugs that soothe hot tumors only, and deliver the patient.
For the sake of God, except for what I hope for it to be safe from harm with ease of illness and a back that has some hope, so turn it off from your time in the beginning before the hot tumor happens.
If the organ returns to what you intended, then use the measure that calms the hot tumors and treat the wound with the proper ointments that dry it up. If the jaw is broken and there are fragments of bone that are healing well, then grind them and extract them. Follow in this regard what we have mentioned earlier regarding simple diseases in their respective chapters.
And be careful and keep yourself away from taking risks, as I have preceded to advise you, for that will be more beneficial for your reputation and safer for your exposure, God willing.
