The author of this book said when he had finished for you, my sons, this book which is a part of the science of medicine in its completeness and has reached in it the ultimate degree of clarity and explanation; I saw that I should complete it for you with this article which is a part of work by hand.
For the work of the hand is improved in our country and in our time completely lacks, to the point that it would have studied its science and its effect has disappeared. And what remains of it are scant remains in the books of the ancients, which have been miswritten by hands and affected by error and confusion, so that their meanings have become obscured and their benefit has diminished.
So I saw that I should revive it and compose it in this article on the way of explanation and clarification and brevity, and to bring images of hammers and other tools of work because it is an increase in explanation and what requires it.
And the reason that there is no artisan who improves his hand in our time today because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its owner to retrain before that in the science of anatomy which was described by Galen. Until he stands on the benefits of organs, their configuration and their humours and their connection and separation, and knowing the bones, nerves and muscles and their numbers and exits, and the pulsating and stagnant arteries and their outlets.
And for that reason, Abqurats said: "Doctors are many in name but few in fact, especially in the art of the hand. We have mentioned this side in the introduction to this book.
For he who is not aware of what we have mentioned in the anatomy will certainly commit errors that kill people as I have seen many who pretended to this science without knowledge or study.
And I saw a ignorant doctor who had split a pig's leg on the neck of a woman, he cut some arteries of the neck, so that the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead at his feet.
I saw another doctor who advanced in removing a stone from a man who was old and the stone was large so he panicked and removed it with a piece of the bladder's tissue. The man died after about three days, and I was called to remove the stone; so I examined the patient's condition and the nature of the stone.
I also saw another doctor who earned a living by treating some of our country's bandits as well as by medicine.
I saw a black boy who had a fracture in his leg near the ankle with a wound; so, because of his ignorance, the doctor quickly fixed the fracture with splints and braces tightly without leaving the wound any breathing room.
Then he left him to follow his desires for a few days; then, when his leg and foot swelled up and came close to dying, I took charge of him.
I called on him, so he quickly removed the bandage; then, he recovered from his pains except that corruption had taken hold in the member and I could not save him.
Corruption continued to spread in the member until he died.
I saw another doctor who was slow and lazy; so the cancer he had grew big and became a great problem for his patient; that is because if cancer is pure black blood, then it should not be exposed to iron at all.
Unless it is in a member that can be entirely removed.
For this reason, my son, you should know that working with the hands can be divided into two parts: work that is accompanied by safety and work that often leads to injury.
I have warned in every place where it comes from this book the work that is full of danger and fear; so you should warn against it and refuse it.
So that the ignorant one won't find a way to speak and attack; so take precautions for yourselves with strong measures and gentle care for your illnesses and stability.
And they took the best route to safety and a good outcome, and they avoided the dangerous and difficult diseases that are hard to cure.
And purify yourselves from that which might lead you into sin, in your religion and your world; for it is better for your religion, and higher in this world and the next, for your ranks.
For Galenus said in some of his teachings: "Do not treat a disease that is not sick, so don't call yourself doctors of illness.
And this article has been divided into three doors.
The first door.
In the heating with fire and heating with medication, sharp, well-organized, from the tip to the heel, and the images of the tools, the anvils of heating, and all that is needed in the work by hand.
The second door.
In the cut, the drain, the bloodletting, the suction, the bleeding, and similar things, all well-organized and sorted by type, with images of tools.
The third door.فى وصف ادوية التّمريض وصورها معلّقة ومشبّهة وغير ذلك من الأدوية المستعملة فى الأمراض العادية.
In the fixing and removing, treatment of limphosis, and similar things, well-organized and sorted by type, from the tip to the heel, and the images of tools.
The first door.فى صور الاجسام المستطيلة والمجوّفة والمخروطية والمستقيمة وصور الآلات مستعملة ومشابهة.
In the heating.
Before we mention the work, it should be noted that we should mention the benefits and harms of heating, and in which mood it is used.
I say, the discussion of the benefits and harms of heating is a long speech and a precise science; it's a secret that has been discussed by a group of scholars.
They have disagreed, and I have shortened their little understanding out of fear of repetition.
I say, heating is beneficial in general; every bad mood can be improved with a substance or without one; there are two types of moods: the hot one without a substance and the dry one without a substance.
And as for the immobile humor with substance, they disagreed about it; some said that kuh is beneficial in it, and others said the opposite, that kuh does not suit a disease that is of heat and dryness because the fire nature is heat and dryness.
It is not possible to treat a hot dry disease with a hot dry remedy, and he who says the opposite, that kuh by fire may be beneficial for a hot dry disease that occurs in people's bodies. Because when you add the body of man and his moisture to the fire humor, you have a cold body.
And I say according to his saying because experience has revealed it to me several times, but it should not be conceived in that matter except one who has been refined and trained in the door of kuh with an advanced training. And he stood on the difference of people's humor and the status of diseases in themselves, their causes, symptoms, and duration of time.
And as for all other humors, there is no fear of them on you, especially the cold wet diseases; all doctors agreed on them and did not differ in their benefit with kuh.
And know, my sons, that if the treatment by kuh with fire is beneficial over the treatment by a burning remedy because fire is a singular essence that its action does not exceed the organ that has been kuh'd nor hurts an adjacent organ connected to it except a slight harm.
And the treatment by a burning remedy may exceed its action to what is after the organs and may cause a disease that is difficult to treat, and fire, because of its dignity and generosity of its essence, will not do that except it is excessive.
And that has been clarified to us by experience because of the long service and care in the industry and standing on the facts of the matter.
And for that, I have omitted the long speech; and if it were not inappropriate to my book, I would have mentioned to you in the fire a secret hidden and the method of doing it in the bodies and denying diseases with philosophical and demonstrative words that are difficult to understand from your minds.
Know ye, my sons, that they have differed as to the time when the cautery is suitable, and they have made the best time spring-time.
And I say that the cautery may be suitable in every time, because the harm which is realized from before the time is made up in the benefit which is brought about by the cautery. Especially if the cautery is from painful necessities that are strong incitements not to be borne with delay, for what is feared that will follow after is greater in harm than that which entered before time.
And know ye, my sons, that what the common folk and ignorant physicians imagine, that the cautery which cures a disease will never be repeated, and they make it inevitable.
And the matter is not as they imagined, for the cautery is like a remedy which changes the humor and dries up the humors which are the cause of the occurrence of pains.
Except that the cautery is superior to the remedy in the swiftness of its success, and in the strength of its effectiveness, and in the intensity of its power.
And the disease may return at some time from now, according to the patient's humor and the strength of his illness and what is prepared in his body from the تجمع of humors therein, and due to neglect on his part in acquiring them by means of food and similar things.
God forbid that the disease which is used with the cautery should be a gentle disease and in a member which has few humors and fluids. Like a cauterization of a toothache, etc., so it may be that he will not return in which that pain is absent, and this is the least.
And the saying of the common folk that "the cautery is the last of medicine" is a correct saying, because they believe that there is no remedy which is effective as a cure after the cauterization has been applied, and this is not so, for the matter is otherwise.
And the meaning is that the use of cautery in a disease is the last resort for a doctor; because when we use therapeutic measures such as drugs to treat a disease and they don't work, then we resort to cauterization and it works. Therefore, the cauterizer is the last thing in medicine. This does not agree with the meaning that the general public and many ignorant doctors have gone to; for it is not true that cauterization is the last thing in medicine.
And the early scholars said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron; and they said this because gold is moderate in its properties and of superior essence. They said that it does not pustulate at the site of cauterization, but this is not always the case.
Because I have tried it and found that it only works in some bodies and not in others; cauterizing with gold is better and more effective than iron, as they said; but when you heat the gold cauldron in fire, it does not show you the level of heat for the color of gold.
And because it quickly cools down; and if you add to it in fever, it melts in fire and clumps together, so the artisan is distracted by this, and that is why cauterizing with iron among us is quicker and more correct for the work, God willing.
And I have organized this section on cauterization by seasons from the head to the foot to facilitate for the student what he wants, God willing.
Chapter One.
In Head Cauterization One Cut.
This cauterization benefits from the excess of moisture and cold on the brain, which is a cause of headaches and frequent falls from the head to the sides of the eyes and ears; it also benefits from sleeping a lot and toothache and pain in the throat. And in general, any disease that is caused by cold, such as paralysis, epilepsy, fainting, and similar diseases.
In this case, you should first order the patient to vomit with a laxative medicine that has been purified and taken for three or four nights according to what is required by the strength of the patient, his age, and his habits.
Then you should order him to shave his head with a razor then set him down between your hands, seated so that he places his hands on his chest.
Then you should place the back of your hand on the tip of his nose between his eyes and where your finger middle ends, mark that spot with ink.
Then heat the cast-iron cauldron that this is its image.
Let him reveal the bone as much as a raisin's size, then raise your hand or else repeat the same with the iron itself or something else if it has cooled down. Until you see from the bone what I mentioned to you, then take something of salt and dissolve it in water and drink it in a cotton pad and put it on the spot and leave it for three days.
Then carry on him a cotton pad soaked in fat and leave it for him until the scar vanishes from fire, then treat with the four-part ointment until God wills he heals.
And they say that the wound is the better and more beneficial as it remains open, it will draw puss, which is best and most beneficial.
And some have mentioned that the skin should be burned to the bone, and the iron should hold fast until it burns a little of the thickness of the bone, then after that, what has been burned of the bone is stripped, then treated with it.
And others have said that you should be excessive with the iron until it has an effect on the bone that is strong enough to cause a small piece of the bone to fall, like a pea or a tiny ball, and they claim that it expels the air from that location through steam from the head and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then treat until it heals, and I do not see these two types of iron treatment at all except in certain people, and by way of speculations, and leaving it with us is better if it can heal naturally as we have seen in all the organs.
特别是当病患的头部肌肉虚弱时，第一种缝合方法更安全、更有效。这种方法对我来说是最好的，我建议你使用这种方法，这样就能确保成功，若神意许诺，那就大功告成了。
第二章。
在缝合头部。
如果头部出现慢性疼痛，病患长期受苦，并且已经尝试过各种治疗方法，如绷带、固态、喷剂和膏药以及各种包裹和固定方法，特别是当病患曾接受过针刺疗法，但没有效果，那么请看。 如果病患的头部肌肉具有良好的韧性，并且没有出现任何弱点，那么就再做一针刺法。在头顶中央或头顶左右，或者在头的两侧，找一个合适的地方，稍微向上提头，然后再用力下压。 然后再在头部每个角落做一针，直到皮肤变薄，露出骨头。 并在头部后部，就在我们 gọi为“斧”的位置做一针，然后松开手，不要暴露骨头，因为病患会对这种疼痛感到非常痛苦，这与其他头部针刺法相比更难忍受。我会在适当的位置做这针，将在下一章中描述。
用于头部前部和后部的针刺法应该比中头部更温和。以下是一张图表，可以帮助您理解这些针刺位置之间的差异：[在此处插入图表]
第三章。
在针刺非慢性头痛。
如果头痛伴有眩光和眼痛，病患会通过洗漱和使用我们之前提到的药物来缓解头痛。如果这些治疗方法不起作用，那么就用以下两种针刺方法之一：要么从头部前部开始，要么从后部开始。以下是这两种方法的说明：[在此处插入图表] 或者使用刺痛性药物，或者使用铁针。
And as for cauterizing with the burning medicine, it is that you take one clove of garlic and peel it and cut its ends from both sides then split the place of pain with a wide scissor until it becomes under the skin place that can fit the clove.
Then you put it under the skin until it disappears and then tie it tightly with a bandage and leave it for fifteen hours then untie it and take out the garlic and leave the wound two or three days then carry it.
On it a cloth dipped in grease until the place drains then treat it with the ointment until it heals if you wish, and if you want to do that with some of the burning medicines which I have brought up in the eighth article in the burning medicines.
And as for cauterizing it with iron on this condition: Heat the iron ingot which this is its image:.
And it is called the iron ingot because its head is like a screw with some bumps and there is a small depression in the middle of it..
Then you put it on the place of pain and hold your hand while you rotate the iron a little bit, and the amount that burns from the thickness of the skin is like half its thickness.. And you raise your hand so that it does not burn the artery which is from below, and then you dip a cloth in salt water and put it on the place and leave it for three days.. Then you carry the cloth with grease and then treat it with the ointment until it heals if God wills..
And if you want, you can cauterize this headache with the edge of the iron scissor and save from cutting the artery in this non-chronic headache especially..
Chapter Four.
In cauterizing a chronic headache..
If you have treated the headache with what we mentioned from advanced treatment and what we mentioned in the chapters of diseases, and if it did not respond to that treatment and you saw from the disease what we mentioned from the burning treatment or fire, then you can try cauterizing it with a knife.. The iron should be heated until it turns white, after having marked the place of the pain with a line half an inch long or less, and then your hand should be left for one shake while you pull it until you cut the artery and reach towards the bone.
But you should be careful not to connect the jaw that moves when chewing, so it burns the muscle or nerve that moves it, causing spasm.
And be careful and vigilant about bleeding from the artery you cut, for if you cut the artery, there is danger of death. Especially for one who does not know what to do or has not become accustomed to doing it, and left work first.
And the remedy for the occurrence of bleeding from the artery will be mentioned on its face in the book, if God wills, and if you see a disease that does not respond to this wound, then see what to do with it.
And I saw the patient's body tolerating the wound, as we have described, and treating the wound until it heals, God wills.
And if you wish, use the iron that we mentioned in the chapter of cutting the artery with a double-bladed knife, because this is a better and more effective burn.
Chapter V:
In: Curing Earaches.
If a pain in the ear occurs due to cold, and is treated with laxatives and all the treatments we mentioned in the classification, and the pain does not go away, heat the iron that is called the "tip", as this picture shows:
Then drop it on all of the ear as it spins, or both of them if the pain is in them. And keep the iron away from the root of the ear a little after having marked the place with ink, and the burn should be ten points in each ear or less, and then treat the places until it heals, God wills.
Book Two, Chapter Six.
On the Extraction of Bones.
The type of gangrene that is treated with cauterization is that which arises from pus as mentioned in the discussion of diseases.
Cauterization should be avoided for the type of gangrene that occurs from dry gangrene and nerve spasm.
When you have treated this type of gangrene with irrigate and poultices, and your treatment has not been effective, then the patient should be cauterized using three applications. One at the base of the ear, the second slightly below the temples, and the third at the meeting of the lips.
Make your cauterizations on the opposite side from the affected area, as relaxation occurs on the healthy side.
The method for cauterization is to make a burn with the tip of the finger, just below the temple, and another in the forehead, and the length should be the length of the thumb.
Hold the cauterizing instrument (a type of knife) so that it burns half the thickness of the skin; this is the image of the caustic agent, which is a type of scalpel as mentioned in the previous figure. It is slightly gentler than the previous one. The blade should be a little thicker, then treat the area as mentioned earlier until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Seven.
On Treating Chronic Hemorrhoids.
If chronic hemorrhoids have developed, and your treatment using the methods mentioned earlier has not been effective, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize four times. Cauterize each temple with one application, and another in the middle of the head as mentioned earlier, and a fourth on the back of the head.
Follow the same recipe as mentioned earlier; it is also beneficial to cauterize a fifth time on the stomach, and then treat using the previous methods.
Chapter Eight.
In the eighth chapter on "Amnesia.
The one who is affected by phlegm should first be treated with large dosages of the ajarritants and purified blood pills for the brain.
Then he should have his hair shaved completely and a poultice of mustard, written in the article about blistering, applied to his back. It is a form of shock therapy.
And do that on the specific rank mentioned there, for by doing so one will be healed. If not, then administer three shocks of electricity to the back of his head, starting from the top of the head and going down the neck.
Place a thicker finger between each shock, then treat the shock with what has been mentioned above. If you want to increase it and the patient is able to tolerate it, then administer the middle shock.
If you want to increase it, then administer the shocks on the temples, and then treat until he is healed. The hot iron should be in the shape described earlier.
Chapter Nine.
In the ninth chapter on  "Paralysis and muscle relaxation.
First, advance in purifying the head with the ajarritants and what has been mentioned above. Then shave the patient's hair. Administer one shock of electricity to the middle of the head, then one each to the temples, and one to the back of the head.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck, if needed in order to treat muscle relaxation in the body, and if the patient is able to tolerate it and the disease is severe and persistent, then administer four shocks on the spine. And report back on the shock to see if more than half of the skin is burned, then raise your hand, and then treat according to what has been mentioned above until he is healed, God willing. The hot iron should be in the shape described earlier.
Chapter Ten.
In the tenth chapter on   "Epilepsy.
The patient who has been struck by phlegm should be cooked; his brain must first be purified with large ijarats and with all the remedies we have mentioned in the section on treatment if the patient is old enough and likely to respond to medication.
If the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medication, he should use gargles and mouth rinses that purify the brain several days before that, along with improved nutrition.
Then he should shave his head and apply the cauterization in the middle of the head as mentioned above, and another cauterization at the back of the head. And on each of his ears a cauterization, if the patient is strong and likely to respond [to treatment], apply the cauterizations mentioned in the case of a stroke and muscle relaxation on the vertebrae of the neck and spine, and the cauterization should be olive oil-based on the previous description.
If the patient is a child, make the cauterization gentle in this case.
Chapter 11.
In cauterizing malaria.
If the cause of malaria is corrupt humidities and thick phlegm, apply the cauterizations we mentioned in the case of a stroke.
If the cause of malaria is a bias leaning towards blackness and the patient's body is moist, he will not be able to purify his brain as mentioned above in the section on treatment.
Then shave the patient's head, then make a tight cake of linen as large as a circle, and then lower it onto the middle of his head while he sits upright, holding onto something from each side. Then take a pound of sheep fat.
Then heat it gently on the fire until the tip of a finger feels warm when inserted into it, then empty it in the middle of the head in the circle, and leave it to cool down, do this for the patient once a week along with his other good treatment, until he recovers, God willing.
And if you wish to burn it, do so drop by drop, without holding the torch in your hand, but rather let it go up and down while burning. This kind of burning moistens the brain moderately.
Then carry it on a cotton ball soaked in fat or in chicken fat.
Chapter 12:
In burning the water that descends in the eye.
If you see the beginning of the descending water in the eye with the signs mentioned in the division, then hurry up and let it drain without obstruction so that it can be purified. Let it sweat for a few days in the bath while drinking.
Then have him run a comb through his hair and burn it on the middle of the head, then burn two burns on the temples if the beginning of the descent of water in both eyes or one if it is only in one eye.
Then cut with the torch all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the torches be long in width on both temples and preserve from bleeding.
If you see anything of it, cut it off on the spot with any available treatment and we will come to wisdom in tying the arteries and preserving from bleeding.
And you may burn it at the back of the head under the two bones, two torches that are sufficient.
Chapter 13:
In burning the chronic tears.
If the tears of the eye are chronic and constant, and if you have realized that it is due to an excess of thick, sticky, sticky blood, then burn the type of torch described in front of the eye when the descending water begins. A torch in the middle of the head, two torches on the temples, and two more under the bones at the back of the head, and if you need to increase it, burn a small torch on each side of the eye on the edge of the eyebrow with a small torch.
Chapter XIV.
In treating a nosy nose.
If the treatment we mentioned in the division does not succeed, then quickly cut off the hair from the front of the head and shave it with the olive knife. Then, shave it with the surgical knife twice above the eyebrows, just below the hair, and be careful not to cut the artery; this is a picture of the surgical knife.
Chapter XV.
In treating a drooping eyelid.
If the eyelid relaxes due to disease or moisture, then cauterize it with this crescent-shaped knife.
If you wish, cauterize above the eyebrows a little, two cauterizations on each side, and distance from the temples; the length of each cauterization should be the same as that of the eyebrow.
And do not overdo it with the cauterization, but only burn a third of the skin; and this is a picture of the knife with this characteristic.
Chapter XVI.
In treating a drooping eyelid.
If the eyelids turn inward towards the eye, cauterize it in two ways. Either cauterize it with fire or with a caustic substance; if you cauterize it with fire, order the patient to stop brushing his teeth until his hair grows and becomes straight.
If he cauterizes it while the plant is still growing, then bind his eyes so that they cannot move until the hair grows and becomes straight; when it has grown and become straight, place the patient's head on your lap, and mark the position of the eyelid with ink in the shape of a leaf.
The beginning of the mark should be near the lashes, and then place a cotton wool ball dipped in egg white or salves of berrisroot under the eyelid; then heat the surgical knife; this is a picture of it.
Then it is heated in the form that you have taught a little bit in many times until it burns the surface of the skin which is all the shape of an Indian leaf and its ظاهر خاصّة وعلامة صحّة عملك أن ترى جفن العين قد تشمّر والشعر قد ارتفع عن لحمة العين.
Then raise your hand then leave it three days, then carry on with cotton with oil until the crust falls off then treat with the ointment until it heals, God willing, If hair returns after a while and the eyelid relaxes.
If hair in the eyelid is lower, treat it with oil to return to its natural position and not cause pain, and as for burning the skin with medicine, that is when you order the patient to leave his eyelashes until they grow long and straight.
Then make a picture of paper leaf then take from the soap known and the lime not extinguished in each one weight a dirham or about it so you grind them both well grinding, and do that with urgency so that it does not dry out. Then you spread it on the paper you made as a leaf shape and place it on one or both eyelids and put a cotton with milk under the eye and the patient's head in your lap.
Then put your index finger above the medicine and tighten it a little while moving it whenever the patient feels burning because he will feel a burn like fire, as long as he feels the burn, leave the medicine and move it with your finger, if the burn stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the eyelid has risen as it rises when burned with fire or cut, and otherwise, repeat the medicine on the site that did not affect by the medicine and did not turn black until you finish your work and the eyelid shrinks then put cotton with oil on it to remove the burn scars.
Then treat it with the olive ointment or something else until it heals, and you should be cautious when working so that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye because the eyelid relaxes after days and we fear that there is something in the eye.
Then prepare the medicine on that place that has relaxed from the eyelid especially as you did first then treat it until it heals, and this is a picture of the leaf of the ash tree.
And know that people's eyes may differ in size and stature so according to that it should be like your shrugging, and the way to correctness is not hidden from those who have experience with this industry.
Chapter 17.
In K'i' nasur which is exposed in the lacrimal eye.
If you treat nasor with what we have mentioned in the characteristics of diseases then your treatment does not work, it is necessary that you burn it on this feature.
Order the patient to put his head in your lap and hold his head servant between your hands firmly so that he does not move or hit his head.
Then you put a cotton ball soaked in the egg white or in the saliva of the perzqatuna on his eyes then heat the iron which this is its picture.
It is hollow as the shape of a goose feather from one end which has the burn, and if you want that the other end be open then it is good for your work if God wills.
Then you squeeze the nasor if it is open and take out its pus and dry it up, or if it is not open then you open it and take out its pus then you put the iron on it when it's very hot and hold it with your hand so that it reaches the bone.
And remove your hand a little away from the eye when you burn it to the side of the nose so that your hand does not miss or disturb the patient then the iron may fall on the fat of the eye and ruin it, if it reaches the first burn to the bone and otherwise you have to prepare the iron again if you need it.
And leave it for three days, and then put a cotton pad with oil on it and treat it with the drying ointment until it heals, because if it has been forty days and did not heal, put on it sharp medicine that consumes bone until it is exposed, and scrape it as mentioned in his book if God wills.
And another face of the cutting of the scar, some of the early mentioned, intentionally go to the place of the scar cut then put in the same hole a thin funnel this is its picture.
And pour in it the weight of a dime of lead dissolved and hold your hand on the funnel firmly bound and not move the patient at all so that the dissolved lead does not flow into his eye, and it should be put on the patient's eye a cotton pad soaked in egg white or water.
For the lead burns the place of the scar and heals it with a wonderful healing, because if the scar healed with what we have mentioned above in cutting and treatment, then there is no need to use the hole of the nose and return the scar to the naso-pharyngeal canal as will be mentioned in his book in his special case.
Chapter 18.
In cutting a crack in the lip.
Often a crack occurs in the lip, known as a pimple, especially in the lips of children, because it often happens, when you treat this crack with what we have mentioned above in the section, and if treatment does not succeed, heat a small travel iron on this image:
be on the sharpness of the knife then put it in a travel iron and heat it, then put it in the same crack until the cutting reaches the depth of the crack, and then treat it with the ointment until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter 19.
In cutting the scar that occurs in the mouth.
If it is exposed in the root of the gingival or in the tongue or in the roots of the teeth and swell, then burst and become pus-filled scar, then treat it, but if treatment does not succeed, it is necessary to heat a travel iron on the size that fits in the scar.
Then introduce it into the nostril hole and grasp your hand until the iron bar reaches its entire length and ends, and do this once or twice. Then treat it afterwards as we have mentioned above to heal, God willing.
If the material has stopped and healed, there is no need to examine the place and remove the rotten bone according to what will come in its book if God wills.
Chapter 20:
In the extraction of loose teeth and relaxed molars.
If the gums have relaxed due to moisture and the teeth have moved, and after treating them with medication they haven't improved, place the patient's head on your lap and heat the iron bar as shown in the image below after placing the ống (tube) on the tooth.
Then introduce the iron bar heated quickly and grasp your hand for a moment until the patient feels heat of fire has reached the root of the tooth, then remove your hand and repeat the process as many times as you wish, then let the patient fill his mouth with salt water.
And he should hold it for an hour and expel it, as the loose teeth will become fixed, and the relaxed gums will tighten and dry up, removing the unwanted moisture.
Chapter 21:
In treating toothache.
If the toothache is caused by cold or there is a pest in it and the treatment with medication hasn' t improved, then two methods of kya (iron bar treatment) are applied: either with fat or with fire.
While fat kya is done by taking raw cow fat, boiling it in a metal cup or shell, then taking a cotton wool ball, dipping it in the hot fat and placing it on the tooth that hurts quickly and firmly, and grasping it until it cools down.
Then repeat the process as many times as you wish, until the fire reaches the root of the tooth; if you want, you can dip a wool ball or cotton in cold fat and place it on the tooth that hurts, and place the hot iron bar on top of it until the fire reaches the base of the tooth.
And as for sharpening with fire, it is that you go to a copper tube or a iron tube and there is some thickness in its wall so that the heat of fire does not reach the mouth of the patient, then you warm the iron which comes out of its shape and put it on the same tooth and hold your hand until the iron cools down. You do this several times.
If the pain goes away in that very day, or another day, it is necessary thereafter to fill the patient's mouth with sweet fat and hold it for an hour then spit it out, and this is a picture of the iron.
It is sharpened with any side you want and at the rate that can be done, and this is a picture of the tube.
Chapter 22
In sharpening pigs.
If the pigs are stubborn about the phlegm and cold secretions and do not submit to ripening with medicines, and you want rapid ripening, then warm the hollow iron which this is a picture of it with an open end on both sides.
Let the smoke come out during the sharpening from the other end and place it protected on the same swelling once or twice if it needs that until it reaches the depth of the swelling, if the swelling is small, then make the iron according to the swelling.
Then leave it for three days and carry on it a cotton wool dipped in fat until what is burnt by fire goes away, then treat it with the ointment and bandages until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 32
In sharpening a hoarse voice and difficult breathing.
If the secretions prevail over the larynx, especially if it is accompanied by a cold constitution, then the patient should first vomit with medicines to ease them, and then burn him with a sharp knife in a knot on the base of the throat at the level of the epiglottis.
Be cautious that your knife does not reach the larynx, and burn only half of the skin, then apply another kaya at the joint of the neck in the last bean of it with a good one, and the iron should be shaped as mentioned above.
Then treat it as mentioned above until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 24
In kaya for lung disease and coughing.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold dampness, and there is no fever or consumption, and the disease is chronic, then apply two kayas above the collarbones in the soft, hollow areas, and apply another kaya in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And the iron should be shaped as mentioned above, and if you wish, your kaya should be drops of an iron that is called a point, and its image has been mentioned in dropping and earache, and the points should be about thirty points towards it.
Then treat it as mentioned above until it heals, and a kaya with three prongs can be made in this form, and this is the image of the iron.
Chapter 25
In kaya of the armpits.
If the head of the humerus has dislocated due to slippery moisture or has not remained in place during its attempt to be restored to its position, so that it becomes a habit for it to recede, then the jaw should first be put back into place: Then lay the patient on their back or on their correct side, and raise the skin inside the armpit with your left hand fingers if the joint has dislocated inwardly:
Then heat the double-headed iron, and this is its image.
Then the skin is burned with it until it passes through to the other side, and the shape of the kaya is four kayas, and if you use an iron with three prongs, then the shape of the kaya becomes six kayas, and the prongs should be on the soft part of the armpit.
Here is a picture of the steam iron with three prongs.
And one might be added to this number, making eight plies. Then the cooked meat is placed on the plies and salt is added; then the patient is immobilized and the joint is not moved at all until it heals, unless the dislocation is upward, which is rare.
One good screw-type ply or multiple plies, applied drop by drop, and the joint will toughen up, moisture will evaporate, and the patient will recover.
Chapter 26.
In stomach surgery.
If there is a cold and moisture in the stomach, causing many infections and treatments have not been successful, then the patient should lie on his back, extend his legs and arms, and then three plies are applied to him. One ply under the ribcage, the size of a finger, with a screw-type iron; and two plies on either side of the first one, until the shape of the plies forms a triangle and they are farther apart so that they do not merge if they become infected; the depth of the plies should be two-thirds the thickness of the skin, and the shape of the plies.
On this image and on this amount, no more than that.
If you prefer, you can cook it with one large ply in the center of the stomach, on this image.
And the iron used to cook this single ply should be shaped like a circle, as shown in this image.
The stomach can be cooked drop by drop on the part that you want to measure with ink, then cook it with a drop iron and then treat it with the previously mentioned treatment until it heals.
Chapter 27.
In cold surgery on the liver.
If the liver becomes painful due to cold and moisture, or due to wind, causing a significant departure from its normal state, and if the patient is treated with what was mentioned in the previous chapter, it will not improve. So, there are two options: either continue with the same treatment and see if it improves, or try another approach. The patient should lie on his back and make three knots with the thread on this very shape and amount on the liver below the lobules where the human elbow ends.
And after each knot and each knot on the thickness of the finger, and the cautery should be along the length of the body straight, and do not press your hand with the cauldron yes, but you should put the thread in water first before making the knots with it so that the thread does not break.
And let the amount you burn from the thickness of the skin be half of it no more, and the patient should stand on his feet if he is not standing then he should lie down and extend his legs and raise his arms, and this is a picture of the cautery.
And it may be that you can cauterize these knots with the surgical scalpel if you have a companion and skill in industry and pay attention so that you do not press too hard on the cautery so that you burn the skin all over it and burn the abdomen and reach the intestines, because the skin is thin there, so be careful.
Chapter 28.
In an abnormally enlarged liver and in a tumor on the liver, cauterization.
If a cyst has formed in the liver and you want to know whether that tumor is in the meat of the liver or in its wall, then the patient will find weight and pain without sharp edges.
If it is in the wall of the liver, then there will be a sharp pain and you will see that it has become difficult for doctors to treat it. The patient should lie on his back, and then you learn about the affected area with ink.
Then heat the cautery in fire, it is a cautery that resembles a millstone and this is its image. And cauterize it with one knot until you burn the skin all over and finish with the cautery on the wall until you remove all the pus, then treat it with leech treatment to heal it.
This type of cautery should not be used by anyone except one who has long been trained in the art of medicine and experienced these diseases many times; then he may undertake such work, but leaving it with me is better.
Chapter 29.
In cauterizing the shins.
I have mentioned in the beginning cauterizing with the origins of the zaruond for cold shinbones, this way: Take one origin of the zaruond that is dry and long by nature; it should be as thick as a finger, and then dip it in oil and burn it in fire. Then cauterize it with one burn between the connection of the collarbone to the neck and two small burns below the nipples a little slanted towards the side of the beard, and two great burns above the breasts between the third and fourth ribs.
Also two burns between the fifth and sixth ribs slanted a little towards the back, and another burn in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach, and three burns from behind: one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the spine below the burn that is between the wrists.
And your hand should not be deep in the cauterization, but it should be slightly inside the skin, and some of the beginners have mentioned that some people used to use an iron piece similar to a half-circle and heat it up and insert it between the ribs until it reaches the same spot as the swelling.
And the thread comes out as we have mentioned in the liver tumor, and in this case, the cauterization with iron is full of risks; either the patient will die immediately, or there will be a scar that cannot heal in the area.
Chapter 30.
In cauterizing the spleen.
If you treat the disease of the spleen as we have mentioned in the division chapter, and your treatment is not successful, then cauterize it with three or four burns aligned with the length of the spleen.
On the shape of the liver knots, which present their form and be between each knot and knot amount to the thickness of the finger or more a little and be the characteristic of the iron the characteristic we mentioned in the liver nodule whether and do not deepen your hand with the nodule and the image of the sick lying on his back.
The other side is in the elbow and raise the skin which opposite the spleen where ends the arm of the sick left elbow and be your raising the skin on the width of the body so that fall the knots on length of the body.
Then enter the two swords very protected so that they pass through it by the skin from the other side then come out the iron so that be four knots, and if you want to iron with the other iron of the three sabafid.
Then treat the place of the cut after that you leave it to extend pus for a few days is more useful than all that has been mentioned before from the treatment.
Chapter thirty-one.
In the cut of water retention.
The iron only benefits in water retention fluid especially, if you treat the patient with the treatment we mentioned in the division has not been effective your treatment so you should iron four knots around the navel and one knot on the stomach.
A knot on the liver and a knot on the spleen and two knots behind his back between the knots one opposite his chest and another opposite his stomach, and be the depth of the cut close to the thickness of the skin, then leave the cut open so that extends pus for a long time.
And do not leave the patient without treatment after ironing what should be collected so that he speeds up the cure, and the image of the iron that is used to iron the back is screw-shaped on what we have mentioned its image which is used to iron the back is olive-shaped.
Chapter 32.
In the treatment of the feet and legs.
If they swell in the flexor area and fill with yellow fluid, it is necessary to burn the skin on the foot in the spot between the thumb and the index finger.
And hold your hand with the iron, do not bend it then raise your hand and never bring it back again, for [the fluid] will ooze out [as] yellow water and the iron will be in this position.
Then two burns on the legs, each one on the back of the leg, with the sharp edge of the iron, and a burn on the length of the leg, one below the knee and the other lower down towards the middle of the leg, and two burns on each thigh.
Leave the burn untreated for a long time so that it oozes out water, then treat it with all that we have mentioned above.
Chapter 33.
In the treatment of diarrhea.
If the diarrhea is caused by cold and moisture, until it weakens the powers of support and digestion that are in the stomach and intestines, and this treatment has not healed, and you see the patient tolerating the iron, then go ahead with a large burn on his stomach. As mentioned above, a iron rod burn on the stomach with four burns around the navel, gentle with the iron, and a large burn on the cotton patch above the anus, or two burns.
If you see an abundance of moisture, and the patient is tolerating it, then go ahead with a burn on the genitals and a burn on each hip, and two small burns on the stomach near the large one, because this is a successful treatment that will not miss its benefit if God wants.
Chapter 34.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids.
If there is chronic hemorrhoid in the anus that is very common or one that is of thick, cold, or corrupted moisture, and has been treated as mentioned above (in the section on treatment), but the treatment has not been successful, then go ahead with three burns on the bottom of the spine, just below the base of the tail, a little apart from each other.
If you see that the skin under the bed has turned red like two fingers, and if you judge that his stomach has become cold and his food cannot be digested, and if you see that his face is swollen, then cut a large hole in his belly, as described above, and another hole near his liver. And another one on his intestine with a nail-shaped knife, and leave the incision open for some time then treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 35.
In the cutting of warts.
After cutting it, if you cut the wart, heat the iron that is like a nail then insert it into the same wart that has been cut and keep pushing your hand until the iron reaches the opening of the sweat which blood flows from it. You do this once or twice.
If the warts are many, then cut each one with a large hole as we have described and then treat it with those that suit her of ointments until it heals, and if you cooked it with a large hole on cotton, it would be more effective in benefit.
Chapter 36.
In what concerns the nidor which is in the rectum and its vicinity.
If the patient does not respond to incisions and the surgery described in the relevant section, and refuses to undergo them, it may recover by itself. But if one of the nidos becomes chronically infected and suppurates, it is necessary to first measure it with a thin probe.
Then, with the help of a probe, determine the depth and then heat the cautery to the same depth as that of the probed area and perform the cauterization once or twice or three times, depending on your need.
Be careful not to burn a nerve if there is one or a great sweat if the nidor opens into the bladder or into the intestine.
Be cautious in all these areas, as you only do this if the nidor is in a muscular location and you have determined that it is not soluble. Then treat the area until it heals completely. If the area seals itself and stops the discharge for a certain period of time, then know that it has healed fully.
If the discharge does not stop, know that it is soluble or that there is a piece of bone or other decaying matter as mentioned in the relevant section.
Chapter 37.
In cauterizing the kidneys.
If the kidney becomes painful due to cold or strong wind and there is a decrease in its function, it is necessary to cauterize both kidneys as mentioned earlier, using the surgical probe. Sometimes, two cauterizations may not be enough, so you should perform three cauterizations on each kidney, one after the other, in the same session, to achieve the best result.
Chapter 38.
In cauterizing the bladder.
If the bladder becomes weak and relaxed due to cold and fluids, causing the patient to have difficulty urinating, perform a cauterization in the area of the pubic hair at the bottom of the belly button, where the pubic hair begins, as well as a cauterization on the right and left sides of the groin.
And it shall be after the drying on each side according to the size of a thumb and dried up in the lower back, or two if needed, and the ironing is hammer-like as mentioned above.
Chapter 39.
In drying the uterus.
If, in the uterus, there is a matter of cold and moisture that prevents pregnancy, or it hurts or disturbs it, or if, when it comes, it causes pain, then it should be dried three times around the navel as we have mentioned in drying the bladder. A dry on cotton at the lower back or two, and the ironing is hammer-like.
Chapter 40.
In drying the hip's rotation.
It may be that there is a wrong mucus in the hip's place, which is a cause of its departure from its place; its sign is that the leg lengthens on the other when compared to each other and you find the site of the dislocation gap; it should then be dried
After you have taught with the ink around the right as it rotates to be the same right in the middle of the circle; and the ironing that has been mentioned above in drying the stomach; if you do not find this iron, then make three dry on the large olive iron.
And a depth to dry according to the thickness of the skin, then treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 41.
In drying the women's vein.
If there is pain in the hip's place, and the reason for that is cold and moisture; and you have treated the patient with what we mentioned in the division, and treatment did not succeed, and time has passed, then it should be eased by the thick secretions with the kahem (a kind of medicine) of kashari or sabra, etc.
Then burn it and direct the application of the caustic agent on two strikes; either with a caustic agent, or with fire; and the application of fire results in many ways, one of which is to apply three tri-shaped burns on this part.
Then make it deep enough to reach the bone, and place a space of about the thickness of a finger between each application; and the tongs should be olive-colored; and if you wish, you can apply one burn in the middle at the top of the hip itself, so that there are four burns; or if you prefer, burn it with the circle previously mentioned in the burning of the hip joint.
So that the circle surrounds all the hip and burns the whole thickness of the skin; this is the characteristic of burning the sciatic nerve if the pain was necessary for the hip itself and did not extend to the thigh and leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, apply two burns on the thigh at the point that the patient points to where he feels pain; and apply one burn above the sciatic nerve by four fingers towards the outer side a little; and make the depth of the burn equal to the thickness of the skin only.
If he indicates that the pain extends towards the toes of the foot, apply a burn at the point where he points with the caustic agent; three or four times or more if necessary. And if he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the leg, apply a burn there with a scissor-shaped caustic agent.
And be careful in all your burns that they do not reach the point of burning a nerve or a large blood vessel, which would cause harm to the patient and cause a temporary disability;
I have seen one or two people who burned their sciatic nerve and stretched the burn to the foot, until it reached the toenails, pierced all of them, and ruined the whole leg; then diarrhea occurred, followed by death. If the pain is in both sides, apply the same characteristic burn to both hips.
Some of the wise scholars have mentioned in the book of surgery by Albucasis that it is critical to perform a hip osteotomy... This procedure involves making an incision in the shape of a cup on the hip, with a diameter of half a cubit. At the top of this cup, there should be a thickness similar to a date seed, or slightly smaller. Inside this cup, there should be another cup and a third cup.
It should be made with a thickness of about a fist between each cup, and the cups should be open on both sides. The height of the cups should be around two fists or slightly more. It is recommended to take a handle from iron that has been firmly fixed in the cups. This is its appearance.
Then, it is heated in the fire until it turns red and spits sparks. It is then placed on the ill person's hip while leaning on the sound side, which will burn three times. Leave it open for several days.
It is often used and very few people tolerate it due to its harshness, horror, and shock value. However, it is a very effective treatment when someone can endure it and benefit from it. The location of the kick is not ideal...
While another method involves using drugs to burn: making two half-circular cups that can hold the blood vessels of the door... made of brass or iron.
The height of the cups should be about two fists or less. The bottom part is open, and the top part is closed, and they are joined together in the shape of a handle.
Then, place them on the ill person' side while lying on the sound side, and grip your hand firmly. Then, pour a mixture of sharp water between the two cups that has been heated slightly with fire, and let it stand for a sand-like duration (about an hour). The patient will feel the burning and stinging of the mixture as if it were fire.
Once the burning sensation subsides, raise your hand with the device and wipe off the sharp water from the hip completely. Then, leave it for several days, applying oil to it daily, until the wound heals and purifies itself.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals, if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a mold for it while holding the water according to what you made in the hip, this is the property of acute water and I have proven it in the article on repairing medicines.
Take from the salt of the cauldron and from the unwettened lime a part of each, then grind them and put them in a new pot that has been drilled at the bottom with a small hole on the scale as much as what enters the tube, and put under the bottom of the pot another agitator.
Then pour on the salt and lime of the fresh water what drowns them by a finger after having clamped them with your hand tightly and leave the pot until the acute water descends in the bottom of the agitator pot, then gather all that water together, then throw it on another lime and another salt again twice.
For it will then be very acute in power and will handle many medical procedures and burn all the limbs because it does the work of fire itself, and some medicines are burned with it such as the thrafia and the apricot seed honey and lime mixed with soap ground up.
And Galenus claimed a story about an ancient man as a treatment for hip pain and woman's swelling, he greatly honored his matter, and claimed that it does not need any other treatment and that it heals with one application only.
So that he may perhaps enter the bath-house with a portable one and come out of it having healed, and if the green shittah is not available, then the recent dried one is finely ground up with some fat and placed on the hip where the pain is or in the leg or thigh.
Then tighten it and leave the pot for three hours or as much as the patient feels the burning go away, then let him enter the bathhouse, and if his body becomes damp, then let him enter the sink, because the pain will go away and heal by God's will; If he does not heal, then repeat the bandage after ten days once again.
If God wills, it will heal; know that it is not appropriate for anyone to use cauterization with these drugs unless the body has been purged. Diaczorides mentioned that goat's urine, when used as a cauterant on the groin area, was beneficial.
The cauterization should be done in this manner: take a piece of wool, soak it in old oil, and place it on the deep area between the thumb of the hand and the forearm, closer to the forearm; then take a dry hair from a goat.
Then light it with fire until it becomes a boil, then place it on the wool and leave it until it goes out; then take another one; keep doing this until the sensation reaches halfway up the arm to the shoulder, and the pain subsides by the will of God; this type of cauterization is called 'khrir al-barra'.
Chapter 24.
In the cauterization of back pain.
Back pain may be due to various causes, such as a fall, a blow, or excessive vomiting, and cauterization is indicated in this case; it is performed solely in this category.
If the cause is due to a cold fluid discharge, after purging the patient with  'hab al-menten' (a specific drug), one should cauterize the patient's back where the pain is located; three rows of cauterization at the width of a table, each row with five or more cauterizations according to the patient's condition and strength.
The cauterization should be done with a hot iron rod, or four cauterizations with an intermediate-sized nail iron.
Chapter 34.
In the cauterization of initial hernias.
This condition often affects young children; the beginning sign is that a child may experience difficulty breathing when they stand or move, and you will find that in the last vertebrae of his back there is a lump that has come out and protrudes on all the other lumps.
If you see that and want to stop it, then cauterize with a hot iron that is in the shape of a circle on this image. To take the cauterization on each side of the furrow equally, and if you wish, you can burn it around the furrow with a dot iron two or three times, and let the dots be close to one another, then treat the site as we mentioned above.
And be careful not to use cauterization on the hernia that is caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
In cauterizing gout and joint pains.
If the joint pains are caused by cold moisture that drains into any organ of the body, then it is the custom of physicians to call this gout.
If the cold gout is treated with the treatment we mentioned in the above section and the pains do not go away, then cauterization will get rid of them. It is done by cauterizing around the knee joint on this image.
And if you need to drip on the face of the foot, then do it with a dot iron, and if the pains rise up to the knees or to other joints, this often happens, so we will do three or four cauterizations on each side with this very oil-colored iron.
If you need more than this cauterization, then do it without deeping your hand in the cauterizing, just keep it at the thickness of the skin, and if the pains rise up to the hips or to the back, then use what we mentioned above from cauterization in its own place.
If the pains are limited to the hands only, then drip around the arms as they rotate two pages, and if the pains remain in the fingers, then drip on each node and on the palm of the hand, and if the pains rise up after a few days to the elbows or shoulders, then use what we mentioned above from cauterization in its own place.
If they are well-prepared on both sides and the patient is given proper care and medication, he will recover from this cough if God wills it.
Chapter 54.
On the treatment of abdominal abscesses.
If an abdominal hernia presents itself in the groin, and some of the intestine and mesenteric fat drop into the testicle, and this begins to develop soon, the patient should be instructed to refrain from eating that day and to take laxatives to pass stool from his gut.
Then lie on your back with your hands behind you, and order the patient to hold himself so that the hernia or intestine drops out. Then you will push it back with your finger, and mark the indention on the pubic bone with a pencil; it should resemble a half-circle, its ends toward the top of the body.
Then heat an iron so that it looks like this:
until it red-hot and throws sparks; then the servant will push back the intestine or hernia into the abdomen, and another servant should place his hand on the area so that it does not drop out; and place a cushion under him, and another servant should hold his legs apart.
And another on his chest, holding his hands; then lower the iron onto the mark, keeping it steady in your hand and holding it there until you reach the bone; or do so again if you do not reach the bone with the first try.
And be careful not to burn the intestine during the ironing process, as this will harm the patient and may even lead to death or a great misfortune; and know that you have not succeeded in your task unless you reach the bone with the iron; and it is appropriate that the iron for children is gentle on their limbs, and for adults on their limbs.
Then treat the scar area with oil for three days to get rid of any scabs, and then treat it with all types of ointments until it heals; and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound closes.
It is necessary that you make his food... for the duration of his treatment... so that his abdomen is softened... in order not to protrude the intestines when he wakes up and defecates... then, if he wants to stand after forty days... a tight belt should be used and held for another forty days... and [the patient] should decrease his fatigue and fullness from food and drink and loud crying.
If he uses this measure in this way, he will be healed completely, God willing, and I will mention the treatment of hernias with a cut in its own chapter, God willing. As for the hernia that occurs in all the abdomen and is new, if you want it not to increase, you should cut the hernia with a round knife on its capacity. And let what is burned from the skin be like a third of it, and then treat it with what we have mentioned, for it will not increase, God willing. And some of the earlier ones mentioned that the hernia should be scorched with an iron triangle in this image.
After you have taught on the hernia with ink and the line that is in the upper side of the hernia and the other line down, and lower your hand in the middle with a single knife-like cut, and the first burn is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter 64.
In burning the hernia.
If it happens in some organs due to a fall or a hit, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the treatment with medicines does not benefit him, then it should be burned with a spot iron, and the burn of each organ is according to its size, large and small, weak and strong.
And the pain and spasm will be eliminated, and if he recovers from the first burn, otherwise you will repeat the burn because it is the habit of these pains to move from the organ to what is nearby, so it should follow it with the burn until the patient recovers.
Chapter 74.
In treating leprosiness.
While the lepers may benefit greatly from the use of a "khi" (a device unknown to modern medicine), especially the type of leprosy that is preceded by pus and blackening.
If you are to treat a newly-onset leprosy with the methods described in the book, and if it has not progressed much or stopped completely, and if you are afraid that the disease might corrode all of the patient's constitution, then you should perform five "kiys" on the head. The one in the middle of the known head, the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, two on the temples, and one behind the nape of the neck; then slightly deepen the "khi" to have a slight effect on the bone.
It should be removed so that the thick fumes can escape and a "khi" should also be applied to the same spot on the back as mentioned earlier. However, if the leprosy has persisted on the patient and has become noticeable, then you should apply the aforementioned  "kiys" to the head. A  "khi" on the tip of the nose, two on the cheeks, two on the vertebrae of the neck, one large at the coccyx (tailbone) and another above it in the same area, and two on the hips, one on each hip. Two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows; then a   "khi" should be applied to each joint of the fingers of his hands and feet and to each heel.
Be careful not to burn the nerve at the back of the heels, as it may cause damage; a  "khi" can also be applied to the bone of the hips, another one to the stomach opening, and another one to the liver. It should be noted that the more you apply the  "kiys", the more beneficial they will be.
And know that the patient does not feel pain as much as the healthy person because his body is numb, and it is necessary for the irons to be of a size and shape appropriate to the members and joints, as mentioned above regarding the characteristics of the pliers.
Then treat the cauterization with fine sugar and honey and other treatment until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 84.
In cauterizing a numb member, and treating it with drugs, ointments and bandages, and yet it did not heal, then anoint the same member with the same medicine, but slightly thicker than before.
Then treat it with the ointment until it heals; and sometimes a burn can occur in some of the numbness that affects the hand or foot in the spinal nerves at the exit of the nerve that moves that member, so the numbness goes away.
And one who is not blind in understanding the anatomy of the members and exits of the nerves that move the body.
Chapter 94.
In cauterizing leeches.
If the leech has passed its time and a medical trick has not been effective, then cauterize it slightly deeper than the thickness of the skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with rice flour, rose water, and hawthorn leaf, or blood of hamsters, or blood of eels; all mixed together and applied to a cloth, and apply it to the affected area until it heals.
Chapter 50.
In cauterizing cancer.
If cancer is just starting and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a large circle of fire around it; some wise men have mentioned cauterizing it with a strong cauterization in its center, but I do not see this as appropriate because I predict that it will burst open, and I have personally witnessed this.
It is appropriate to burn around it with a circle as we have mentioned, or with many scorches.
Chapter 51.
In the burning of the sebaceous gland.
If a sebaceous gland has become stagnant, either due to the natural process caused by age or because the patient is elderly and has less blood, or because of the passage of time, and you want to accelerate the maturation of the sebaceous gland, burn it with small circular scorches, applying them dropwise.
Then leave it alone, as it will speed up the maturation process; if you want to slow it down, heat the iron according to this image:
And lower it in the middle of the sebaceous gland so that it penetrates the skin, and let the burn be from what is below so that the pus runs more easily; then treat it as necessary until it heals.
Chapter 52.
In burning the ulcer.
The ulcer is nothing but decay that progresses in the member until it eats it, just as fire consumes dry wood; if you see an ulcer in a place that can be burned with fire, heat many small and large iron hooks according to what is suitable for that location where the ulcer is.
Then burn it from all sides to completely eliminate the decay, leaving nothing; then leave it alone for three days and apply sulphur powder mixed with oil to the burned areas so that the peel comes off and all decay is removed.
Then treat it with ointments that promote healing of the tissue; if, after three days, you see that the flesh is growing back in a healthy manner without decay, then no need to repeat the burning; however, if you see decay, then repeat the burning process on the remaining affected areas. The ulcer can also be treated with harsh medicines.
This is similar to the benefit of fire, which is faster and more beneficial; and I have mentioned treating it with harsh medicines in the classification; so take it from there whenever you need it.
Chapter 35.
In Kii of the reverse and non-reverse nails.
It often occurs in the bases of the feet, and is a rough thing that hurts the man; and its treatment is on two sides: either to nail it with fire or to cut it with sharp water.
As for the treatment with fire, it is that you heat the hollow iron tool similar to an eagle's feather, made of iron according to what surrounds the nail from all sides and is thin in the edge, then you lower it on the nail heated, then you rotate your hand with the tool around the nail until the tool reaches the depth of the nail.
And you leave it for three days to suppurate, then bandage it with wild garlic, ground in salt, and leave the dressing on it for a night, because it will come out of its roots; then you treat the wound site with the ointment that promotes the growth of flesh until it heals. As for the nails, they are non-reverse.
It often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, so it is necessary that you take a tube of brass or iron or eagle' s feather and lower it on the nail or wart, then you pour a little sharp water into the tube.
And hold your hand while you rotate it slightly with a grip so that the edge of the tube affects the root of the nail, and the sharp water finds a way to sink into the root of the nail, and the patient should be patient for a little while on the sting of the sharp water; an hour or two.
Then you leave it, and the nail will come out with its roots; thus you do with them one after another until you finish all of them in the body, then treat the wounds after they are taken off with ointments that promote flesh growth.
Chapter 45.
In Kii of the nail that falls out.
If a person has a cold that affects the nerve or a fever of four days or more, then he should have four or five cauterizations on the spine between each cauterization and also one in his chest. And on his stomach a cauterization with the olive cauldron because the cold dispels and accelerates the maturity of the cold disease.
Chapter 55.
In cauterizing boils that occur in the body.
It may emit a foul, pus-filled material that is cold and thick; therefore, when it first appears, it should be cauterized with a small, lit piece of wood from the fire, or from the long root of the zerr (a type of plant), or with an olive cauldron.
And the boils may be cauterized in their first eruption in this manner, without causing any increase or spreading of the disease; however, it is necessary that this be done after the patient has been vomiting due to bloodletting.
Chapter 66.
In cauterizing bleeding that occurs when an artery is cut.
Blood often flows from an artery that has been cut due to an external wound, or when splitting a tumor or cauterizing an organ, etc., and it is difficult to control this flow.
If this occurs, quickly place your index finger over the opening of the artery and clench it gently to hold the blood under your finger so that it does not flow out; then, place several olive cauldron-like cauterizers (small and large) on a fire and blow them until they become very hot.
Then, take one of them - small or large, depending on the size of the wound and the location of the artery - and lower it onto the opening of the artery while removing your finger quickly; then, grasp the cauldron tightly to stop the blood flow.
If, when you remove your finger from the artery's mouth, the iron extinguishes, immediately take another iron from the irons that are in the fire and continue doing this with one after the other until the blood stops.
And be careful not to burn a nerve, and it will be a disaster for the patient, especially if the artery is large, except in one of four cases: either by cauterization as we mentioned or by amputation if it has not been amputated. If it has been amputated, its ends will shrink and the blood will stop. Or tie it tightly with threads, or place on it medicines that are suitable for stopping blood and tightening it with splints.
And if someone tries to cut it with a bandage or by tightening it with rags or placing burning things, it will not stop in any way except in rare cases; so if someone is exposed to any of that and he does not have a doctor or medicine ready, he should immediately place his index finger on the mouth of the wound as we described.
And tighten it very tight until the blood stops flowing and drips from above the wound, on the artery and finger; there will be no water left on them until the blood clots and dries up, and in the meantime, examine what needs to be cauterized or medicated.
The second door.
In surgery, piercing, bloodletting, and wounds, etc.
Khalf said: "We have mentioned in the first book that every disease is suitable for cauterization with fire and medication, its causes, its tools, and the images of irons; and I have made that separate chapters from the beginning to the end of the century.
And I follow in this book the same method, so that the student can easily find what he wants.
Before I start, you should know, O my children, that this book contains precious gems that are not found in the first book about cauterization.
For this reason, one should be more cautious as the work in this field often leads to vomiting of blood which supports life when an artery is cut or a wound is made on a lump or a pus bag is opened or a surgical operation is performed or a arrow is extracted or a wound is made on a stone and so on. All these lead to peril and fear, and most of them lead to death.
And I advise you to avoid falling into what is uncertain on you, for it may happen to you in this craft various kinds of people with different kinds of illnesses, and some of them have become exhausted by their disease and death has become easy to them.
Due to the severity of what he experiences from his disease and the length of his suffering, and the illness that makes him think about death, and some of them spend their money on you in the hope of health and cure, and some of them are killing themselves, so it is not appropriate for you to seek help from those who come to you with this description.
And let your caution be stronger than your desire and your urge, do not advance towards anything from this before you have certain knowledge that is true to you about what will be the outcome of it, and use in all your treatment of your diseases to make a step forward with knowledge and warning of what the safety will be.
For you will find in it aid in acquiring praise, glory, remembrance and thanks, may your Lord guide you, sons, and keep wrong decisions and mistakes away from you, for that is in His hands, there is no God but Him.
I have arranged this chapter in the order of what was mentioned in the book of surgery from the beginning to the end, so that it may be lighter on you in terms of what you want from it by God's will.
Chapter 1:
In the treatment of water that collects in the heads of children.
This disease often affects children at birth when the midwife presses the head of the baby with roughness, and it may also be due to a hidden disease that is unknown.
I have not seen this disease in anyone but children; all those I have seen of that age group die quickly. For that reason, I have stopped treating it. However, I have seen a child whose head was filled with water and the swelling increased every day. The child couldn't sit by himself due to the swelling in his head and the water increased until he died.
If the moisture is gathered between the skin and bone, or if it is collected under the bone on the membrane, the work in that case is that if there is a small lump of moisture between the skin and bone, then one should cut across the middle of the head with a blade that is the length of a finger, until the moisture is drained. This is a picture of the blade.
If the moisture is greater and the lump is larger, then make two crossing incisions as in this image: .
If the moisture is under the bone and you can see the head stitches open from all sides, and the water drops when you squeeze it with your hand to the inside, it is not hidden from you. Then you should cut three incisions in the middle of the head as in this image:  .
And after the incisions, all moisture will come out, then you tighten the wounds with garments and bandages, and wrap it with a liquid over the head for five days, then you remove the bandages, and treat the wound with strings and medicated oils, and do not leave the head moderately tight, and feed the patient with dry food that is little moisture.
until the organ strengthens and heals, another recipe for incision: when you look where the bone of the swelling appears and the moisture collects, because it may be in the back of the head more or in the front, or on the right or left.
So, you mean by the incision where the swelling appears and the moisture collects, so you cut it according to what is possible for you, and be careful not to cut a vein, so the patient dies from that bleeding, along with the vomiting of moisture.
Chapter 2.
Chapter 2.
When a severe attack presents itself to the eyes or chest, and time has passed without it responding to treatment with drugs, then treat by cutting these two arteries.
If you want to cut them, then shave the patient's head with a razor, then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the artery appears, then cling to the patient's neck with his own clothes, and then look for where the pulse beats, and the two places of下降 which are behind the ears, and rarely hidden except in some people.
Then mark them with ink, and cut them with the trepanation tool cutting into the bone, and that should be done with the head facing upwards. If you want, you can insert the trepanation tool under the artery and lift it up in a cut, and its length should be about two fingers clenched together.
If the pulse stops, blood will come out repeatedly and will rise to the front and turn around, and if the artery is not felt, then measure from the ear until you reach three fingers, then mark it with ink and cut it to the bone, and what should be done.
Send seven or eight pools in the middle, and maybe it sends more or less, all of that is according to what appears to you from the patient' strength and the swelling of the arteries, then look at the wound, if there was still something attached to the bone from the membrane, cut it.
To avoid a hot swelling, then tie the wound with a cotton thread, and then treat it with unguents until it heals.
Chapter three.
Cutting the arteries in the temples.
If a person has chronic headaches, severe attacks due to watery and hot fluids in the temple muscles, chronic strong headaches, and similar diseases, and if the treatments of medicine have not been effective in them, we have tried in these illnesses to cut or cauterize the arteries in the temples as described.
The face of the patient should be shaved, and the superficial arteries in the temples should be identified, as these will be visible and easy to locate.
If it is cold, the patient should wrap their neck with a cloth, and then you can rub the area with a cloth or irrigate it with hot water to make the artery visible. Then take the instrument shown in this image. Then, using a blade, carefully remove the skin to reach the artery. Take a hook and pull it up to bring out the artery from under the skin, removing any connective tissue that may be present. If the artery is thin, bend it with the tip of the hook. Then cut a piece from it, as far away from the ends as possible, and if it doesn't bleed when cut or torn, there won't be any bleeding. This is important to know so that you don't cause excessive blood loss during the surgery. Then vomit three times into six cups.
If the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong doubled knot. The thread used should be made of spider silk or stringed out strings from a violin to prevent the formation of fungi and promote healing.
Then cut the excess between the two knots. You can do this at any time, or you can wait and do it later. If you prefer, you can sew it shut with a hot needle to the bone, which will serve the same purpose or be even better.
However, if the patient has a fever or is in a state of confusion, as heating can help eliminate fluids and promote healing, it should be done using old cotton balls and clean towels. After the arteries have been sutured, the area should be treated with dry medications that promote tissue growth, and then wrapped with bandages to protect the wound.
If, during your work, there is a flow of blood from the artery, quickly cut it off either with heat or by filling the place with salt and tightening your hand until the blood stops flowing. If you do not have anything to do this, put your finger on it until the blood freezes.
And wash the place with very cold water until the pain subsides and tighten it as you should, and among what is lighter and easier to cut the artery is to burn it with this iron with two blades after you have learned the places with ink.
And lower it very hot until it reaches the bone and the sweat stops in two places so that the distance between its ends increases, for it does not heal with this burn at all; This is the image of the iron.
The blades are sharp, similar to the two small knives, except that they are much less sharp than the blade because if they were as sharp as the blade, cold would reach them more quickly and the meat would stop more quickly; If it is a little thick, the fire will grip it.
Cut the meat quickly, this work is better than every other work and lighter and easier, and let it be after the distance between the blades is the same as the thickness of the finger.
Chapter IV.
In treating constant watery tears in the eyes.
If the tears are constant and the flow is from the veins that are on the skull bone outside, and you did not benefit from any treatment with medicines or remedies, and you saw the face of the patient turn red. And he feels a tickling on his forehead like the tickling of ants, and his eyes are droopy, wet, and their eyelids are twisted from the intensity of tears; so you have to order the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then make three parallel incisions along the forehead, each about two fingers long, parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second slightly outside the muscle that moves the cheek, and the third on the other side.
Be careful not to cut the two arteries on the sides, and keep your hand away from where the jaws meet, and make a space of three fingers clenched in each incision; and have with you a piece of sponge or dried-up rags to stop the blood.
Then insert the sharp knife with a pointed tip that is shown in this picture. Take the knife from the incision next to the cheek all the way to the middle incision, stripping off all the skin and fascia between the incisions; then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision; then remove this knife. And insert into the first incision as well another instrument called a scalpel sharp on one side and smooth, not sharp, on the other side; this is its picture:
And make the sharp side up towards the meat attached to the skin, and the smooth side down towards the bone; and push it until it reaches the middle incision and cut all the blood vessels that descend from the head to the eyes, without the cut reaching the surface of the skin.
Then do the same in the middle incision as in the other, and after the moderate amount of blood has flowed, squeeze the areas where the dried blood is to extract it; then put a cotton swab in each incision and place on it a rags that have been soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar and oil.
So that a hot swelling does not occur, and on the third day you undo the bandage and use a lot of water to clean [the wound], then treat it with basilicum ointment, applied with rose water and all that is used to treat surgeries until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Five.
In the treatment of tears and نزلات (infections) around the eyes from the inner head.
When a person has had many acute, severe, and persistent eye infections that have caused the eyes to become weak and dim, with decreased vision and irritated eyelids that fall apart and shed their eyelashes. And it will be in the depth of the head, a sharp and painful pain, and repeated sneezes; so know from these symptoms that those substances and infections come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for them is this treatment, which is to order the patient to shave his forehead, and then split a single line down the middle of the forehead.
And it will be in the depth of the head, a sharp and painful pain, and repeated sneezes; so know from these symptoms that those substances and infections come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for them is this treatment, which is to order the patient to shave his forehead, and then split a single line down the middle of the forehead. Or raise it slightly from the side, and begin the cut from the left temple to the right temple; make the cut down to the bone, and keep your hand away from the jaw muscles that move when chewing until, when the bone is exposed, all the blood has dried out on the sponge.
So, separate the edges of the cut with cotton wicks or a piece of hemp twine, and then tie them up with bandages, soaking the bandages in a mixture of liquid and oil so that a hot swelling doesn't form; when you have removed it and seen that the hot swelling has begun to grow back, you should scratch the bone until new flesh begins to grow.
Then, treat it with the drying remedy that grows flesh, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of plantain, preparing a paste from them, and using it to promote the growth of flesh in such surgeries.
Chapter Six.
In the treatment of what falls in the ear.
All that falls in the ear is one of four types; either a metallic stone or, like iron and glass, half-stone; or a plant seed, such as a chickpea or nut, and similar things; or a liquid thing, such as water or vinegar, and others.
And if it is an animal, and a stone has fallen into the ear or the kind of stone that does not grow in the ear, then receive the ear towards the sun; if you see only the stone, stuff something in it from violet oil or serge, and then try to get it out by moving the head or sneezing with the candy. And plug the nostrils when a sneeze comes, after you put around the ear a strip of cloth or wool and extend the ear towards the jaw; often this treatment will get it out, but if not, then try to get it out with the gentle claw that this is its picture.
If it comes out with the gentle claw, but not, then try to get it out with an insensitive, weak, little hook; if it doesn't come out like this, then make a tube of brass and insert one end of the tube into the ear hole Yes indeed.
And plug what is around the tube with greasy resin so that the wind does not have a way except through the tube, and then pull it with your breath strongly; often this treatment will get it out, but if it doesn't come out as we described, then take a little of the paste of birds or the paste of birds that is used to catch birds, put it on the end of the hook
after you wrap it with a cotton wool and then put it in the ear hole carefully after drying the ear of moisture, if it doesn't come out with all what we described, then hurry to cut it before the hot swelling happens or cracks happen.
Recipe for the cut that you squeeze the sick person in the chinchilla first and get out for him from the blood as much as his power, then sit the sick between your hands and turn his ear towards the jaw and make a small cut at the base of the ear where the skin is tough.
and the cut is in the shape of a moon until you reach the stone, then remove it with whatever tools you can, and then sew up the cut from there slowly and treat it until it heals.
And if the object that has fallen in the ear is one of the seeds that grow and swell, try to get it out as we have mentioned. If it does not come out, take a thin, soft scalpel on this image.
And try to cut that type of seed that has fallen in the ear, and if you are sure that this seed has become damp with steam from the ear until it becomes small pieces, then extract it with the blind hook or with a soft pair or with suction.
As we have mentioned, it is easy to extract it, and as for the water that has entered the ear, the sick person should use the sneezing with the condenser first and fill his ear with something of old cotton while lying on that ear that has water. If it comes out in this way.
Or, take a lot of pebbles along the fingers, fine and smooth, heat them slightly with fire, and the sick person puts one in the hole of his ear and jogs on one leg from that side and hits with another stone on the stone that is in the ear.
He continues to do this with a pebble, one after the other, until all the water comes out; and sometimes the water comes out by taking a piece of paper or feather, putting one side in the ear, and holding the other side on fire until it burns most of it, then you put another feather.
Do this several times until all the water comes out, or extract it with a tube as mentioned above in the pebble; and as for removing the animal that has entered it, see if it is small in size like the flea and its like, treat it as mentioned above in the division.
If its body is large and can be felt by the sense of touch, try to remove it with a pair of tweezers and hooks, and this method is easier for all things that enter the ear; and as for removing the worms that are generated in the ear after treating it as mentioned in the division in the article about the bugs, and if your treatment was not effective.
It is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun, if you see something of the worms take it out with pliers or soft hooks; because if you do not see anything from them, then take a tube this is its image.
It should be narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and insert the thin end into the ear as much as the patient can bear then suck it strongly do this several times until all the worms come out; because if it does not respond to come out so fill around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you in the peal.
If it does not come out as we mentioned, then use the drops which we have mentioned and which the first ones used to kill the worms; you will find this in the article about drops. And it is that you pour the fats and medications into the ear with this machine, and this is its image:.
As you see, it is made of silver or copper; narrow at the bottom with a small hole, wide at the top; and if you want the tube in the interior of the tube to be of copper, tightly wound with a piece of cloth.
Then throw the fat or juice or whatever drugs you want into the tube in the ear; and then put the rod with the cloth from above and squeeze it with your hand moderately so that the fat enters into the ear cavity, and feel for it.
With the patient lying down, and let what you pour into the ear be warmed up a little in fire; and be careful that the thing which drips therein does not become very cold or very hot because the ear does not bear such things.
Chapter 7:
In the treatment of سد ( obstruction) in the ear.
Some children may be born with their eardrums intact.
And sometimes, people may have a blockage in their ear canal due to an injury or growing tissue (adenoids); this blockage may be deep inside the ear hole, invisible to the eye.
If it projects a little outside the piercing and is perceived by the eye, then what projects in the depth of the ear and is not perceived by the eye is, in most cases, difficult to see. And if it is perceived by the eye, one should put the sick person's ear in the sun. And look at it; if you see the plug apparently, open it with a gentle forceps and this is its picture:
Its end is slightly limited, and most of the forceps is smooth on both sides so as not to hurt the ear. If the plug is made of meat that has grown in the ear canal, hold it with a small hook and cut it gently until all the meat comes off.
If the plug is in the depth of the ear, take a slight, smooth bent wire and heat it slightly in fire then push it into the ear canal. If you feel the plug with what the patient feels from hearing loss, gently break it off.
And be careful not to wound the auditory nerve. Then make a thread of the size of the piercing, dip it in egyptian ointment and do this for several days so that you ensure against the wound healing over. Or take a thread, soak it in water and sprinkle it with crushed vitriol.
And use them; if you see that the ear has swollen and there is hot heat, then you should take out the thread and replace it with a new one that has been dipped in rose oil so that the swelling and hot heat subside. Then treat it until it heals.
If there is bleeding, dip a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, then continue to use any treatment that stops the mentioned bleeding in the article of the drops.
Chapter VIII.
In treating warts that appear on the eyelids.
These warts that appear on the eyelids may be wet or dry. You should grasp them with a forceps or a hook and cut them with a needle. Then carry vitriol powder to the site.
If there is bleeding from it, then remove it with a fine lentil hot plate and dry it well after the cut. And often it returns if something remains of its roots; and when it is burnt with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
In the treatment of cold that affects the eyelids of the eyes.
Often, there is something in the eyelids that resembles a severe cold in its intensity and hardness.
And for this reason it is called "cold," which is the gathering of a thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids; and the treatment is to look at it, and if the cold is visible from the surface of the eyelid, moving in all directions, then it is easy to cut it open.
Then peel it off gently from all sides until you get rid of it, then hang it on the hook and cut it; if you do not get cutting it except by cutting the eyelid, do not hurt the patient for that. If the cut is large, gather it with sutures and treat it until it heals.
If it is small, there is no harm in it because the ointment will fix and heal it; if the cold is inclined towards the inside of the eyelid, towards the inner surface, then flip the eyelid and hang the cold on a hook without the need to cut, and cut it from all sides.
If the eyelid has been cut, it does not hurt; then wash the eye with salt water and treat the area to heal it until the patient recovers.
Chapter 10.
In the treatment of chorioretorzin, which affects the eyelid of the eye.
Chorioretorzin is fat that forms in the layers of the upper eyelid; this affects children, weighing on their eyes, and they cannot look at sunlight. For tears reach them quickly.
Therefore, you will see them always leaning on their faces and they sleep on them; their eyelids are wet with tears that have risen; the nares [nostrils] are visible and the pharynx is open; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the nares between them. The action is that the patient puts his head in your lap.
Then you take a linen cloth and prepare from it a loop; and you make of that loop a circle of the size that surrounds the nares on all sides; then you put it on him and press with your fingers on each side to gather the nares in the middle of the circle.
Then you split in the middle of that moisture with the extraction needle a cut across, and it should not be larger than the cut that is made in the bleeding; As for its depth, all you have to do is split the skin completely until you reach the nares.
In most cases, the nares will protrude from the cut in the form of a piece of white fat, so you attract it with a cloth that you have wrapped between your fingers and take it out; And be careful not to increase the cut so that the needle does not reach the eye and hurts it.
If the nares do not appear to you in the first cut, you should increase it slightly with caution until it appears; then attract it as we said and then dip a cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the area and tighten it with a bandage; And some people grind salt.
And put it in the hollow of the cut so that it melts what is left of that moisture, then treat him until he recovers; If a hot swelling occurs, treat it with sedative cataplasms until it heals.
Chapter 11.
In eye closure.
If it grows out of the natural course on the eye eyelid, it increases the eyelids abnormally under the natural eyelids and stiffens them, causing various diseases such as constant tears, drooping eyelids, white color, and thickness until it becomes a cause for the eye to go blind.
The eye can be tightened on four ways: either by burning with fire as mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, or by sharp medication as mentioned above in the chapter of cauterization, or by tightening with incision and sewing, or by tightening with canning as I have mentioned.
To make the head of the sick person face down in your lap, and then rotate the eye lid with your left hand; if it does not rotate, insert a needle with a thread from below the eyelid, and pass the needle through the thread above, and this should be near the hair itself. You should pull the thread upwards towards the eyelid.
Then rotate it with a stick, and cut in the inner part of the eyelid without the excess hair, using a surgical blade taken from the larger fistula to the smaller fistula; then tie the thread and place a small cotton pad or cloth under the eyelid, then mark the eyelid with ink.
Like the shape of an olive leaf, except that the shape should be according to what you want in terms of raising the eyelid, because people may differ in this; some may need to cut a piece from the eyelid as it relaxes.
And some may need less cutting, all of this depending on the relaxation of the eyelid; then cut with the surgical blade along the two lines that you marked and start from the larger fistula to the smaller fistula, and let each cut be close to the natural hair; cut at the same thickness as the stick.
Then insert the hook into one of the angles of the skin, then peel it off completely; then gather the two edges with a needle and cotton thread, clean the blood, and stick what is left of the threads to the eyebrows with some sticky substances if needed.
You want to do this, or else it doesn't matter; then leave the sutures and threads for about three days or four; then treat it; if you wish, you can leave the wound without stitching and treat it with something that dries and tightens; the eyelid will rise when the wound heals and closes, and stitching is better.
And this method of compressing the wound, which was mentioned by the early surgeons, except that it is more convenient for the patient and does not carry any risk, while the other method of compressing the wound is that you teach the eye to blink in the same way as a leaf of mint, as we have described. Then raise the eyelid with three nail-claws which are spread or gathered in this form: .
Then cut what remains of the eyelid with a small pair of scissors, cutting it at an angle: .
If you cannot keep the claws in place, or if the shape does not suit you, take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the shape, and another thread near the larger lid, and a third thread near the smaller lid, and join the threads together between your fingers with an even tension. Then raise your hand slightly.
Then raise the entire eyelid that has been marked, as we have described, and sew it together with stitches, treating it until it heals. If it swells or becomes hot after cutting or opening it, relieve this swelling with poultices and similar soothing medicines.
The lower eyelid may also invert its eyelids, in which case you should use what we have mentioned about cutting, stitching and compressing with heat and sharp medicines. The fire and the sharp medicine can help to achieve this. Do whatever is most beneficial for the patient without causing them harm through the surgical procedure.
The compressing with a reed is done in this way: you turn the eyelid inside out and cut the slit, which is on the inside, as we have described. Then make two thin reeds or pieces of wood, each the same length as the eyelid, and less wide than the blade of a needle.
Or you can cut them at both ends, where the threads will stick, then gather them together gently on what is left of the eyelid, tighten the two reeds by twisting them together from both sides and leave them for a few days. The stretched skin will turn black and rot.
Until it falls out by itself, if it is delayed, then cut it with a scalpel and then treat it until it heals. If it has become attached, the eyelid rises and does not cause the eyelids to droop over the eye; this is the image of the two eyelids. Make it in this form and this amount in length and width with the same eye:
Chapter 12.
In raising the hair that falls from the eye by the needle.
If it is a single hair or two hairs, the work in that is that you take a fine needle and insert into it a piece of smooth, very thin silk thread, then gather the ends and tie them together with a very small knot, and let the length of the thread be about a handspan.
Then assemble in the tether another thin silk thread less than it in length and tie the ends if you want, then place the patient's head on your rock, let it be near the sun so that the work is clear, for it is a delicate work, then insert the needle with the tether into the root of the excess hair.
And pass it through the eyelid with a rush so that it comes out above the natural hair, then pull the thread up above the tether and insert it into the tether, if it is one or two or three hairs no more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the tether in the eyelid with the natural hair, and if you pulled the tether without pulling out the hair, pull the tether with the thread to the lower hole to come out of the top hole.
Then reinsert the hair and pull them, do this until it rises in the upper hole and you see it with the eye, so at that time remove the tether and thread, and tighten the eye, and leave it tightened for two or three days until the hair is attached and the flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add a long hair from natural hair so it rises with it, or leave it until it grows longer after a period of time, then raise it.
Chapter XIII.
In the treatment of the stye that occurs in the upper eyelid of the eye.
The type of stye that causes this swelling is called an epicanthal fold, and this stye can be either natural or induced. The induced one is due to the fusion of a wound or scar, etc.
The procedure consists of cutting the fusion and separating the eyelids, placing a cotton thread between them, and tying it so that they heal properly. It is not recommended to use treatments that dry out and contract the affected area.
If you do so, the stye will return with greater intensity than before. Instead, use the following: prepare ring-shaped bandages made of bleached linseed and cotton thread, tie them around the eyelids with a knot, and apply a paste made of dissolved diacetylated oil in water with a little Linseed oil and wax, or olive oil and honey, to the thread.
The key to treating a stye is to prevent it from healing in the same shape as it was before; the procedure we mentioned earlier is only a means of fixing a stye and not allowing it to heal in the form it had before.
Chapter XIV.
In the treatment of a stye that occurs in the lower eyelid of the eye.
This type of stye, which occurs in the lower eyelid and is called a "stye" in reality, can be either natural or induced; the latter results from a wound, cut, or scar, etc.
The procedure consists of taking a needle with twisted thread, inserting it into the flesh and passing it from the inner corner of the left eye to the outer corner of the right eye, so that the thread is in the middle of the flesh; then stretch the flesh upwards using the needle and cut it with a wide scalpel.
If the eyelid returns to its normal shape, take a mudpot and place it on the stye area; then rotate the eyelid and make two slits on the inner side of the eyelid with a scalpel at the angles of the cut; the ends of these slits should meet to form a corner. Until they come together, their shape will be like this one:
(It is) the Greek letter "L", then (you) remove that flesh as much as the sharp side is below what follows the eyelid, then you gather the scattered parts with two stitches, stitching with sheep's wool, and then treat it with what we have mentioned of drugs relaxants and tying until it heals.
And if the suture has exposed itself from a cut or stitching or burning, it should be made a simple incision without hair of the eyelids as well, then separate between the eyelids with a string on what we have mentioned.
And in summary of treating the stye, whether it is from above or from below, to carry out the work according to what seems suitable to you from the shape of the stye, for it may differ greatly in form, and the skillful craftsman devises the ruse with whatever face is possible.
Until it returns to its natural shape or approaches it, and the same disease guides you with respect to what is suitable for it from work and tools in most cases, .
Chapter 15:
In the attachment of the eyelid to the eyelids or the cornea.
May expose this attachment to many people that the upper eyelid is attached to the white of the eye, preventing it from moving freely and hindering it from its natural actions; it should be inserted a thread's end under the eyelid.
And raise it up to the top, or extend it with a hook, and then cut the attachment with a delicate tweezers that should not be as sharp in cutting tweezers but rather be like a little cloth so that it does not disturb the patient when working and thus the tweezers slips into the eye by its sharpness, and your cutting is as if you are peeling off that attachment.
And expect until they return the eyelid to its natural shape and heal all the attachment, then pour at that time a saline water in which to wash it or instill it with a solution of zingarean (Zingiber officinale) dissolved in water, then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a cotton thread.
For above the eye put a wet lint wetted with egg-white; and after three days use the patchwork bandages until it has healed.
Chapter Sixteen.
In cutting the hock and nethering.
If the hock is nervous, it is like a thin, stiff membrane; if it is not nervous, it is like a dry white mass that, when touched by iron or hooked with a hook, tears easily.
There is no hook in it, and both types begin at the larger eye and gradually dip a little, until they cover the pupil and prevent light and movement from the eye; the work when cutting it is that the patient should put his head on your lap.
Then open your eyes and raise the eyelids with your hand; then take a hook that is slightly flexible, extend it upwards, then take a horse or cow hair and a strong thread, bend the end of the needle, and sew it into the middle of the hock.
Then sew it up with the thread and string; then extend it upwards, peel off the edge of the hock with the hair as you would spread a garment, to the very end; then cut the rest at the base of the eye with a sharp scalpel or small scissors, leaving the natural flesh of the eye.
To prevent the hock from shedding tears, it may be sewn up with a needle and thread, as we said above; then the edge that has been peeled off is smooth with a sharp scalpel.
And be careful not to cut the corneal membrane, which can cause a fistula; then, after cutting, place in the eye a little powder of salt or a zinc poultice and leave it until the next day; then treat it with what is appropriate until it heals.
If the cicatrix is not innervated and cannot accommodate a needle or a hook, then this type of cicatrix is often treated with drugs and heals as described in the classification. If you want to cut it, then open the patient's eye.
Take a smooth, blunt scalpel and place it gently on this image:. Shave the cicatrix with a gentle, smooth blade. If you see that it is cracking and crumbling, just scrape the excess with your blade. Take a break and come back to the eye with a drop of Eyebright or a red dye or crushed salt and tighten the eye for another day.
Then. Repeat the process until all of it is gone, unless you encounter a hot swelling in the eye, in which case you should leave it and treat the hot swelling until it heals. Then, repeat the process on the cicatrix with the shaving technique until it heals, and as for the meat that has grown on the eyelids,.
If the meat hurts the eye severely, then tie that meat with a hook and cut some of it off. Do not cut too much to avoid excessive tearing of the tears. Then, drop red or eyebright dye in the eyelids until it heals,.
Chapter 17.
In cutting the eyelids and the flesh that grows on them.
May it grow on the eyes of some people, forming a red layer that covers or reaches the eyelids or even spills over them, and sometimes the eyelids may turn outward,.
The work is to have the patient put his head on your stone, then open his eyes, and you grab all the red meat with the appropriate hooks,.
Or you can grab it with a chisel or tweezers and then cut it piece by piece until you eliminate it entirely, and be careful not to hurt the eye while working, and your blade for cutting it may be the one we described in cutting the cicatrix or a small scissor.. As such is the form of the ligature in which the threads are arranged, as it appears in the following door.
If the wound has healed over and all the threads have gone, fill the eye with ground salt or drop in it a little red dust and similar medicated substances and carry on the eye from outside a cotton pad soaked in egg white to guard against hot swelling.
If something remains of the thread and blood has overcome you and you fear hot swelling, leave the eye alone and treat it with something that soothes the swelling, then return to it with treatment until it heals, as well as with this type of meat that is displayed in the eye.
However, you should avoid treating any weak eye by nature or by exhibition through work with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the organ is suitable for such work.
Chapter XVIII:
In Ligating the threads around the eye.
The veins, red in colour, twist around the eye, preventing vision; if the eye is strong and there is no other disease besides the spooks, then you should first examine it.
Then ligate them; that is, instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then hang those veins with one or two hooks according to your skill. The hooks should be slightly flexible in this shape:
or two hooks attached to a single body, like this:
Then, with a sharp scissors, cut the veins gently and wipe away the blood from time to time until you see that the eye has lost those veins and the blood has dried up; protect the eye and do not hurt it with the scissors; let your work be in the middle of the day in the light of the sun.
And ensure that your work is very careful so that you do not cut anything other than those veins; then, when you are free, squeeze the green or red eye drop into it to eat up what is left of the spooks; if you cannot ligate all of them in this time, bandage the eye with something that soothes eye pain.
Leave it for days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling goes away, then continue working on this particular attribute of the wound with the tweezers until it heals.
Leave it [and have the head of the scalpel in the student's palm and another drips blood and looks intently at the front and back of the eye and that is the original work to open the eye with fixtures held or a triangle grabs it Tlemid]. The original work is to open the eye with fixtures held or a triangle grabs it Tlemid.
A sharp scalpel, and have the head of the scalpel in the student's palm and another drips blood and looks intently at the front and back of the eye and that is the original work to open the eye with fixtures held or a triangle grabs it Tlemid. You can choose whether to start the cut from the top of the eye or from below; the first option is better, cutting two small slits in the upper side of the eyelid, one at the end of the eyebrow and the other at the beginning.
Hold it between the middle finger and the index finger, then attach two tweezers below them; then hold it between the thumb and the index finger and slightly lift your hand to see all of the slit; cut from the west (the smaller one) with scissors or a delicate tweezers.
Insert the sharp edge of the scalpel into the eye; remove all the fat and cut it until it reaches the ligament, and do not cut the tear (tears); as for the blood, let the blood flow onto the ligature, and do not let it run onto your hand.
Then cut the excess with scissors above and below until there is nothing left but the cornea; if you can remove it from the cornea, peel it off with a tweezers, as this is better, and sometimes it may be possible to do so in some people.
If you cut it, it will hurt the area around it for a few days; let it heal and then continue working on it.
Chapter 19.
In repairing the nose.
Doctors are called “Rishah Nasar” if they treat with fire or sharp, scorching medicine as described above and do not heal. The only way is to cut open the tumor when it has ripened and extract all the moisture or pus inside of it.
Until the bone is exposed, so if you see corruption or blackness in the bone then you should scrape it with a tool like this: [Image of a surgical instrument scraping the bone].
And it is called “Rass” made of Indian iron, and its head is round like a seed of the fig tree engraved with the engraving of the file or the grater in a thin way, so you place it on the site of corruption in the bone, then you turn it between your fingers and squeeze your hand a little so that you know that this corruption has been removed.
And you do this several times, then you bandage the site with drying and astringent medicine; if it has healed and the flesh has grown back and cut off for forty days, and there was no recurrence or incident on it.
So, you know that it has healed; otherwise, there is no way in it except to return the Nasar to a hole in the nose. [Image of a surgical instrument with a curved blade, perhaps a scraper or chisel, being used on bone]. And it is done like this:  [Image of a surgical instrument scraping the bone again with a different angle or position].
The tip of the iron is triangular, and its back is conical inclined to the tip, as you see it, then place it on the bone itself, and that is near the ear, and move your hand slightly away from the eye, then turn your hand with the chisel so that it penetrates into the bone, and the patient feels it.
By making him hold his hand over his nose, so that he feels the wind coming out of it, then, as I have told you, firm up the site with drying and astringent medicine, so that the material that was draining to the outside returns to the nose, and this is lighter on the patient if God wills.
Chapter XX.
In restoring the eye's lint.
If the eye's lint has not been affected by any issue or decrease in vision, then the wound should be dried and then sutured at the eyelid. Then, a compress should be placed on the brow without condition and suction applied gently.
Then, a poultice should be placed on the eye, made with brooms, gum, resin, and myrrh. This poultice should then be covered with a lot of bandages, which are made by taking many soft cloths and folding them into four layers, thus making many.
Then, place one on top of the other according to what the eye needs, then tighten them tightly with a sturdy cloth. Remove the compress and keep the eye tightly suctions for a day and a night.
If the knot relaxes during this time, then tighten it again as before. Remove the bandage after a day and a night as we mentioned. If you see that the eye has recovered, great! Otherwise, repeat the process of bandaging, tightening, and suctions until it does.
Chapter XXI.
In cutting the orb.
If a hernia has appeared in the temporal lobe, then sutured and pushed back inside the eyelids so that it is not visible and does not affect the patient's appearance. If you want to cut it, follow the instructions below:
This is done by inserting a needle into the base of the lobe from bottom to top, then insert another needle with a double thread from the opposite side and pass it through, leaving the first needle in place.
Then, cut where the double thread bends, tie some of the lobe around the needle, and tighten it. Then, remove the needle and place a wet cloth soaked in egg white on the eye. Leave it to rest until the threads and lobe fall off. Finally, treat the eye to strengthen it.
Until the wound heals, and the grape may be drawn from all sides with a circle of rag until it increases the eye wetness and then it is pressed with a thin applicator that reaches to the bottom of the eye so that the moistness of the egg flows and the eye falls and wilts on place then it is pulled until it heals.
Chapter 22
In the treatment of the pimple.
This disease, which is called the "kamina", is a period of time that集聚在眼睛中，看起来像下降的水而不包含水。治疗这种疾病的工作是：让病人坐在椅子上，手握着两边。
And move him until you see the period moving down your eye, then stabilize it and do not disappear, and the light will be seen by the patient as he used to see, and if it does not drop to the bottom, we know that it is water, and if it does not prepare for descent with what we mentioned.
Or sit the patient between your hands, then take a thin scalpel and cut it slightly above the lens membrane at the point where the lid meets the lens membrane in the cornea until the substance comes out.
If only water is discharged, squeeze the eye with a warm compress containing honey or a boiled milk and honey mixture, then continue with the treatment mentioned earlier until it heals.
Chapter 23.
We have mentioned the types of water in the classification and which ones are suitable for the eyes. Take it from there, and then the patient should sit between your hands, facing the light towards the sun.
And bind the healthy eye and tighten it firmly, then lift the eyelid of the eye with your left hand if the eye with water is the left eye, or with your right hand if the eye with water is the right eye.
Then place the tip of the knife near the brow, thickly furred in the same white part of the eye from the smaller lid. Then push the blade firmly with your hand while rotating it until it enters into the white part of the eye and you feel that the blade has reached something empty.
The blade should go as far as the distance from the pupil to the last of the black, which is the brow of the eye, because copper is seen in the same position as the eye, due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, then the blade should move up to the place where the water is.
Then push it down once, twice... If the water comes out immediately, the patient will see what opened his sight immediately and the blade is in his eye, then he should stop for a while, and if the water rises, he should lower it again without taking the blade out.
Then, if it stabilizes and does not rise, remove the blade carefully while twisting your hand a little, then dissolve a little pure salt in the water and wash it with it inside the eye, then put a wet compress or sponge outside the entire eye.
With olive oil and egg white, and tie the healthy eye to it, and as for us and our people, we put cumin ground with egg white on it, because sometimes the blade does not enter the eye due to its great hardness, because there are people whose eyes are very hard. Then take the forceps that is called birid which this is its image: [Insert image of birid forceps]
Then pierce it with the same slit as the blade, but do not press hard on it; then insert the blade as mentioned above, and when you finish your work, prepare for the patient to lie down firmly in a dark room.
And he should not move in any way, and he should avoid coughing, and his food should be what softens his nature naturally; do not remove the bandage from his eye until the third day, then take it off in that dark house and test his sight.
Show him some things then return the ligature to the seventh day, and it is not allowed to do that at the time of treatment or after casting from your clock but it is necessary to avoid that before the water rises quickly with great sight.
If there is a hot tumor, then the eye should be released before the seventh and fixed by what calms the tumor until when it is calm, then at that time the sight is released and a patch is placed on his face to train his sight from underneath for days while he is in that dark house.
He comes out of the house gradually and deals with his affairs, and know that in casting there is nothing for the learner to do without observation several times, so at that time he proceeds to work, and I have reached me from some Iraqis that he mentioned that he makes a cast in Iraq that leaks water.
I have not seen anyone in our country make it or read it in the books of the early ones, and this is a picture of types of casts for one to stand on those who do not know it:
It is made of copper especially, and its end is this specific softness like triangle-shaped edge sharp edge,.
Chapter 24.
In treating fleshy growth in the nose.
May grow in the nose different kinds of excess meat, such as a thing that resembles a scorpion with many legs and some is scaly meat as hard color and some is soft meat without color.
So, if this meat is soft and not malignant or cancerous, the patient should sit between your hands facing the sun and open his nostril and throw the probe into that meat and then pull it out to the outside and then cut what you realize of it with a gentle sharp probe from one side.
Until you know that all the meat has gone, if there is anything left that you cannot cut with a gentle probe, you strip it with one of the delicate instruments with care so that nothing remains from it, and if blood overwelted you or a hot tumor appeared.
As he saw fit, or if it was a malignant tumor, he quickly incised it so that the blood stops and all the flesh goes away. Then throw into the nose after cutting only water and drink. If the nose opened up and moisture escaped to the throat.
Know that he has been healed, if the moisture does not flow as it should know that inside there is sticky meat growing on the top of the loose bones to which the instrument has not reached by cutting. So at that time it is necessary to take a thread from linen that is somewhat thick.
And tie it with many knots and put between each knot the length of a finger or less, and the patient will insert the end of the thread in his nose with a stick or whatever he could after making it like a seed, and draw its breath until it reaches the nostrils.
And then bring out the ends of the thread, and this is often done by children in schools, which is a thing that is easy for whoever wants it, and then you gather the two ends of the thread, the end that came out of the mouth and the other that remained in the nose.
Then use the meat spread with the knots in the thread, you do this until you know that the meat has been cut by the knots of the thread, then take out the thread and put it back into the nose after wiping the blood with a cotton swab that has drunk the ointment in Egyptian medicine. Do this for three days or more.
Until it eats all the remaining meat, then the last thing in the nose is a lead tube for days until it heals, if it needed treatment, dry with that.
This is a picture of the dropper that drips the oils and medications in the nose:
Put silver or copper, a small semi-candle shaped like the eye of a needle, open and with a channel as well.
And if you want to make the tube closed like a trumpet and paint the dropper flat.
It has a handle at the end, as you see, which you can hold if you heat the oil or any other kind of liquid or substance in it.
Chapter 25.
In warts that grow on the end of the nose.
A wart often grows on the end of the nose, increasing in size and ugliness over time.
Therefore, it should be cut and completely removed in its early stages, and either cauterized or treated with a burning agent that can replace cauterization. If it escapes cutting and hardens, becoming large and dark, it has little feeling.
Do not expose it to iron, as it is a cancerous tumor; I have often seen this tumor cut, and it has caused a great tragedy for its owner. However, I believe the tumor can be completely cut off. So make the patient vomit and cut it without caution or carefulness, treating the area with something that dries and contracts so that it heals.
Chapter 26.
In sewing up the nose, lip, and ear. If the connection between one of these soft tissues and a wound or something similar is broken, you should know that when such a connection is broken in any of these soft tissues, it is difficult to benefit from surgery except in some people.
So, when any of this is displayed, you should see if the wound is still soft and bleeding; if so, gather the edges of the wound together with sutures and then treat it until it heals, but if the separation has separated the two lips, and each hole is healthy on its own, then you should peel off each lip by a thickness of its skin until it bleeds.
Then, gather the lips together with sutures, tighten them and apply a mixture of oil and powder, as well as a plaster of linseed or other unguents, and leave it tied for two or three days, then remove it.
And change the medicine and leave it until the threads themselves are cut off then treat them with the ointment until he heals, the prescription of the stitch is to gather the separation of contact either by needles as we have described in the stitch of the belly or by thread as you have defined there,.
Chapter 27.
In removing knots which occur in the lips.
May often occur in the lips of many people inside small hard lumps, some of which resemble lovage knots and others are smaller or larger, it is necessary that you turn the lip and split on each knot and attach it to the hook.
And cut it from all sides then fill the place after cutting with a powder of vinegar until the blood stops then gargle with vinegar, salt and treat the places where he had sutures to heal until he heals wounds,.
Chapter 28.
In cutting away excess flesh in the gums.
Often grows on the gums excess flesh called by the first al-bulus, it is necessary that you attach it to a hook or grab it with a chisel and cut it at its root and leave the period flowing or blood then put on the place powder of vinegar,.
Or one of the contractive agents dried into a powder, for if that flesh returns after treatment it often returns, so cut it again and burn it, because it will not return after burning,.
Chapter 29.
In grinding teeth with iron.
May be gathered in the surfaces of the teeth from inside and outside and between the gums, rough, ugly scabs, and sometimes become gray or green until it reaches from that corruption to the gum and disfigure the teeth for this reason,.
It is necessary that the patient sits between your hands and his head in your stone and strip the tooth and the tooth that has emerged the rough and the thing similar to sand until there is nothing left of it, and do the same with the blackness and greenness and yellowishness and other colors until you filter.
If what is in it from the first jahr (a period of approximately 3 years) and otherwise, you will repeat on him the jahr day another and third until you reach the goal in what you want, and know that the tooth needs to Mgarad different shapes of many forms according to what is prepared for your work.
For the sake that the Mgarad which is extracted by him from inside is not the Mgarad which is extracted by him from outside and which is extracted by it between the teeth on a different image, and these are several images of Mgarad be with you all prepared:/.
Chapter 30.
In Extracting Teeth.
It is necessary that you treat the tooth from its pain by every means and hesitate to pull it out because it is a noble substance until, if there was no need to pull it out.
It is necessary that when the patient is determined to pull out that you are settled until the tooth of pain is healthy at your hands. Often the patient is deceived pain and believes that it is in the healthy tooth, then pulls it out, and the pain does not go until the tooth patient pulled out, we have seen this from the action of the chirurgers many times..
If the tooth of pain is healthy by itself, then at that point it is necessary that you cut around the tooth with a blade that has some strength until the gums are removed from all sides, and then move it with your fingers or with gentle clamps first a little slowly little by little until you shake it out..
Then, when you are able to do this, secure it well with two clamps and the patient's head between your knees, so that he does not move, then pull out the tooth on a straight line so as not to break it, if it did not come out then take one of those machines and put it under him from all sides gently and press to move it as you did first..
And if the tooth is hollow or broken, then you should fill that hole with a cloth and seal it tightly with a thin rod so as not to fracture it while you tighten it with clamps; You should investigate carefully around the gums on all sides whether there is anything.
And be careful not to break it so that some of it remains and returns on the patient from it a worse plague than his first pain, and do not make what you make the ignorant surgeons in their bridge and their boldness to build on it without using what we have described.
For they often cause great plagues for people; the least of which is that the tooth breaks and its roots remain, or some of it. Or that it falls out with some of the bones of the jaw, as we have seen many times, and then rinses after removing it with a liquid or vinegar and salt, if there is a bleeding from the site, then often happens that you crush something of the alume and rub it into the site.
Or grind it if the alume does not benefit you, a shape of the gentle clamps that you move the tooth with first is long-handled, short-handled, thick to prevent it from bending when you grasp it with it on the tooth, and this is the shape of the large clamps:
be thick-handled so that when you grasp it, it does not give itself or bend and short-handled; and let it be made of Indian iron or hard steel, well-welded at the edges and with teeth on one end that fit together; then grasp it tightly and firmly.
You may also make the ends like a file so that they are also strong in control.
Chapter 31
In removing the roots of the teeth and extracting the broken bones of the jaw.
If the root of a tooth is left after removal, it should be placed on the site with a cloth dipped in grease for a day or two until the site relaxes, then insert the clamp or pliers. That which resembles its surroundings is the mouth of the bird called blarge; and this is the picture of the cleaves:
You have made it like the mandrel from inside or like the screw; and if it is not suitable for you to come out with these cleaves, then you should chisel on the original and peel all the flesh with the forceps, and then introduce the machine which resembles a small hammer which this is its picture:.
Short-ended, slightly thick; and should not be threaded so that it does not break, otherwise if it comes out like this, then use these other machines whose picture is given below, the first is triangular in shape with some thickness:
Another triangular shape, pretty small:
And we can also use this double-bladed machine whose picture is given below as well:.
And other machines and iron which have been mentioned in the inventory of teeth, we can also use this machine that resembles a large fishing hook whose picture is given below:.
Short-ended, slightly curved, a little thick so that it does not break, and should not be threaded; and know that the machines of teeth are many, as well as all other machines, they cannot be counted, and the industrious skilled maker with his work may invent for himself machines according to what prompts him on it, and the diseases themselves.
Because some diseases do not have machines mentioned by the ancients due to their different types, if a bone in the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth breaks or decays, search for it in its place with any of these machines and cleaves that were mentioned when removing the roots.
And we use a pair like this whose picture is given below:.
be slightly thick so that it can keep the bone in place so that it does not slip until it is removed, and we compress the site with suitable medicines, if there is a decay in the bone then we shave off its decay and color, until it is cleaned, then we treat it until it heals,.
Chapter 32
In spreading the mandible teeth beyond those of other animals.
If the molars have erupted beyond their normal position, it disfigures the mouth, especially if this occurs in women or slaves. One should examine them, and if a tooth has erupted behind another one, it should be extracted.
And if they cannot be spread or bound, extract them, and if they are stuck to another tooth, cut it with this instrument which is of the form of a hook:
It should be similar to a small beak, and let it be made of sharp Indian steel. Your cut should take place over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and to prevent other teeth from moving. If the tooth is already loose because of its coldness, use a file:
It should all be made of Indian steel, and the engraving is very fine. It should be like a file used to make needles; temper it so that it takes several days to cut the tooth slightly at a time with care so as not to dislodge the tooth and then smooth it down and polish it.
And if a tooth has broken, causing the tongue to be hurt when speaking, it should also be tempered so that the roughness of the break is gone and it is even and smooth and does not hurt the tongue or affect speech.
Chapter 33.
In chaining the movable molars with silver or gold wire.
If the front molars become loose and shift due to a blow or fall, and the patient is unable to chew on anything, otherwise they may drop out. In such cases, they should be treated with herbal remedies to stop them from falling out; however, these treatments were ineffective.
The trick is to chain them with a gold or silver wire; gold is better as silver can rust and decay after a few days, while gold remains forever unchanged. The wire should be neither too thick nor too thin, just the right width to fit between the molars.
Take the thread and insert its curve between the correct teeth, then weave with both ends of the thread between the mobile teeth, one or more, until you reach the tissue on the correct tooth on the other side.
Then, return the tissue to the side from which you began and hold your hand gently and wisely so that it does not move at all and tighten your thread at the roots of the teeth so that it doesn't slip, then cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors, gather them together and twist them with a pair of pliers and hide them between the correct tooth and the mobile tooth.
To prevent the tongue from being injured, then leave it as such tightened for as long as it lasts, and if it looses or breaks, tighten it with another thread, so one can enjoy it like this throughout the whole life, and this is a picture of teeth and the shape of the intertwining in two correct teeth and two mobile teeth as you see:
A single tooth or two teeth may fall back into their place, and intertwine as we have described, and remain in place, and a skilled carpenter can shape the bone from a cow and make it like a tooth and put it in the place where the tooth has gone. And he tightens it as we have said, so it remains and enjoys it, and:
Chapter 34:
In cutting the ribbon that is under the tongue, which prevents speech.
This ribbon that is under the tongue may be either a natural one with which a person is born or one that has developed due to an injury that has healed.
The work is to open the patient's mouth and his head on your stone and raise his tongue, then cut that nerve ribbon with a twist until the tongue is released from its grip, if it has some rigidity and complexity, and if it is the result of an infected wound, then drill a hole in it and cut it crosswise until the ribbon is torn and the knot is dissolved.
Beware that the incision should be in the depth of the flesh so as to cut a vein there, which will cause bleeding. Then rinse at the site of the cut with rose water or vinegar and cold water, then put under the tongue a string of cotton that the patient holds every night.
If it heals again, because if blood comes out, put on the place powder zaggi, because if it overwhelmed you, heat the spot with a metal ball suitable for this. Then treat it with all the treatment until it heals, .
Chapter 53.
In removing the toad that develops under the tongue.
It may happen that there is a swelling under the tongue resembling a small toad, which prevents the tongue from performing its normal function and perhaps bone too, so that it fills the mouth, and the work is to open the patient's mouth towards the sun and look for the swelling.
If you see it like a spot of color or hard black, the patient does not feel it, do not expose him to it because it is cancer, and if it is inclined to white color, and there is moisture in it, pierce it with a sharp needle, and cut it gently, and get rid of it from all sides.
If the blood圧倒s you while you are working, put on it powder zaggi so that the blood stops and then continue your work until you get it out completely, and then rinse with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with all the treatment that suits this case until it heals,  .
Chapter 63.
In treating tonsillar swelling.
And what grows in the throat from all kinds of tumors may be exposed inside the throat glands that resemble the glands exposed from outside, which are called tonsils, if you treat them with what I mentioned in the division, so they did not heal up.
So look, if the tumor is hard like a spot of color and lacks feeling, do not expose it to iron, and if it is red in color and its origin is thick, do not expose it either to iron out of fear of bleeding blood, but leave it until it ripens, either you slow it down or it explodes on its own.
If it is white in color, round in shape, and its base is thin, then this is the one that should be cut. The work on it is to examine it before the operation if it has settled completely or has some deficiency.
Then sit the patient facing the sun, with his head between your legs, and open his mouth. Take an assistant in your hand and attach a tongue depressor like this: [Image of a tongue depressor].
It should be made from silver or brass and be as thin as a knife. When you place it on the tongue and see the lump with your own eyes, take a hook and insert it into the tonsil and pull it out as far as possible without pulling any of the palate.
Then cut it with a tool that looks like this. It is similar to scissors except that its two sides are curved and very sharp. Make them from Indian iron or Damascus steel: [Image of sharp, curved scissors].
If you don't have this tool, cut it with a forceps. [Image of forceps].
It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other. After cutting one tonsil, cut the other in the same way. Then, after cutting, gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.
If it starts to bleed, gargle with water that has been boiled with rosehip husks or asafoetida or something similar to constrict it until the bleeding stops. Then treat it so that it heals. It may grow other lumps in the throat besides the tonsils, which you would cut as mentioned above for cutting the tonsils.
And I have treated a woman who had a lump that had grown inside her throat, hitting the epiglottis, and it was about to block the passageway. The woman found it difficult to breathe, and it had prevented her from eating or drinking.
She was about to die if she had stayed one or two days longer, and the lump had grown two projections that protruded from her nose like two horns, so she hurried and inserted a hook into one of them and pulled it out, which caused a good piece to come off.
Then I cut it where I saw it through the nose hole and then did the same with what came out of the other nose hole, and then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue, and then I pushed the hook into the same wart, and then I cut some of it, and only blood ran from it.
Then the woman's hymen was torn, and she immediately started drinking water, and she ate some food. We continued to cut that wart repeatedly for a long period of time, and the wart would heal what was cut, until it became long for her and for me.
She fainted, and I put the wart inside her throat in the hope that it would stop increasing, then I left her side without knowing what God had done to her after me, .
Chapter 37
In Cutting the Soft Palate.
which is called a grape if it descends to the soft palate and swells and is white and rectangular, then it is called a stalk; and if it is thick at the bottom and round, then it is called a grape; if treated with what has been mentioned in the division, then the treatment did not succeed.
I saw the swollen wart had calmed down on her, and it had become thin, so it should be cut; and whatever was collected together in a round shape and did not have any length, and its color was like blood or black or did not have any feeling, then it should be left alone.
In it there is danger on the patient, so if you see her with the description I mentioned, that is, if she is white and tall, then she should lie down facing the sun and press her tongue with the instrument that has been described before, and then insert the hook into the grape.
And pull it down and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for cutting the tonsils, and it is not necessary to cut more than what exceeds the normal state, because if you cut any more, you will damage the voice and speech.
Then, after cutting, what we have described in the cutting of the tonsils is used and treated until it heals. If the patient fears to cut them, then the trick is used to bind them without fear or caution; the face of binding them is with the sharp medicine, that is, you put the head of the patient on your stone.
Then, bind his tongue with the tool we have mentioned; then take the sharp water which we have mentioned in the door of the ki (bleeding) and grind it with the hard clay and make it not thick or thin and fill it with this tool and its image is as follows: [Image of a device for binding the tongue, possibly a clamp or strap].
It should have a tip like the spoon of an axe, and you place the medicine on the tongue itself and the patient is lying on his side so that saliva flows from his mouth from inside his mouth so as not to affect him with anything from his throat.
Then take your hand with the medicine and squeeze it on the tongue for half an hour until you see it turn black and the sting of the medicine has subsided; If you want, take a cotton wool and wrap it around the tip of an axe and dip it in the medicine.
And insert the axe with the cotton wool into a tube from above so that the cotton wool sticks to the tongue; You do this several times until you achieve what you want of bleeding the grape, and then you leave it; It will wilt and fall off after three or four days, and if you need to repeat the medicine, you repeat it.
And after the ki, wipe around the grape with a cotton wool soaked in fat and dry up what is around it of medicine, then rinse with cold water and treat from the outside with gurgling and inside with gargling until it heals; This type of treatment is safer than cutting and less likely to cause fear.
And the tonsils can also be treated with something softer than ki and cutting; It is treated with incense on this basis, woad is taken, and other herbs such as thyme, marjoram, chamomile, and valerian are collected together or some of them are poured into a pot and immersed in vinegar.
Boil the pot and place it in the middle of the wisdom cloth. A hole is made in the middle to fit the hollow machine. Such is made of silver or brass.
Enter the end with the raisin in the patient's mouth until steam rises to the larynx through the tube until it swells nicely, and then repeat on it several times until it softens; do not make this treatment when the tumor has just occurred.
If it does not have this machine, take a tube and fit a shell at one end to prevent the patient's mouth from burning; then apply the treatment in this way.
for the shell of an egg prevents the steam from burning the patient' mouth and this is a good treatment with safety.
Chapter 83.
In removing splinters and other foreign objects that get stuck in the throat.
Often a bone or a fish spike, or other foreign objects, get stuck in the throat; it is necessary to extract what is visible with the help of an instrument that can reach the back of the throat, when the tongue is pressed against the palate.
To see what is in the throat and what is hidden in the throat, which cannot be seen, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before he swallows his food in his stomach, because sometimes the foreign object can come out with vomiting or it might be swallowed by the patient; he might have a piece of string or a broken bone.
Or it might be swallowed by the patient; he might have a piece of dry bread or you might take a piece of sea sponge that is soft, then tie it to a string and put it in his mouth; if it reaches the place where the splinter is, pull out the sponge quickly; do this several times.
Often a splinter or a bone gets stuck in it and comes out, because what has been mentioned above does not help; otherwise, use an instrument like a needle.
The wound should be slightly larger than the marrow rod; and in the end a hook is inserted into the hole with care, so that the patient does not cough and hit his throat; or the doctor himself should insert it with his hand.
And the patient should be positioned so that he can reach down or pull his hand up with the tool; all of this according to what is appropriate for him until it comes out, and
Chapter 39.
In Removing a Foreign Body from the Throat.
If the treatment with drugs mentioned in the previous section does not succeed, then look in the patient's throat near the light of day after you have pushed his tongue back with the tool that I have described for you.
If you see the object, then remove it with a small hook or with a gentle, secure clamp. If you cannot do this, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient' throat as far as possible near the object, and then insert a hot, blunt metal rod into the tube.
Do this several times, and the patient should fast for a day; then he should drink cold water from an ibrik in one mouthful and gargle it, but not swallow any of it; and he should move his hand about in the water.
If the object falls to the back of the throat when it senses water, and if it does not come out with what we have described, then vaporize the throat with urine and salves using the tool that I have described for the larynx. Do this several times; then the object will fall.
The method of working with the vaporization is that you take a pot in which you heat charcoal with fire, and cover the pot; it has an opening in its center, and you attach one end of the tool to it; then you burn the incense and the patient places his mouth on the other end of the tube so that he does not breathe out the smoke; then he knows that the vapor has reached his throat.
If the clot settles on the seat, and if it does not settle, then incense is burned repeatedly and the patient endures thirst and eats salt and garlic and does not drink water; it must come out in this way, and this is a picture of an apparatus used to draw the clot from the throat if it has settled there.
It is similar to the cleats as you see, except that it has this attachment that enters the throat, and its ends are similar to the mouth of a bird; there is roughness in the cooler when it is put on something and does not leave it:
And another machine that compresses the tongue; it is a wide ring of iron as broad as the mouth above the tongue enters the mouth standing on one side, so the patient's mouth remains open against his will and he cannot remove it at all until it removes it:
The description of the machine that opens the mouth to this exact size with its eyes.
Chapter 40.
In it, he makes a hole in the wall of the bladder and cuts it.
There are many different types of tumors, which are described in detail in this book, and they differ in terms of their wall and openings from one side; One is the type of tumor itself and what it contains of fluids.
The second type is from the positions where they occur in the body, because the tumor that occurs in the head is not like the tumor that occurs in the rectum, and the tumor that occurs in a soft part is not like the tumor that occurs in a joint; each has its own ruling over its work.
And some tumors should not be opened until the pus is fully mature and complete, and some should be opened while they are still not fully mature, such as the tumors that are close to joints.
Because the tumor, when it occurs near a joint, and its matter is long until it becomes rotten, may damage the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so it becomes a cause of the duration of that member, or the tumor may be close to a vital organ.
For if you delay it until it ripens, you damage that chief member; or, if it is near the anus, you should cut it with intention, but this is not sufficient for the non-ripe tumor which is near the anus, so as not to ferment the cavity and go inside the anus, turning into a fistula.
It will, in a sense, never heal; you should know the time to cut tumors that have ripened completely, which is when the tumor pain has abated, fever has decreased, redness and pulsation have diminished, and the head of the tumor and all the signs have changed.
You should cut the tumor from the bottom of its location if possible, so that the fluid flows downward more easily; or from the thinnest part of the tumor and the most prominent bump; and let the incision run along the length of the body if the tumors are in the hands or feet.
And the locations of muscles, tendons, nerves, and arteries; in short, in all flat spots that do not bend, and as for those that bend, cut according to that location; if the tumor is in a fleshy location, it is better to leave it uncut.
Until it ripens as we have said above, when it is completely ripe, for if you cut it before that time, the pus will flow heavily from it and cause great harm and filth; and some tumors may be cut across the body's width in cases of necessity or according to what the member needs.
You should use a single cut on small tumors and a wide cut or several cuts on large tumors, according to the size of the tumor; and some tumors may be cut so that the skin is squeezed and then cut if it has become like a rag.
It will, in a sense, have died, similar to what is often seen in many sutures and folds; some of them are cut at a three-sided angle, while others are cut like an oak leaf or the shape of an albus.
And among these is what uses the round cut and the crescent cut and similar cuts, and what does not have a head like flat smooth tumors, it should only slow down simply, and if the tumor is great and has gathered a long time and has slowed it down that you do not rush out and all the pus comes out at that time.
Or sometimes you take some of it out and then tighten the swelling until the next day, and then you take some pus out as well, you do this repeatedly gradually until you take all of it out.
And especially if the patient is weak or a woman or a small child or an old man, because sometimes the animal spirit can be dissolved very quickly with the release of pus in one go, so the patient may die without you realizing it, so be very careful about this door and fear it greatly.
And after you have slowed down these tumors, you should wipe the wound and look at it; if the tumor wound is small or the cut is one simple cut, use cotton thread or old cotton, but if the tumor is great and the cuts of slowing down are many.
Then you should insert a thread into each cut until some of them meet, and if the tumor has been cut off from the skin or has been hollowed out, then it should be filled with old cotton or linen fabric without moisture and tightened to the third day.
Then take it off and treat it with whatever is appropriate from ointments until it heals, and if blood has been shed during your work, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a cotton cloth in them, and carry it on the affected area several times.
If the bleeding has stopped, then you should use the means and treatment and herbs that we have described in many places in this book from the division, if you are in wintertime and the site of the tumor is full of nerves, then it should be soaked with hot water and oil.
Put it on the place, and if you are in summer and the places are inflamed, then the plasters should be carried wet with water and oil or a drink and oil all of it cold until on the third day as we said it is necessary that the tumor is removed and rubbed off.
And you use in its treatment what is similar to it until he recovers, this is what you need from knowledge of the treatment of tumors on the whole and while the way of detail has been mentioned every tumor how to approach its treatment summarized,.
Chapter 41.
On surgery for tumors that occur on the scalp skin.
Are exposed on the scalp skin small tumors, which are of the types of goods contain them folds are for her circumstances like a hen's nest and its types are many, some are fat and some contain moisture resembling dung.
And some contain moisture similar to dash and soup, etc., and some are hard and solid, all of them do not pose a risk in splitting her out unless you encounter when splitting her out artery.
And the work in splitting her out is that she is probed first with the machine which comes after this image called meds until you know what she contains, and if it is that which contains moisture, then split it out split out simple on this image:
And begin the split from line ~ b ~ to line ~ c ~ so if the moisture is drained, then peel the bag that used to contain that moisture and cut it all together, and do not leave anything at all because often it will return if any of it remains.
Then dip a cotton ball in the Greek ointment if it is present, otherwise in salt water and fill it with the wound and leave it for another day because it eats what is left of the bag, then repeat the cotton ball with the Greek second and third if you need that.
Until you are certain that there is nothing left of the cyst, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. If the swelling contains adipose tissue, open it in this manner:
Until you are certain that there is nothing left of the cyst, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. If the swelling contains adipose tissue, open it in this manner: Cut across and tear the sinuses on either side of the wound and peel off the fat, making every effort to remove the membrane which encloses it. If a vein stands in your way, do as I have described above, and so also with the cyst if it is hard.
The treatment as described above, and the cut on the hardened cyst is easier because it has little blood or moisture, and some of these head tumors in certain people have none at all because I opened a cyst in one place that had no moisture at all,.
A woman's head, and I found that the lump was like a hard stone, rough, white, not capable of being broken even if someone threw it against a wall, and neither of these other tumors that occur on the head was like this; they were like those that occur in children's heads.
And at the bases of the ears, open them all with a simple cut, and make the bottom of the canal so that it will drain into the lower part, then treat it with whatever is suitable for it,.
Chapter 42.
In the cut on the pigs that are exposed in the neck, these tumors often occur in the neck and under the armpits and under the axilla, and some of them occur in all parts of the body; one that is exposed in the neck is often, and they develop from each other..
And each pig has within it a special fat that it has, as is the case with the fat and head tumors that we have described; the types of these pigs are many; some are hard and do not respond to treatment, and others contain moisture and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment..
I did not find any of them to be in good condition when touched, and their surface was close to the color of the skin. They moved in all directions and were not attached to any spinal nerves or muscles or arteries, nor were they deep. It is necessary to make a simple incision from the top of the body to the bottom, following this line from point A to point B:
And you should peel it from all sides and spread the skin with a hook or two or many hooks if needed, as we have said in head tumors. Take it out little by little and let it be on a neck so that it doesn't cut any vein or nerve, and let the scalpel not be very sharp.
So that your hand doesn't get tired from cutting, and the patient doesn't worry; if you cut a vein or an artery and it stops you from working, put powdered vinegar or some grains of something that cuts blood.
And tighten the wound and leave it until the edge of the tumor is less painful, and the wound relaxes and starts to rot, and the blood stops; so go back to your work until you finish, and then inspect with your index finger if anything is left, then cut off small hairs and pluck them out.
If there is a large vein at the root of the hair, it should not be cut from its root; rather, it should be tied with a double strong thread and left to fall off by itself without causing any harm, then stuff the wound with old cotton that has been soaked in Egyptian balm, and treat it.
If you cut all the hair, it should gather the edges of the wound and sew it immediately after making sure that there is no remnant; if you see that a piece of hair has been left, cut off the hair with a sharp scissors or nipping pliers.
It is necessary to aim for the roots and foundations and use sewing, as we mentioned earlier, and what was said about hair that contains fluids; make a simple bandage where you see the place of maturity and let it be from below up.
Then, after using the poultice, apply ointments like Egyptian ointment to eat what is left of the corruption until you see the wound has cleansed itself and then treat it with ointments that promote healing until it heals.
Chapter 34.
In slitting the throat to remove a growth that occurs in the inner throat.
The early scholars mentioned this incision in the throat, and I have not seen anyone in our country perform it; however, those who perform animal sacrifice should avoid doing a throat incision as it will not benefit them.
So that all the blood vessels and lung are healthy, and as for those who have a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils, if there is no disease in the trachea, then it is necessary to use a throat incision to escape the disaster that is caused by choking.
Therefore, if we want to do that, we should make a throat incision under three circles of the trachea or four small incisions in width between two circles, as large as the incision in the fascia, not in the cartilage, and this position is compatible with the incision; this is a good method.
This is so because it has little muscle and the blood vessels are far away, if the therapist is timid, he should stretch the neck skin with a hook and then make an incision in the skin until he reaches the trachea; he should turn the vessels aside if he sees any of them.
Then he should cut the fascia we described, and he can tell that the trachea has been cut by the mucus it produces, and by the loss of voice and by leaving the wound open for a period of time; so when the fear of choking disappears, collect the edges of the wound from skin.
And its line alone without the cartilage, then use the medications that promote healing until it heals, said the author of this book; the interpretation of this sentence is that if they see the patient with a closed ring due to one of these tumors that we mentioned.
And the patient was close to death, and he himself wished to die. They went to cut open the throat so that the patient could breathe through the wound, and this would save him from death. But they ordered that the wound remain open until the illness had passed and the period of sickness was three days or so.
When they then ordered that the wound be stitched and treated so that it would heal, which I myself saw that a servant took a knife and sent it on her throat, cutting some of the lung. I was called to treat it, and I found it collapsing as a slaughtered animal collapses. So I uncovered the wound.
And I found the blood that came out of the wound little, so I was convinced that she had not cut a vein or a nerve, and wind comes out of the wound. So I stitched the wound and treated it until it healed, and nothing was displayed to the servant except a slight change in her voice, no more.
And after a few days she returned to her best condition, so from here we say that cutting the throat is not dangerous.
Chapter 44.
In the split on the lump that appears in the larynx from the outside and is called the larynx's tongue.
This lump, which is called the larynx's tongue, is a lump of great size on the neck. It is common in women and is of two types.
Either it is natural or it is secondary, and in the latter there are two types: one is similar to adipose tissue and the other is similar to a lump that occurs when an artery becomes constricted and splits apart. In the split on this second type of lump, there is a risk. So it is not worth exposing it to iron at all except for what is small from it, if you examine and search it with a probe, you will find that it is similar to adipose tissue and is not attached to any arteries, so split it as you split on adipose tissue. And take it out with what it contains of the bag if it is in a bag, and otherwise investigate all of them then treat the site with what should be done of treatment,.
Chapter 54.
In the incision on types of bags.
The goods are of many kinds and I have mentioned all their types in the classification. It should be noted here that the distinction between the good and the evil is complicated, so I say that the evil is accompanied by fever, heat and painful aching, until the fever abates.. And the mold is completed, and then the fever and severity are calmed down, and the good does not have with it no heat or fever or pain. It is contained in a sac of fat - which is a special covering for her, and its color is like that of the body, and its beginning is like a puss, and becomes like pus, larger and smaller..
It has two types: either fat or contains moisture, and the colors of moisture are numerous as mentioned in the classification, so when you come to treat the good, you should pierce it and investigate it first with the tool called the awl, as its image appears in the book after this..
The size of the tumor, and then take out the awl and look at what comes out in its place, if it comes out fluid of any color, split it simply as mentioned in other tumors, and if it does not come out in the awl's place fluid, know that it is fatty..
Split it on this model as I have told you, and hang it on hooks and peel the skin from all sides with care and preserve the bag if you can get it out whole with the good..
If the bag tears during work and you are not able to get it out whole, then often that is what happens, so take it out piece by piece until there is nothing left of it, because if there is anything left, either little or much, the good will return to the matter most..
If it overpowers you and only a little remains, then expose the wound when you are free and add some fine, sharp, caustic particles and tighten the wound, and put something that soothes the hot swelling above it, and treat it with all the treatment until it heals. If the piece is large, then draw its edges and treat it with what closes it.
If a sweat interferes, obstructions the blood flow, or causes feverishness; then make haste to expose the affected area with ground turpentine and leave it tight for two or three days until the wound rots and the feverishness subsides. Then return to cutting away what remains of the piece.
Chapter 64.
In images of instruments.
The which deal with the cutting and punching types: There are three types of awls, large, medium, and small.
Image of a large awl.
Image of a medium awl.
Image of a small awl.
Made of steel, square at the ends, tight to facilitate quick entry into lumps. This is followed by images of three types of awls: large, medium, and small, respectively labeled as "large", "medium", and "small".
Image of a medium spear.
Image of a small spear.
Are suitable for searching through lumps, wounds, abscesses, and cavities to examine what is inside the bones and other things. They are made round, polished, smooth, like daggers, from brass, copper, or bronze, or iron, or silver; and the best ones are those made of copper.
And some spears may also be made from lead, black lead, which is suitable for using to explore abscesses that have a deep pit, which tends to bend with its softness; and these are also three types as some are long, some are medium, and some are short.
As much as needed to explore the depth of each abscess, and to make its thickness correspond to the width and depth of the abscess; image of a spear made from lead (rha'a):.
Figure 12: A needle-point chisel.
Figure 13: A small needle-point chisel.
Images of chisels: There are many because there are simple ones, which have one claw and there are three types of large, medium and small. There are also blind chisels, which come in three types, and chisels with two claws, which also come in three types. There are three types, and all of these types need one that is specific to its location; Image of a large simple chisel: Image of a medium simple chisel: Image of a small simple chisel:
Image of a large blind chisel: Image of a medium blind chisel:
Image of a small blind chisel:
Image of a large two-clawed chisel: Image of a medium two-clawed chisel: Image of a small two-clawed chisel:
Image of a large three-clawed chisel:
Image of a medium three-clawed chisel: Image of a small three-clawed chisel:
Here are the images of knives used for slicing and peeling goods, which come in three types as there are large ones and medium-sized ones and small ones. Image of a large knife:
Image of a medium-sized knife:
Image of a small knife:
The length of the blades that are used to cut is limited, and the ends are not limited. They were created to help with peeling a product when there is a fear of cutting an artery or a nerve, so the patient can find relief from the pain caused by peeling the wound, and find some comfort in the pain relief.
Here are images of hooks used for pulling, which come in three types as there are large ones and medium-sized ones and small ones. Image of a large hook:
(A small room made of brass in which there is a semi-cylindrical piece that serves as a handle for the instrument; at one end, there is an elongated piece similar to a bird's tongue; it has two layers and the blade of the scissor is hidden inside it.)
(The forceps that rest between the fingers when squeezing the tumors; they are not felt by the patient, and there are three types of them because there are large ones, medium ones, and small ones)A Large Forceps:
(The forceps that cut to stop bleeding; they are of three types because there are large ones, medium ones, and small ones)A Large Pincer:
(They are made of brass or of metal; they are round and a little long as you see, and should be thin. These types of forceps should be with you both large and small to cut blood quickly when necessity requires and when medicine is not available.)The text emphasizes the importance of having various sizes of forceps and pincers for quick and effective bleeding control during surgery.
(However, do not use them to cut blood in every part of the body; rather, use them in the muscular parts of the body such as the leg muscles, thigh muscles, arm muscles, breast muscles, abdomen, and ribcage, and other similar muscular organs.)The text provides context on the specific areas of the body where these forceps can be effectively used for bleeding control.
(And some other small instruments may be made in the form of a shell.)The Arabic term "قشور الفستق" translates to "almond shells." The text seems to be describing smaller surgical instruments that resemble almond shells. These could potentially be used for various purposes, but the specific details are not provided in this excerpt.
To stop the flow of blood, cut it with the leech if it bleeds from a punctured site or when cutting a vein or artery. It may be shaped like this:
Chapter 74.
In treating male breast disease.
The which resembles women's breasts may swell, in some people, at the age of puberty until it resembles women's breasts, remaining warm and ugly. So, whoever disliked this should split a crescent-shaped cut on the breast as follows:
From line A to line B: Then peel away the fat, then fill the wound with the cauterizing substance, then stitch up the wounds, and treat it until it heals, for the breast may drop and become loose as it does in women.
It is necessary to cut it in its upper sides with two cuts resembling a crescent-like shape, one connecting to the other at their ends until the larger line surrounds the smaller one as follows: From line B to line C, then peel away the skin between the cuts and remove the fat, then use what we mentioned earlier of stitching and applicator and whatever needs of treatment until it heals.
If it does not absorb what you need to cut for the patient's benefit or due to bleeding, it should be filled with cotton soaked in the cauterizing ointment and left until it eats what is left of the fat, then treat it until it heals:
Chapter 84.
In treating nodules that occur under the armpit.
These nodules that occur under the armpit are of two types: one is solid and contains a bag, and the other contains fluids. So, if it contains fluids, it should be cut with a crescent-shaped cut as follows:
From line B to line C, if all the contents of the nodule have been discharged, it should be stuffed with old cotton and left until the next day, then the cotton should be removed:
Treat with the appropriate ointment until healed, if the tumor is of the type of pig's knots then open it as we have mentioned in opening pigs knots, whether the wound persisted to spread pus then use cauterization as mentioned earlier.
Chapter 94.
In cutting the tumor that appears in front of the artery or vein, called aneursma.
If the artery is injured and the skin above it is scarred, a tumor often appears as a result, as well as the vein can also swell and form a tumor.
And the signs by which you know if the tumor and swelling are from an artery or a vein, the tumor if it is of the artery is rectangular gathered inside the body, and if you press the tumor with your finger, you feel it as if there were a crackling.
The tumor is round in front of the body, and opening these tumors is dangerous, especially those in the armpit, groin, neck, and other parts of the body, and some are very large, so they should be avoided by treating them with iron.
And what is also in the extremities or in the head, so it should be avoided, and if it was swelling of the artery, open it in the skin lengthwise, then open the wound with tweezers, and then peel off the artery from the ligatures.
Then open it up, then insert a needle and pass it through to the other side, and tie the artery in two places as you have mentioned to me in the pair of arteries in the temples, then cut off the blood with a tweezers at the site between the ligatures until all the blood comes out.
The tumor will resolve, and then use appropriate treatments to cause pus, until the ligatures fall off, then treat with ointments to heal.
If the tumor was caused by a venesection, then you should hold the lump in your hand as much as possible along with the skin, and then insert a needle below the place where you held the lump in your hand and run it through a double-threaded thread until it comes out on the other side. Then tie the lump firmly as much as you mentioned to me in tying the grape from both sides of the thread, if you are afraid that the threads will slip, then insert another needle with another double-threaded thread under the whole tumor at the intersection of the first needle.
And tighten your threads in four places, then open the tumor in the middle until you have taken out what is inside, and cut off the excess skin and leave what was attached to it, and then put a bandage on it that I have soaked in wine and oil. And then use the treatment that is by twisting and ointments until it heals.
Chapter 50.
In the tumor that is exposed from nerve twitching.
As well as the tumor that is exposed from the artery and vein, so too is the tumor exposed in the nerve if there is a blow or due to excessive fatigue or otherwise, and this is more common in the areas of the wrists and heels.
And in any joint movement, it is a tumor that is similar to the color of the whole body and is most often without pain, and if it is pressed with great force, the patient will feel a kind of numbness, and the tumor does not gather in the depth of the body.
It should not be exposed to iron, as it may cause a scar, and whatever is under the skin moves in all directions and does not go forward or backward, so what is under the skin is not exposed with iron, because it might cause a scar, and whatever is under the skin moves in all directions and does not go forward or backward.
And split the skin with a scalpel, if the tumor is small, hold it with a tweezers and cut it from its root, and if it is large, hang it on a hook, peel it off, then peel it off and stitch up the wound, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 51.
In cutting warts that appear on the abdomen.
It has often occurred to many people that warts that appear on the abdomen and elsewhere on the body are called "wartlike" because they resemble a fungus; their base is thin and their head is thick; some of them grow small, while others grow very large.
I have seen a man with two warts on his abdomen that resembled a fungus; their base was thin and their head was thick; some of them grew small, while others grew very large. The warts were cut off, and each weight weighed about eight-ten pounds, and the other weighed about six or seven pounds.
The work in cutting them is to examine them first; if the patient is wet, and the color of the wart is white, thin, and slippery, then cut it with a wide scalpel. You should also have hot pliers ready, as often when you cut them up, a lot of blood comes out.
If the blood is overwhelming, you can cauterize it; if you see that the patient is cowardly and frightened of being cut with iron, take a piece of strong lead thread and tie the wart that has these characteristics, leaving it for two days, then tighten the lead thread.
As you affect the wart, it will fall off by itself without any trouble; if the wart is thick, then there is some danger in cutting it, especially if it is on the abdomen, but you can cut half of it or some of it.
Then cauterize it so that it does not come back, and then treat the wound until it heals; however, be careful not to cut a wart that is like a patch of skin that is little in color, has no sense of touch, and is ugly in appearance, because it is a kind of cancer, and we will talk about cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
In treating a pubic wart.
The pus from the wound results from many causes, either from the splitting of the peritoneum that covers the abdomen, which allows the serous fluid or intestinal contents to leak out, as is the case with most hernias, or from blood flowing from a vein or artery, as mentioned earlier, or from wind being trapped in it.
If the pus results from a split in the peritoneum and the secretion of serous fluid, then the lump will be similar in colour to the skin and will be soft and pain-free, and its shape will change with movement. If the pus results from the protrusion of the intestines, its position will be much more different than what we have described. When you squeeze it with your fingers, it disappears and then reappears, and sometimes there is a hissing sound, and it increases in size when entering the bath or experiencing fatigue. If the cause is moisture, it will be soft.
It does not disappear when you squeeze it with your hand, and it remains the same size or does not increase or decrease in size. If the cause is blood, the lump will turn black; if the cause is a protruding piece of meat, the lump will be firm and stabile at a certain size.
If the pus is caused by wind, it will be soft when touched; in this case, you should avoid treating it as there is a risk of it getting worse and causing harm, as I have explained to you in the chapter on lumps caused by veins and arteries.
If the pus is caused by intestines or abdominal organs, you should instruct the patient to stop moving and remain standing with their legs extended, then use a marker to draw around the lump. Then, you should instruct the patient to lie on their back with their arms by their sides, and use a large scissor or silk thread to cut the lump in a direction perpendicular to the skin at the marked location. You should secure the cut area with strong string or cotton.
And the tying of the bond is an ashota, then open in the middle of the tense tumor above the bond and insert your index finger and seek the mesenteric vessels, if found has taken the bond relaxed the ashota and push the mesentery to inside the abdomen, and if you find a serous membrane stretched it with a hook.
And cut its edge, if an artery or vein obstructs you, tie it firmly and return to your work, and take two needles and insert them in the stitches that you have made around the tumor, fixed with two strong threads, then tighten the tumor on the needles.
And if you want to remove the needles and leave the place until the tense meat falls off itself or cut it off if it softens and rots, then treat it with what is appropriate from ointments until it heals, and if it was a bump of the skin of the navel.
Or from moisture, it is necessary that you curl the tumor as we said and drain the blood or moisture that you find, then treat it with what heals the site,.
Chapter 35.
In treating cancer.
We have mentioned in the division types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines, and we warned from treating it with iron so that it does not burn up, and we mentioned the cancer born in the womb and the warning of treating it.
The early mentioned that when the cancer is in a place that can be completely removed, such as the cancer in the breast or the thigh and other members of the body to remove it all, especially when it has just begun and is small, while when it has advanced and become great, it should not be approached.
If, however, I could not heal him, nor had I ever seen anyone else reach that point before, and the work in it is, as we said, to advance so that it becomes easier for the patient from the black stool several times, then to strip it off if it is in the veins of a clear filling.
Then set the sick person up so that he can work, and then throw the hooks that are suitable for him into the cancer, and then plug it from all sides with skin, taking care until nothing is left of his roots, and let the blood flow and do not cut it quickly.
Then squeeze the areas and let all the thick blood flow by hand or with whatever tools you can, because if it hinders you in work, great blood will flow from a vein or artery, and then treat it with all the treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 45.
In treating venereal diseases.
We have been told in the division Of droppings types And how is the gathering of water And the signs of each type And its treatment With medicines, And which is treated with iron That is only the zizzi type And never approach with iron The Tappy type Or the haemorrhagic type at all.
If that is a killer, if you have treated this type of zizzi venereal disease with medicine and it has not responded to your treatment, then look: If the sick person has reached double his normal weight or he has another disease besides venereal disease, such as that he may be suffering from.
Coughing or diarrhea, and so on, so do not treat him with iron because it is a gamble; If you see the sick person has excess energy and is not weak, and he does not have any other disease except venereal disease, and he is not a child or an old man, then begin treatment by setting him up. And a server behind him squeezing his belly with his hands and pushing the water down towards the anus, then you take a surgical knife on this image:
Is limited on both sides, long and pointed at the end like a surgical knife, except that it has some hernia slightly so that it does not go through it when working to the intestines and hurt them, then lookIf venereal disease was born from one side of the navel.
It is necessary to remove the split from the anus to the distance of three fingers below its shoe, above the genitals, if the generation of hemorrhoids is due to liver disease, then your split should be left from the anus with three fingers, if it is generated due to a spleen disease, then your split should be in the right side to the distance of three fingers.
nor should the split be on the side that the patient wants to lie down, so as not to flow the blood to that weak location, then you puncture the skin with all of it with the tool and then you enter the tool in that split and raise your hand.
with the scalpel between the skin and the peritoneum as if you were peeling it, and the amount that you peel it is equivalent to the nail or less, then you puncture the peritoneum until the needle reaches a vacant place, which is the place of water, and then you take it out and insert in the hole the tool whose image is this.
It is a bit like a tube from a thin tube, made of silver or copper or ebony polished, which has a small hole at the bottom and three holes on the sides, two from the side and one from the side as you see it.
And he may put the tip of it sharp like the wild pen on this image: .
There is a ring on its upper side, so when the tool reaches water, it falls from its hour on the tool, and you vomit of water in an average amount because if you vomit of him more than what should be at the time, he may die by dissolving his animal spirit.
Or it may expose him to a fainting that is close to death, but you vomit of it according to his strength and what guides you to the patient's condition from the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his color, and then you remove the tool and stop the water, for he stops it from his hour.
For the skin which holds the hole on the peritoneum which I told you to tighten in this way, then if you see the patient likely to need it, use the instrument again another day.
And you shall also take a little from the water and do this for days while being careful not to leave much of the water, if you are afraid for the patient then leave a lot of water and treat him by burying him in hot sand.
And excessive sweating in the bath and the sun, and persevere with him on thirst and treat with medicines that dry up until he recovers, and burn on the stomach, liver and spleen after removing water as I have described above,.
Chapter 55.
In the treatment of children who are born with a non-perforated urinary bladder or when the opening is narrow or in an incorrect position.
Some boys may come out of their mother's womb with their bladder and rectum not perforated, so you should promptly pierce them.
With a very thin needle on this image:
Then you place a thin pin on this image, and tie it and hold it for three or four days, whenever he wants to urinate, push him away from the hole, and then bring him back, and if you do not make the pin, the urine that flows into the site may close it.
And as for those whose opening is narrow, treat with the needle as we have mentioned above for many days until it widens, and those whose opening is in an incorrect position, that is because some are born with the opening at the end of the bladder and cannot urinate forward.
Until he raises his penis with his hand towards the sky, and it does not reach the womb without going through, which is a very ugly disease, and the treatment for this is that the patient lies down on his back.
Then, with your left hand, extend the scrotum sharply and cut the head of the penis with a sharp scalpel or forceps as sharp as a pen tip, or as if you were carving something so that its middle is protruded like a scythe and the hole falls in the middle as should be.
And be careful when you work from bleeding, because it often exposes that meet what cuts the blood and treated the wound until he recovers.
Chapter 65.
In the bursa that presents in the scrotum, the sheath, the hernia, and the deformity and adhering of the sheath to the scrotum.
This hernia often occurs in the penis, which is a soft, swollen mass and may be benign or malignant; the latter should be removed with a small hook.
And cut it all out and then carry a cotton wool soaked in the Egyptian ointment on it, and then treat it with the olive ointment until it heals, and if the bursa was malignant and slimy in color, you should use cauterization after cutting and stripping it,
If the bursa is in a sheath, and it has not been cut and is partly inside and partly outside, first remove the part that is inside until it heals, and then treat it from the outside.
Because you will not be safe if you treat them together, as the sheath may burst, and it may also occur in the female genitals and in the sheath, blackness and corruption, so it should be curried all that is blackened and rotted or has become blackened.
Then, after that, apply honey with pomegranate seeds ground and crushed myrrh, and then treat it with all the treatment until it heals, and if it exhibits bloodshed, use cauterization with an oval-shaped iron on this form:
If cauterization is beneficial for both cases, namely bloodshed and wound if it becomes corrupted, and if the sheath adheres to the scrotum in a certain place, you should put a lead pipe in its canal to drain the fluid from it, and as for the adhering of the sheath to the scrotum,.
And this adhesion occurs in those whose circumcision was sound and did not owe it to circumcision, and may be that her adhesion is due to a wound or a tumor, so she should be shaved with an awl until the bandage dissolves and the club is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish her from the exploration, then she should shave a bit of the club and the membrane, for the membrane is thin so it may soon burst due to its thinness, and then distinguish between the membrane and the club with a thin cotton cloth that has been wet in cold water so as not to stick together.
Then treat with a contracting liquid until it heals.
Chapter 75.
In purifying boys and treating what may occur to them of errors.
Circumcision is not something other than separating the union as in other surgeries, but since it is something that we do by our will and use it for boys especially, so we must draw up the work in the best way.
And the easiest way leading to safety, I say that the first did not mention circumcision in anything of their books because it was not used in their rites, and what we have acquired is what they have acquired.
By experience, for I have found that the generality of chirurgers and butchers use the blades and scissors to use the ligature with thread and the cut with a nail, and I have tried all these methods.
And I didn't find anything better than cleaning with scissors and tying with thread because cleansing with blades often causes the skin to curl up, as the membrane has two layers, so it may cut the upper layer and leave the lower layer intact.
So he would be forced to cut the tip of the penis, which is not guaranteed to avoid cutting the foreskin, and cleaning with a nail may cause the skin to curl up and ruin your work, or if the boy's skin is naturally short...
Many times they are born like this and do not need to be cleansed, and I have seen that. As for cleansing with the scissors and tying with the thread, experience has shown me its merit because the blade that is above is like the blade that is below.
When you squeeze your hand with the blades in proportion, it cuts to a single size and time, so the thread loop becomes like a wall for the skin of the penis from all sides, so there is no room for error at all. The first face of work is that it deceives the child.
特に if he is one of those who understands a little that you only tie the thread in his penis and leave it until another day, then surprise and delight him with all the means possible that he accepts with his mind, and then stop him between your hands standing upright.
And do not be seated, and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy's eye does not fall on it or on any of the tools, then put your hand into his penis and puff up the skin and raise it up until the head of the penis comes out.
Then clean it of what has accumulated in it from dirt, then tie the marked place with thread twice, and then hold it tightly between your thumb and index finger at the place of tying below, and cut between the ties. Then raise the skin up quickly and take out the head of the penis, then let the blood flow a little bit, as it is better and less likely to swell the penis, then blow it with a wet cloth, or sprinkle it with dried pumpkin ash that has been burned, as it is the best thing I have tried, or grain flour, as it is also excellent.
Then raise the skin up quickly and take out the head of the penis, then let the blood flow a little bit, as it is better and less likely to swell the penis, then blow it with a wet cloth, or sprinkle it with dried pumpkin ash that has been burned, as it is the best thing I have tried, or grain flour, as it is also excellent. Then hold the grains of wheat from above on a cotton ball soaked in rose water with a drop of fragrant ghee, and leave it there for another day, then treat it with all the treatment until it heals.
This is the image of the scissor which is suitable for cleaning:
The wrong way to clean is that the entire flap or some of it is turned over when cutting, so you should extend it from your wrist with your nail before it swells up.
Cut it flat, if you can't grab it with your nail, use a hook and cut it, if after three days there is still an inflammation and heat under the head of the anal flap, leave it to subside and then peel it gently.
Cut it as you see fit, and be careful with the head of the anal canal; if you cut something from the head of the anal canal, it won't hurt; treat it with the solutions we described in the article about solutions.
If you cut more than a little bit of skin and it shrinks up, there's no great harm in that; treat it as mentioned above until it heals.
Chapter 85.
In the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retained urine in the bladder is caused by a blockage of stones, blood clots, pus, or growing flesh, and if you treat it with the described treatment methods mentioned in the chapter, it will heal.
If the urine doesn't pass and you see that there is a stone causing harm to the neck of the bladder, the patient should kneel on their knees, then lie on their back, extend their stomach towards their back, and the patient should hold themselves as much as possible.
So, the bladder neck forces the stone to move towards the back, allowing urine to pass, if this doesn't work and the patient's condition becomes severe, you should use a device called a catheter to remove it, its image is as follows: [Image of a catheter]
To make a catheter out of silver, it should be thin, smooth, hollow, and in the shape of a tube like the feather of a bird. It should be about one and a half feet long with a small funnel at one end. To attract urine into the catheter, a flexible thread should be twisted and tightly tied to one end with a piece of wool or cotton.
Then, the end of the thread should be inserted into the bottom of the catheter and twisted with a twister to make sure it stays in place. If necessary, a little bit of wool should be used to fill the tube. Then, the catheter should be coated with oil or grease or egg white. The patient should sit on a chair.
The patient's bladder and penis should be moistened with oils, grease, or warm water. Then, the catheter should be gently inserted into the urethra until it reaches the base of the penis. The penis should then be bent upward towards the navel and the catheter pushed further inside.
Once the penis is bent, the catheter should be pushed further inside until it reaches the patient' sense of emptiness. The patient will then feel a sensation of fullness.
This is made because the urine passage is curved, and then the thread with the wool is pulled with slightly more force, and the urine will follow the wool, and then it can be removed and the urine will flow out. Repeat this process.
Continue doing this until the bladder is empty and the patient feels a sense of relief.
Chapter 95.
How to inject the bladder with the catheter.
The instruments that are suitable for this purpose should be made of silver or ivory. The apparatus used is called a syringe, and it looks like this: [Image of a syringe]
Make it of silver or ivory hollowed out, with a long tube on the thinnest part hollowed out all around except for the tip, which is closed up with three holes, two from one side and one from the other as you see.
And the hollow place where the tube is, should be made to match what it covers without anything extra until, when you pull it, it pulls away some moisture and, when you push it, it pushes back to a distance, as with the water-slinger which is used to shoot oil in naval wars.
So, if you want to draw the moisture into the bladder, you insert the tip of the syringe into the moisture and pull the plunger up, and the moisture will be drawn into the syringe's cavity. Then, you insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra as described in our description of urinary catheters, and then you push the moisture with the plunger.
That moisture will reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it, and this is a delicate syringe that is also used to inject into the bladder:
It is made of silver or ivory, its head being like a small funnel, and under it there is a pocket in which to place the string, and then you take a camel bladder and put into it the moisture that you want to inject into the bladder, and then secure it between two loops with a double knot.
And warm that moisture slightly on the fire, then insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra, and then tighten your grip on the bladder with that moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you don't have a bladder, take a thin piece of leather and make it into a circle, piercing it with holes all around it, then insert a thick thread into those holes as you would tie a knot, and then bring the edges of the circle together as you would a mat, having placed into it whatever moisture, ointments, or water you want.
Then fasten it to the machine and make it like you made the bladder by squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the removal of stones.
We have mentioned in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and I mentioned the difference between the stone formed in the kidney and the stone formed in the bladder and its signs, and I mentioned the stone in which work is done by hand and the cut.
This is a description of that stone, which is formed in the bladder, especially and which lodges in the urethra; I shall describe it with a clear explanation and a concise statement:
I say that the stone formed in the bladder is more likely to affect children; one of its signs is that the urine passes from the bladder resembling water in its thinness.
It appears in it sand, and it scratches his penis and plays with it; often it hangs down, and then spreads out, and the anus emerges along with it, and it is easy for young people to recover from this, until they reach the age of fourteen, and it is difficult in the elderly, and as for the young people, they are average between those two cases.
And that which forms its stones larger, its treatment is easier, and the smaller, its treatment is more difficult; so when we come to treatment, it should be done first by injecting the patient with an injection that expels all the waste from his bowels, because it may prevent the existence of the stone during examination.
Then the patient is taken by his legs, he is shaken and vibrated downward so that the stone falls to the neck of the bladder or he stands on a raised position several times, then you sit him between your hands with his hands under his hips so that all of the bladder becomes inclined downward; then examine him.
And examine it from the outside; if you feel the stone in space, you should rush from your watch with a cut on it, so that it does not fall under your touch at all; it is necessary for the patient to rub his little finger with oil from his left hand if he is a boy, or the middle finger.
If it is a complete boy, you should insert it into his rectum and search for the stone until, when you feel it under your finger, you move it a little bit at a time to the neck of the bladder and then push it out with your finger toward the place you want to cut.
And order a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand and order another servant to extend his right thumb upward with his other hand, and he extends the skin under the thumbs toward the place where the cut will be, then you take the scalpel that this is its image:
Cut between the rectum and the testicles, not in the middle but on the left side of the scrotum, and let the cut be as large as possible outside and as small as possible inside, to the extent that the stone can come out through it when you press it with your finger in the rectum.
Be aware that there may be some stones that have edges and corners, which makes it difficult for them to come out, so avoid making a large cut to prevent any complications.
Some of them are smooth like a nut and rolling, so it is easier to come out, but if it has edges and corners, increase the cut slightly, and if it does not come out this way, you should change it by clamping it with a tight pair of forceps, the end of which is like an ice pick.
Or you can insert a small, curved instrument with an end that is like the point of an ice pick to hold on to the stone so it does not slip out, or you can widen the cut slightly if some blood occurs, stop it with salt and vinegar.
If there are more than one, first push the larger one into the bladder and cut it, then push the smaller one, and do the same if there are more than two of them, but if one is very large, it is not appropriate to make a large cut because it could harm the patient or cause complications.
If he dies, or if his urine always drips; because the place never heals, but try to push it out until it comes out, or turn it in a fracture with pliers so that you cut it off.
Once you have finished your work, bandage the wound with linen and tar, and tie it up. Leave it wrapped for three days. Then let the patient lie on his back, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
If it has broken open, pour in much water and oil, then treat the wound with olive and basilicum ointment until it heals. If, however, there is a hot swelling, an excess of pus, or something similar, such as blood that clogs the bladder and prevents urine from passing, and this is known by the presence of blood in the urine, treat it with caraway seeds and wine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove the blood. If it remains, it will lead to bladder dysfunction and infection; then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt. Treat each type with its appropriate treatment until it heals.
During all phases of treatment, the hips should be bound together and kept close to each other so that the medications applied to the wound remain in place. If there is a small stone in the urethra that has become lodged and causes an obstruction in the flow of urine, treat it with the following before it reaches the incision:
I often relied on this treatment without resorting to an incision. Here is a description of the shape of the iron pliers:
Like a triangle, its tip sharp and embedded in a stick. Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it does not recur to the bladder. Then, carefully insert the iron pliers into the urethra until they reach the same stone.
To manage the complex with your hand in the same hour little by little and you seek to pierce it until it passes through from the other side because the urine comes out of his time then you tighten your hand on what remained of the stone outside the penis because it crumbles and comes out with the urine and recovers the patient.
If this treatment is not available to you due to an obstacle that hinders you from doing so, tie a thread under the stone and another above the stone then split on the stone in the same penis between the ties then take it out.
Then remove the ties and purify the blood clot that has become in the wound, but it was necessary to tie the thread under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder and the other bond from above so that when the thread is solved after the exit of the stone returns the skin to its place so that covers the wound.
For that it is necessary for you when you tie the upper thread that you raise the skin to above so that it returns when your free and covers the wound as we said, .
Chapter sixty-six.
In removing the stone in women.
A little is generated in women The stone, and if one of them has a stone it is difficult to treat and prevents due to many reasons One of which is that the woman may be a virgin And another that you do not find a woman who allows herself to the doctor.
If it is virgin or one of those who have relatives And third, you do not find a woman who knows this industry, especially working with your hands And fourth, that the site of the split on the stone in women is far from the site of the stone so it needs to be deep cut.
And in that danger, if necessity requires it, you should take a woman doctor who is skilled and rarely find one If not, ask a virgin doctor or bring a pregnant woman who is skilled in the industry or a woman who gives some indication.
Prepare her and order her to make all that you order her of from inspection of the stone first, for her not to be a virgin should enter the finger in her anus and inspect the stone because if he found it and pressed it under his finger.
Then he orders her to cut it, if she is not a virgin and is chaste, the midwife should order to enter her finger in the woman's vagina and search for the stone after putting her left hand on the bladder and squeeze it well.
If he finds it, then she should draw it from the mouth of the bladder down to her bottom amount until it reaches the root of the thigh and then she cuts it at the place of the half of the vagina from any side that comes to her and feels the stone in that side.
And her finger should not move away from the stone pressed under it, and let the cut be small first then she should insert the rod on that small cut if she feels the stone then she increases in the cut according to what she knows that the stone comes out of it, and know that the types of stones are many.
Of them small and large, smooth and rough, long and round and full of holes. So know its types to guide you to what you want, if blood overwelmed you, pour it in the place of the powder and hold it for an hour until the blood stops then go back to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and know that you should prepare with yourself from the tools that I mentioned in removing the stones for men to help you in your work, if blood overwelmed you and you knew that the pulse has stopped put the powder on the place.
And tighten it with strips tightly and leave him and do not return to him and do not take out the stone because he may die The patient then treat the wound, if after a few days the pain of blood has stopped and the place has become rotten then go back to your work in order to take out the stone,.
Chapter 26
In the incision on the waterbag.
The waterbag is a gathering of moisture in the white fascia that is located under the scrotal skin surrounding the testicle, and it may be in a special membrane that nature has prepared for this purpose on one side of the egg.
Until it is thought that it is another egg, and it is between the scrotal skin and the white fascia we mentioned, nor is this possible unless it is rare, and this waterbag is born from a weakness that affects the females, so this substance is deposited, and sometimes there is an impact on the female genitalia.
This moisture can be of many colors, sometimes yellow, sometimes bloody red, sometimes dirty black, and sometimes watery white, and it is most commonly water white in color, and the signs by which it is known are:
Where the water meets, if in the white fascia we mentioned, the swelling is slightly oval in shape like an egg, and the testicle does not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
If the moisture is in a special membrane, then the swelling is oval on one side of the egg.
For this reason, people may mistake it for another egg, and if the moisture is between the scrotal skin and white fascia, it falls under the scalpel, and if you want to determine the color of the moisture, insert the square probe mentioned above in the image, and whatever comes out of the probe, judge the color of the moisture within it.
If we come to treatment with iron, the patient should be ordered to bleed if he can, and if you see that his body is full, then let him lie on his back on something high enough so that there are many cloths under him, and then sit down on his left side.
Then order a servant to sit on his right side, extending his penis to one side of the scrotal skin next to the genitals, and from the side of the inspection then take a wide scalpel, make an incision in the scrotal skin from top to bottom close to the pubic area.
And the incision should be made in a straight line parallel to the line that divides the scrotum into two halves until it reaches the white peritoneum, so you remove it and preserve from damaging it; your removal of it should be more from the side that adheres to the egg and you remove as much as you can.
Then you broaden the opening of the sac filled with water and remove all the water, then you separate the sides of the incision with clamps and stretch the peritoneum upwards without touching the scrotal skin that contains it, and cut the peritoneum however you can cut it, whether in one piece or in pieces.
Especially its thin side, because if you do not remove all of it, the water may return; if an egg comes out of its skin while you are working, then, when you finish cutting the peritoneum, spread it and then sew the sides of scrotal skin together.
Then treat it like other injuries until it heals; if you damage the egg, it may be corrupted by another disease, so you should tie the vessels in the attachment to prevent bleeding, then cut the testicle from the attachment and remove the egg and then treat it as mentioned above.
If the water collected on both sides is the same, then you know that they are two testicles, so split the other side as you did with the first one, whether it is even or not, and then wipe the blood.
And you insert a sponge that you have dipped in oil or rose water into the incisions, and make another out of silk that you have dipped in wine and oil, and spread it on the testicles and the abdominal wall, and place a folded cloth on top of them, which is called "rafida". And you tie it from above with a rope that has six loops, as follows:
Then two cloths are taken, sewn together, and stuffed with fluffy wool, and the ends that are tied are made of cotton or wool that is wet and gathered into a belt, and one end is placed on the back side to the neck.
And the second takes you towards the genitals and the two legs on the thighs from below, and the two remaining on the armpits, and gather all the tension in a belt of trousers; and this thobe can also be made by fire instead of being cut with iron.
This is a second method, in which you take a small skinning iron and cut the scrotum while it is hot as we described above until the white fascia containing water becomes exposed. Then put another iron on this image:
It is like the Greek eye, then you sew it with that fascia while it is hot until all the moisture comes out, then you stretch the fascia with pins and peel off the skin and cut it according to what you can get, until you remove all of them and preserve the egg, do not touch it with fire.
And know that this work is safer and further away from blood loss and better than working with the cut, because if it obstructs you in the cut or while ironing a hot lump or bleeding or another thing, then you should treat it with the treatment that is suitable for it as we have mentioned above.
If the patient is weak and cannot bear this work because of its ugliness, then use the patch as I have described, which is if it is correct with you according to what we have mentioned above.
Because the thobe is watery, the patient should sit on an elevated chair, then you stick the lump at its bottom with a wide loop and make the patch run along the body length, and the opening should be wide enough so that all the water comes out, then put cotton on the site and tie it.
And leave it to drain the remaining water, then treat it until the wound heals, because if there is a change in the output of water while you are sticking it, and this is because the white fascia stands in the way of the mouth of the wound, preventing the water from coming out.
Therefore, you should insert into the wound a feather of an ostrich or the instrument which is used to extract the water of amniocentesis which has been shown in the picture or widen slightly the opening of the wound.
and know that the water may return and gather after six months or so, so if it collects, stop it on the same condition and defend the patient his days,.
Chapter 36.
In the incision on the adipose tissue and its treatment.
Know that the incision on this fat is among the risks that lead to death in most cases, so that is why we see leaving it and avoiding it, and I am ذكر work in it and types of tumor.
I say that many tumors may occur in the bodies that are composed of the structure of the uterus and this is due to various reasons, whether from a loose sewage that runs into the uterus or from a blow, and the color of the tumor is the same as that of the body, and there is no water for it.
The tumor is静止 and sometimes the tumor is calcified, its color like the body and without sensation, and it may be due to the complicating of arteries and their swelling as mentioned earlier or due to the swelling of veins, so whatever was the swelling of arteries, it can be known by the disappearance of the tumor.
If you press it with your fingers, and there should be no exposure at all, and as for what is due to the swelling of veins, it does not disappear when pressed with fingers, this type may be difficult for him and for all fat.
It is that you make a incision on the testicle, then extend the egg above and extract it from the mesothelial white and eliminate the ligament of the vessels, bind the vessels, and cut the ligament after having eliminated it from all sides of the egg, if the egg has united with such fat growth.
Therefore, it should be extracted and cut, if the union was between something of the mesothelial or between veins, it should be all eliminated and cut.
If the flesh plant is in the attachment place that is behind, then all of it should be cut and the egg should be removed as we have said. If your work is complete, then wash the wound with wet wool in rose oil and drink, then treat it with all treatments until it heals.
Chapter 46.
In treating adrze with a dalia.
The dalia is a swelling with some twisting, resembling a bunch with relaxed ovaries, making it difficult for the patient to move, exercise, or walk. In treating this disease from the group of obstacles mentioned earlier.
However, we should mention working on it as the first did, so I say that the patient should sit on a chair and then push the testicle hooks down, and then grasp the scrotum with your fingers with the vessels that are close to the penis.
And the server should hold it and extend it sharply, then cut it with a wide, sharp scalpel along with the vessels as you mentioned to me in sewing the arteries on the temples, then stitch it with a doubled thread.
And tie it at the first places where the dalia appeared, and also tie it at the last one, then cut it in the middle lengthwise, and remove what has gathered there of the murky, corrupted fluids.
Then treat the wound with other treatments that you want to induce in it for a period to drain the vessels that nourish one of the ovaries, because there is no benefit to the egg without food. before cutting the vessels, so they wither and do not benefit from it.
Chapter 56.
In treating adrze with a mesenteric hernia.
A hernia occurs when there is a tear in the peritoneum, which extends across the abdomen towards the ribs on either side of the belly button. The intestine then bulges through this tear and into one of the groins.
This hernia may be either due to a tear in the peritoneum or due to an extension of the peritoneum, and these two types of hernias have many causes, such as a blow, a jump, a shout, or lifting a heavy object, and its sign is that it little by little increases over a long period of time.
It does not occur suddenly, and the swelling is even below the skin before the peritoneum squeezes the intestine; its sign is that if it is a tear in the peritoneum, the pain is great and sudden at the beginning, and the swelling differs in appearance under the skin near the groin.
This is due to the intestines bulging outside the peritoneum; it may also accompany the intestines with gas, which may get stuck and cause the death of the patient.
This is because it causes great pain and crackling, especially when it is pressed; the treatment for this condition is to order the patient to push the intestines back into the abdomen with his hand if he can manage to do so.
Then you should lie on your back in front of me, and raise your legs; then you will extend the skin that is next to the ribs upward and cut it with needles to open the tear as required.
The tear should be large enough for an egg to pass through, and then you will peel off the skin that is underneath the scrotum until, when it is all exposed, you can insert your index finger.
You will then bend your right hand towards the skin of the scrotum behind the egg, and while doing this, you will extend the white peritoneum to the top with your left hand, and lift the egg together with the peritoneum towards the tear.
Order the servant to bring the egg up above, and then discharge completely what is behind, searching with your finger whether there is anything of the twisted intestine in the white hard fascia; if you find something, push it down into the belly below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread, woven from ten threads, and insert it at the last of the fascia which is under the skin of the testicle next to the incision; then cut off the ends of the loop of the thread so that there are four threads. Then put some of them together in a stiff way and tie the fascia that we said was under the skin of the testicle with it tightly from both sides; also wind the ends of the threads and tie them tightly so that nothing of the nutrients that feed it can reach it. So that there is no risk of a hot tumor appearing, and also a second band outside the first band, away from it by the length of two fingers; after these two bands, leave a piece of the fascia which is under the skin of the testicle as long as a finger.
So that there is no risk of a hot tumor appearing, and also a second band outside the first band, away from it by the length of two fingers; after these two bands, leave a piece of the fascia which is under the skin of the testicle as long as a finger. And cut the rest of it all round, and take it with you, then tear [it] at the bottom of the skin of the testicle as much as it bleeds and the string that we described earlier; then use the wool dipped in oil and place it in the wound, and use the bandage that we have described.
And the white fascia, which we said after cutting it, may burn; often it does so, and leave the band alone until it falls by itself; if it did not fall, pour hot water on it and carry it with what moistens it until it falls.
Then treat the wound with all the treatments of surgeries until it heals.
Chapter 66
In the الريحيّة (hydatid) هذه الريحيّة ما رأيت أحدا جرأ على علاجها بالحديد، وقد ذكرت الأوائل أن يصنع كما وصفنا في the hydatid which is with a دالية (daliah, an old name for a type of cyst): that the veins are tied together gently below.
Then make a split in the middle and treat the tumor with what opens it up until the vessels drop and treat the wound on what we have mentioned so that it heals.
Chapter 76.
In the hernia which is in the ribcage.
It may be that the hernia in the ribcage, as we have said, will change places and will not descend to the vulva anything from the intestines; if it descends, it is slight and returns in all times.
But if time passes, it will increase the split in the fascia until the intestines and serosa descend into the peritoneum, and this is what we have mentioned. This is because the fascia will extend, then it will relax and slump; the position will be loose and limp, and its treatment is to burn it as we have mentioned the description of it.
It may be treated with iron in this way: the patient lies on his back between your hands, then you split the soft part of the hernia that has emerged into a split as wide as three fingers; then you close the fascia under the skin.
Until the fascia, which is white and lies under it, is exposed; then you take a tube, place it on the site of emergence from the fascia, and press it down to the depth of the abdomen; then you sew the two sites that emerge from the tube in the fascia, sticking one to the other with sutures.
Then you release the end of the tube, do not cut the fascia at all, nor touch the ovary or anything else as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal hernia; then treat it with surgical treatment.
If the sutures break, clean and patch up the wound until it heals; the fascia will contract and not increase hernia.
Burning is better in this location because it is closer to safety.
Chapter 86.
In the relaxation of testicular skin.
Frequently the skin of the scrotum in some people becomes relaxed without the muscles underneath becoming relaxed, and its appearance is ugly. He who wishes to treat this should lie the patient on his back.
And cut all the skin which has relaxed on the thick skin then gather the two lips, and if you want to sew first the looser skin with three or four stitches or secure them from the stitchery, and then cut what is between the stitches.
Then treat him with other surgical treatments until he recovers and the stitches fall away.
Chapter 96.
In the castration.
Castration is prohibited in our religion.
For this reason, I should not have mentioned it in my book, and yet I mentioned it for two reasons: one is that it may be in the knowledge of the doctor if he is asked about it and to know how to treat those who suffer from it; and the second is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit.
As in sheep, goats, cats, and other animals, I say that castration can be done by two methods: by pain or by cutting. The method of pain is to make the animal sit in hot water until its uterus relaxes and softens.
Then stroke it with your hand until it softens and cannot be felt by touch, and as for castration by cutting and tying, you should hold the animal and squeeze its scrotum with your left hand, then tie the forelegs together and make a single cut on each testicle.
Until the eggs appear, then cut them after removing their skin and leaving nothing of the sacs except the thin skin over the ducts; this type of castration is better than that by pain.
Because the cut may leave something of the testicles, so the animal might desire to mate, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
In the Treatment of Hermaphroditism.
The hermaphrodite may be in two types in men: one is that he appears what follows the space or hair on the testicles between the testes shape as if a woman's vagina, and sometimes urine flows from that which is in the pubic hair.
As for women, there is only one type and it is located above the genitals on the pubic hair similar to the male genitalia small bat 'men emerging from outside one as if a penis of a man and both are like female. And the treatment of all three types.
The two types of men and the single type of women should cut those excess meats so that its effect is removed then treat it with treatments of other surgeries until it heals, and as for the second type of men who urine comes from the pubic hair there is no work nor is there a way to cure.
Chapter 71.
In Cutting the Clitoris and Meat coming from the Vagina of Women.
The clitoris may increase in size beyond the normal amount until it becomes swollen and ugly, and sometimes it may grow large in some women to the extent that it resembles the penis of a man and becomes capable of penetration.
Therefore, the clitoris should be held with your hand or a hook and cut, and do not exaggerate cutting, especially in depth of the root to avoid bleeding blood.
Then treat it with treatment of surgeries until it heals, and as for the meat that grows is meat that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it up.
And may grow out to the outside like a tail. Therefore, some of the firsts call it the tail disease, so it should be cut like clitoris and treated to heal.
Chapter 72.
In Treating Conjoined Twins.
Wound Closure: When a woman's genital opening is not punctured or the puncture is small and either naturally born with her or caused by accident, the latter being due to an excess of flesh that has sprouted up.
It may be thin or dense in depth, in the sides or above or below the uterus, and it prevents intercourse, the cord, and childbirth, and maybe menstruation. Knowing this is by the observation of the midwife.
If the plug is visible and close, if it is not visible, examine it with your fingers or a probe. If the plug is made of thin membranes and is close to the labia, quickly pierce it: make a "v" shape between the labia with your thumb.
The woman should lie on her back with her legs apart, then she should open the labia strongly until she pierces the thin membrane, and then she should take a cotton wool and dip it in oil and put it on the site and have intercourse every day so that the site does not close again.
If the membrane is thick and dense, you should cut it with a wide blade like a leaf, if the plug is made of sprouting flesh, attach it with hooks and cut it, and have with you medicines that calm down bleeding without stinging such as kakiya, sheyan and laban mixed with egg white.
Then use a wide reed tube so that the wound does not heal quickly, hold it for days and use a cotton thread made of dry hemp then treat with all the healing remedies until it heals, and it may happen that there is another plant of meat in the uterus, so it should be cut according to this nature.
Unless it is a tumor, as the cancerous tumor that is in the uterus does not exhibit to it with iron at all,.
Chapter 73
In the treatment of hemorrhoids, warts, and red bumps that appear in the vaginal opening.
As for hemorrhoids, it is an swelling of the veins at the anal opening until a lot of blood flows from them; if presented hemorrhoids became warts, we have mentioned in the division its types and its signs, and we will mention here.
What is acceptable for treatment and what is not, so I say that hemorrhoids and warts if they are in the depth of the uterus and did not appear to touch the sense, there is no treatment with iron and what is from them in the mouth of the uterus touches the sense, then it is treated.
It is necessary that the woman enters a cold house, and then she extends the warts with an awl or a rough cloth and cuts them from their roots, and then she grinds them, when the blood flows, on one of the grinding stones that grind without rolling.
Like the qaqiya, and the shayan, and the labaan, and others, then raise her legs to the wall for a moment, then lower them in cold water, if the bleeding continued, let her sit on the cooking of sumac, pomegranate shells, and acacia, and others, then take wheat flour, mix it with honey and vinegar.
And bandage it on her back, if the blood stopped, and otherwise keep the pressure on the hammer and breasts without a condition, and then take a woolen cloth, dip it in the juice of thistle or the juice of lamb's tongue or the juice of acacia branches mixed with honey and vinegar, and tie it on the spot.
If the swelling has calmed down, treat the spot with the ointment until it heals; as for the red bumps, they resemble the heads of the entrails, rough in appearance, so it is necessary that what appears of them be cut according to what I mentioned in warts, whether, and treat it until it heals.
The fourth and seventy-fourth.
In the sac which discharges from the uterus.
It may present in the uterus various kinds of tumors such as cancer, the calcified tumor, ulcers, dysentery, syphilis, hemorrhoids, fissures, warts, and the hot tumor. I have mentioned all these diseases, their types and symptoms in the division.
It is necessary that we remember in this article the hot tumor which presents in the uterus if it is one of the tumors that accumulate a period How to drain it with iron, so you should look. If there was pain in the beginning of the tumor, with pulsation and inflammation and fever.
And I saw it red if it fell upon it the sense so do not hurry to drain it and treat it with what helps to ripen until when these symptoms subside, then that's when the woman should sit on a chair with two seats and lean on her back.
And she gathers her legs to one side of the abdomen and her hips are open and her arms are under her knees and ties them with a rope that suits.
Therefore, then the midwife sits from the right side and uses the tool that opens the mouth of the uterus which comes in the image later, it is necessary if I wanted to use this tool that I estimate with a rod the depth of the uterus of the woman so as not to be what enters from the tool more than the depth of the uterus.
It hurts the patient if the tool is more than the depth it should be placed رفائد on the edge of the neck of the uterus to prevent the entry of the entire tool in the depth of the uterus and it is necessary that the spiral that runs in the tool from the top side.
And you hold the tool and the servant spins the spiral until the neck of the uterus is opened, if the discharge is visible to the hand and it is soft and smooth it is necessary that they open it at its head with a wide blade, so when all the fluid is discharged.
It is necessary that there be a soft thread soaked in rose oil or green oil with some binding and the thread should come out of the incision from the neck of the uterus, and it should be placed on the uterus and on the pubis a clean wool soaked in water that has been boiled with caustic soda.
Then it is treated after two days with the ointment that is suitable for it until it heals.
And the uterus and wound may be washed by injecting with water and honey then with water that has been boiled with oak galls or long sarsaparilla then return to the ointment, if the abscess is hidden inside the uterus.
It is necessary that you abstain from treating it with iron but treat it with what we have mentioned in the division.
Chapter 75.
In teaching midwives how to treat living embryos if they come out without a normal shape.
It is necessary for the midwife to know first the normal shape of childbirth, and its signs are that if you see the woman bending down towards the ground and longed to smell air, and she is relieved by what she is experiencing from childbirth.
And the baby's exit is accelerated, so know that this birth is on the normal shape and the exit is on his head with the placenta or hanging from his neck, and if you see these signs, it is necessary for you to squeeze her stomach so that the baby comes out quickly.
If it has come down on its head, the placenta has also come down with it and been cleaned of that filth in a good way, and except for this normal birth, it is inappropriate and hated because the baby may come out on his feet and his hands come before his head and legs.
One hand or one leg comes out, or the head comes out with one hand or one foot, and sometimes it may turn upside down and other forms of disgraceful shapes, so it is necessary for the midwife to be skilled and gentle with these things and to beware of slipping and making a mistake.
And I explain each form, and how the art is in it, so that you may draw a conclusion from it and stand upon it, if the baby comes out on his head naturally and becomes difficult for the woman and hard for her to deliver, and I see that her strength has weakened, I make her sit on a chair and order women to control her.
And I wrap her uterus with cooked milk and wet soaps, then the midwife enters between her fingers with a small scalpel and makes an incision in it or she makes an incision with her nail until what is in it of moisture flows out and she presses the woman's belly until the baby comes down.
If it does not come down, then the woman should swish milk with sheep fat and order her to burp and blow on her mouth and nose, and the baby will come out in its hour, if the baby's hands came out first, then they should be gently pulled back a little bit.
If it does not come out, then put the woman on a platform and raise her legs up, then shake the platform on the ground and the woman holds onto a cloth so that she does not fall down, if the hands do not come out and the baby is still inside, then cut them off and pull the rest of the baby out.
Or tie his hands with a cloth and pull them gently, and he will come out, the baby comes out on his feet, if the baby comes out on his feet, then you should push his legs up and then turn the baby a little bit so that it is even, and then take one of his legs and extend it a little bit.
If they came out to the thighs, then order her to burp and blow on her mouth and nose, and he will come out, if it did not come out as we described, otherwise turn the baby a little bit until it is in its natural position, and he will come out smoothly at that time, if it resisted all that.
Take the saliva of the cheb and the saliva of the goat, along with oil from the shirj and resin that has been dissolved, and mix them well in a mortar. Then use this mixture to spread over the woman’s intimate area and her lower abdomen. Finally, make her sit in lukewarm water until the scrotum swells up.
If you see that it has softened, make her sit on a seat made of pepper and let her endure it; if the seat is able to bear it, then make her sit on a chair and cover her mouth and nose with a cloth and gently squeeze her lower abdomen because the baby will come out in an hour. The baby comes out on its knees and hands.
If it comes out like this, then let him insert his hands a little bit at a time. Then the woman should lie on her back and spread her legs while lying on a bed, and grasp her hands, and you should squeeze her abdomen slightly at a time. Then take away the pillows that are under her legs so that she is positioned with her feet up. If the baby does not come out, then raise both of her legs and vigorously move them back and forth. Then squeeze the scrotum slightly at a time until the baby comes up. Then the midwife should put her hand in and straighten out the baby a little bit.
And tell the woman to get up and move around until the baby comes out, coming out with its hand extended. If she is not able to do this, then make her lie down and make her walk. If she is not able to walk, then make her lie down.
Then use the method I have described to squeeze her abdomen and straighten out the baby to its normal position. Sneeze the woman and order her to get up and move around until it comes out. If it is not able to come out, then make her lie down on a bed and gently shake her legs. Then use the method I have described to squeeze her abdomen and straighten out the baby to its normal position.
When the baby comes out, with its hands stretched and its face to the back of its mother, the midwife should hold the baby's hand and gently turn it a little and level it. If it is level, carry on her nose what we have described of the grease and slob.
Then tell her to move a little and if she does, sit her on the chair and order her to lean to the right side then tell her to cough and blow her nose with the kondus because that is how the baby will come out standing on one side.
If it has come down into the womb in this state with the placenta, then split the placenta with your fingernail so that it is emptied of moisture because if it gets stuck on the baby's face and neck, cut it from the umbilical cord so that it does not choke and die, then push the baby inside until it is in its right place.
And order the woman to clear her throat a few times because he will come out easily, the birth of twins or many babies, you know that twins are often born and sometimes three or four are born and they live, but this is rare, and five babies are something beyond nature and they do not live at all.
And they are surrounded by one placenta and they are separated by a thick membrane that is tied to the umbilical cord of each, and sometimes it comes out like the natural and easy birth of a single baby, but it comes out in an abominable way as we have described.
So if some of them are difficult to give birth and become in the form we have mentioned, treat it as we described, and let the midwife be gentle and do what she does gently and slowly and tries every way that leads to safety,.
Describe what is imagined in the womb of babies, and they may fall, some imagined in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten. It is true that a woman has fallen seven and another has fallen fifteen, all of them imagined like this.
By the gracious and wise Lord, all of this should be part of a midwife's knowledge. For it may happen that she will encounter such a case one day and will have to deal with it as required.
Chapter 76.
In Delivering the Dead Baby.
If, after treating the dead fetus as mentioned in the section on treatment, it does not come out and the situation forces you to use your hands, you should look at the woman. If she is of sound strength and there is nothing in her symptoms that you are afraid will cause harm to her, she should lie on a bed on her back.
Her head should be inclined downward, and her legs raised high, with a servant holding her in place from both sides, or tying her to the bed so that her body does not fall away when the baby is delivered.
Then, the midwife should moisten the woman's uterus with lubricating substances, such as olive oil or linseed oil, and apply saliva of the khat plant, milk thistle seeds, and flaxseed oil. The midwife should then clean her hands with these substances before inserting her fingers into the uterus to feel for the baby. Then, she should find an appropriate place to insert the forceps, which are the tools used for delivery.
Look to see if the baby can be delivered by letting it slip down on its own. If so, insert the forceps into its eyes, or its hairline, or its mouth, or its chin, or its beard, or its adam's apple, or the ribs, or under the rib cage.
If the baby is falling down on its feet, it should be delivered in the area between the ribs and in the middle of the back. The forceps should be held in the right hand, and the fingers of the left hand should be placed around them. Then, the hand should be inserted slowly and carefully, and the forceps should be inserted into some of those areas mentioned above.
Until it reaches an empty space, then insert another forceps or a third one if needed to ensure even traction and prevent any inclination towards one direction. The extension should be equal on all sides, not just in one direction.
To facilitate its exit, as is done with the tooth when a tooth is extracted from the jaw, it is necessary that the contractions be relaxed between them; if there is a blockage on one side, it is necessary that the midwife grease some fingers with the grease and insert them from one side to rotate what has been blocked; If some of the fetus comes out, then the hooks are moved to other places.
It is slightly higher and does this until the entire fetus comes out; if one hand came out before the other and could not be reversed due to its compression, it should be wrapped in a cloth and then pulled until, when all come out, they are cut off.
Either at the wrist or at the elbow, and so should be done in the other hand and in the feet; if the head of the fetus is large and there is a pressure on its exit, or there is water collected in it, then a bone-cutting knife should be inserted between the fingers.
And split it with it to let out the water, or you insert it with the machine called "al-mashda'ak" which comes in the image of all the machines in the door that follows this.
So do if the fetus is great in head, by nature it is necessary to split the skull or beat it with the "mashda'ak" as we said then take out the bones with forceps, if the head came out and was pressed at the neck, then split it until the moisture that is in the chest spills.
If it is, he joins the chest at that time; if the lower abdomen is warm or there is a milk in it, it is necessary to slow down until the moisture flows out of it;
If the fetus is on its feet, drawing it is easy and making it go to the mouth of the uterus is simple; if there is a pressure on the abdomen or chest, then you draw it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand and split the abdomen or chest until the water inside it flows.
If all the other organs have been removed and only the head remains, the midwife should put her left hand inside. If the uterus is open, she should insert her hand into the neck of the uterus and grab the head with her fingers and pull it towards the mouth of the uterus. Then, she should insert a hook or two and pull it with them.
If the mouth of the uterus has joined with the womb and it is hot, you should not force it but rather use damp and greasy substances. Use gauze and sit in water that softens and moistens.
If the baby is on its side, if possible, it should be adjusted. If not, cut and remove it. All remnants of the placenta must be removed. Once you have finished treating yourself, use the same treatment for hot tumors that appear in the uterus.
If bleeding occurs, put her in water that stops the flow and use all the other treatments. I have seen a woman who was pregnant and then lost her baby. She became pregnant again after this loss.
Then, after some time, another tumor appeared in her womb and swelled until it opened. She was called for treatment; I treated her for a long time but the wound did not heal. So, she was applied to powerful poultices that draw strongly.
An bone came out, then after a few days, another bone came out, and I was surprised by this as the uterus is not a place with bones. So, I searched the wound and found many bones of the head of the fetus inside it.
I kept doing this until I took out many bones from it, and the woman was in the best of her conditions. She lived like this for a while. This is an unusual case.
This is because it contains knowledge and assistance for the doctor who tries to heal with his own hands.
Chapter 77.
In it are images of the instruments that are needed in the removal of the fetus.
Image of a spiral used to open the mouth of the womb:
This is the binding which is made equal to the books with spirals at both ends of the board except that this spiral should be softer than the binder and should be either made of boxwood or made of tough wood and the width of each board should be in the thickness of two fingers.
And both of them towards a finger and their length is a palm and a half or more a little and in the middle of the boards are two pegs of the same wood as the board which have been tied to them, the length of them is a half palm or more a little and their width is about two fingers or more a little. These two pegs.
The two who enter the mouth of the womb to open it when you turn the spiral, another image of a machine for this:
Is made of boxwood or tough wood in the shape of hooks except that they have two pegs as you see, the length of each of these pegs is about a palm and their width is two fingers, so if you want to open the womb with it.
Then sit the woman on a bed with her legs spread wide then insert these two pegs closed in the mouth of the womb and you are holding the bottom of the tool between her thighs then open your hand with the tool as if you were opening hooks as is done to the hook. Until the midwife makes what she wants, image of another spiral mentioned by the earlier:
Image of the press which is used to push the fetus:
Image of the pickaxe that picks up the head of the fetus:
It is similar to a scissor, has teeth at the end as you see, and it can be made rectangular like hooks as you see. It has teeth like a saw teeth cuts with it and crushes:
Figure 20: An incision is made in the skin and the underlying muscle layer is separated by dissection with a sharp instrument.
Figure 31: The skin is cut open with a scalpel, and the underlying fat tissue is separated by dissection with a sharp instrument.
This hook has two prongs to better grip and extract the fetus, Figure Hook with barbs:.
Figure Two wide scissors to cut the baby open,
These tools, whatever their types may be, and if they are prepared by the maker, will do your work faster and better for people due to their importance; do not undervalue an instrument that might serve you when needed..
Chapter 78:
In removing the placenta..
If the placenta is retained after childbirth, the patient should hold her breath and cough while you grasp her mouth and nose with your hand to facilitate the exhalation of air..
And pierce the covering with a hole in which you place the opened leaves of fo-ti, sage, mint, calendula, caraway, and wormwood; or some of these herbs individually, and immerse them in water and heat them on a fire. Then, place a silver tube over the hole in the lid of the pot and the other end on the mouth of the uterus..
And hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the uterus, then cough as we have previously mentioned; if the placenta does not come out after this treatment, order the midwife to dip her left hand in sheep fat or line snot.
Then, if the placenta has attached to the bottom of the uterus, insert your hand as described above until you feel the placenta; then, pull it gently little by little with care..
In order not to cause uterine rupture, the pulls should be gentle and repeated on both sides; then, increase the force as it responds, for if the uterus is stuck, we have previously described treatment with coughing and the pot and herbs..
If you do not come out with all that we have described, then you should not be violent with her in re- menarik (the baby) but it is necessary that you tie what came out from it to the mouth of the womb to the thigh of the woman and then inject her with the quarto ointment because he will corrode it after days.
And it will dissolve and come out, except that when it putsrefies, it will give off a bad smell to the stomach and the head, and this will harm the patient. So you should use tobacco that suits her case.
Therefore, and some of the first tried tobacco and fig tree, the image of the machine which evaporates when a woman has a delay in menstruation and placenta and so on:.
It is made of lead which resembles a funnel or made of copper and placed on the thin end on fire and the incense is made on the coals held until that incense goes away and repeat it, .
Chapter 99.
In the treatment of the un- ruptured hernia.
Many children may be born with their seats not ruptured, which has been blocked by thin mesotlium. The midwife should pierce that mesotlium with her finger, otherwise, she should tie it with a sharp forceps and beware of the muscle, do not touch it.
Then she puts on it a cloth dipped in alcohol and oil, and then treats it with ointments until it heals, if you are afraid that it will be blocked, put a lead pipe in the hole for several days and remove it when the baby wants to defecate.
And the blocking of the hernia may also be due to a healed wound or tumor, so it should be opened and treated as mentioned above with the use of the forceps and oil,.
Chapter 80.
In the treatment of hernias that occur in the lower part.
The hernia that occurs in the lower part is a complication and thickening that occurs near the seat from the outside or in the space of one of the sides, and there may be one or more hernias.
If it becomes complex, it will open and run from it a watery white or scanty pus, and some of these openings may be discharged into the rectum and intestines and not be discharged, so the discharged may be known by what is discharged from it when the patient uses to defecate.
And sometimes worms may come out of them, and some of these openings may be discharged into the bladder and the passage of the penis, and they may be discharged from the hip joint and the back of the loin, and what is known with the discharged nidus to the rectum, also non-discharged.
Stick your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe into the fistula made of brass or iron if it is not curling up, if it is curling up, then insert a thin probe made of lead or a horse's hair.
Until you feel the probe or hair in your finger, if you don't feel it at all and there is no discharge of feces or wind or smoke as we have said, then know that it is not discharged and hurry to treat.
And if the fistula is discharged into the bladder or the passage of urine, a sign that the probe reaches there and cannot be healed by medicines, and the sign of it is when the probe reaches the hip joint or the back of the loin.
If it is not curling up towards the bone and there is pain in a particular direction, and it discharges pus constantly, and does not benefit from medication or paste, and these fistulas are all incurable.
And its treatment is a useless effort for ignorant doctors, and the one that is not discharged and is not chronic, it will heal by iron as I have described and what has been experimented with, which is to lay the patient on his back between your hands.
He shall extend his legs upward and his thighs shall be tilted toward his abdomen, then a copper or lead probe shall be introduced through the naso-gut if it is in the naso-gut, winding until you know where the probe ends. If you feel the patient towards the anus, then your index finger should be inserted into the anus.
If you do not feel the probe in your finger itself having passed from between your fingers without skin or meat, then you know for sure that it has been introduced; so do not tire yourself out with it, for there is no cure for it as we have said.
And they say that it heals in some people, rarely; and from the therapy which is expected to be beneficial, you shall heat a thin iron on the size of the naso-gut as mentioned above and introduce it into the naso-gut until it reaches about the anus, and then bring it back twice or three times.
until you know that it has burned all the excess skin that clings together like a feather tube, then treat it with a wet thistle in oil until this burned skin comes out, and then treat it with salves that are glued because if it heals.
Otherwise, it will never heal with any other treatment; and if you introduce the probe and it does not enter your finger that is in the anus, and there is a thick veil of meat or skin between it and the probe, and you see the naso-gut in front of the skin's surface, then split the skin from the beginning of the naso-gut at that time. And you pass through the split with the probe while it is in the naso-gut until you reach where the end of the probe is, and the probe disappears and falls, then clean those clotted meats that resemble a feather tube, and do not leave anything from it.
Then treat it with glued salves until it heals, if blood prevents you from performing the surgery to cut those meats, then do one of two beneficial things: burn them with fire or use a sharp medicine because burning these meats with fire combines two good things: burning that excess meat.
Cut the blood and let the secretions dry up, then treat them with dampened tweezers in butter or powdered sulfur with oil until pus forms and the burned meat comes out with the pus, then treat the wound with the salt-encapsulated ointments for hard flesh.
These are medications that contract and dry up; so if it has healed, it has recovered, and there is no need to return to the wound. If the pus has reached the depth of the rectum and is distant from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the rectum and examine it carefully.
If you feel a barrier of fat or meat between your finger and the opening, and it is close to the surface, then there is no choice but to work with one of three methods: either to burn it as we mentioned above.
or that you cut it until you reach its depth so that you can easily introduce the tweezers and treat from close range, and do not overextend the cut to cut the surrounding muscle of the rectum, which may cause the patient to have uncontrollable diarrhea, then treat it as mentioned above, perhaps it will heal as we mentioned.
or that you pass through that barrier and pierce it with a sharp instrument after cutting it close to the rectum as we mentioned, either with a tweezers or another sharp tool, and then clean all those clumped meats in the cut to wherever you can reach it with careful examination.
Then put all the ointment on the wound, including the cut and the upper mouth, until it heals completely and the opening of the rectum remains open inside the rectum, so it is lighter on the patient, and the opening of the rectum may be torn due to this quality.
This is if you insert the tweezers in the naser (rectum opening), and it is on one side of the rectum close to the surface of the body with skin, take a tweezers with a hole at the end like an shoemaker's needle, then twist it slowly as you would thread a needle.
And introduce therein a twisted thread of five threads or so, and then introduce the probe with the thread in the rectum until it reaches its pit, if it has penetrated in the edge of the seat from within near.
And take the thread out of that hole by putting your finger in the rectum and pulling out the end of the thread, gathering both ends together and tightening them tightly and leaving it for a day or two, so whenever the thread is cut into meat, tighten it tightly until those meats between the two ends fall off, then treat the wound so that it heals and heals.
If the rectum's mouth is not penetrated, penetrate it in any way you can except that it is in depth a lot, so you have no right to do that because of the muscle so as not to cut it, then make it as we mentioned until it heals.
The image of the spinal needle that you split through the anuses, the grinding is very sharp and the other side is not sharp so as not to cut it with what does not need it as you see:.
Chapter eighty-one.
In the hole of the hemorrhoids from which blood flows, cutting it and treating fissures.
The hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the rectum, resembling pomegranates or like grape vines, and from them there are small and large ones and blood flows from them always.
And one is few and many, and outside the rectum and in its ends, except that this which is outside the rectum is usually little moist with yellow fluid or a little blood flowing constantly, and it is in the color of the body.
And the treatment of what is inside the rectum, order the patient to defecate and strain until the rectum comes out and its warts appear to you, so you grab it with tweezers or hold it with your nail then cut it at its roots, if it did not stop because of its moisture and relaxation.
Cut off the nail with a rough cloth or a piece of bread or pull it with your fingers and then cut it, and then sprinkle some sharp powder on it so that it will rise up like cautery or scrape it as mentioned in the cautery chapter.
Then treat it with all the treatment until it heals, and if it does not respond to the probe for exit, inject a syringe of little stinging liquid to wash what is in the rectum and exit quickly when the patient relaxes, so order the warts that come out of the rectum, easy and simple.
And it is that you take it with your nail or hang it on a hook and cut it, then treat it with what we have mentioned until it heals, and if you do not like cutting with iron, you should use its hole in this way: Take a twisted thread and put it in an needle.
Then draw the wart up and pierce it with the needle at its root from the other side, and wind the two ends of the thread below the needle which is blocking it, and tighten the wart firmly, then tie the thread and remove the needle, do this for all the warts and leave one of them intact, do not puncture it.
To let the blood flow, then put a cloth soaked in rose oil or gerum oil on the rectum and put it on the rectum and order the patient to be quiet, then leave him until it falls, so when it falls, treat the warts with ointments and all treatment until it heals.
As for the treatment of fissures, it often appears from the dry skin of impurity and blocking of the pulse, so if it has lasted a long time and did not benefit from any medication, it should be cut with a surgical blade or your nail until it becomes moist and the upper scale that prevents it from healing is removed.
Then treat it until it heals, but if it does not heal, repeat the process with more force than before until it bleeds, but don't let it stop bleeding, then treat it because it will heal.
Chapter 82.
In the treatment of reversed nails, non-reversed nails, dry warts, and verrucae.
The nail is a rounded lump on the body, resembling a screw head, which occurs all over the body but especially at the heels and toes, and causes pain when walking.
The area around the nail should be split and gripped with a file or hook, then pulled from its root. As for dry warts, each one is a small, rough, bumpy lump roundly raised above the surface of the body.
It is often found in the hands of boys, and can be treated by extending the verruca, cutting or drilling it with a silk thread or hair, causing it to fall. If desired, it can also be burned with fire or sharp medicine.
Wart-like verrucae can be removed with the tool I mentioned in the treatment of warts, while warts (verrucae) are small, thick bumps on the body's surface, sometimes going deep into the skin, and if they experience cold, they feel a bit like bee stings.
It is found all over the body, with the majority being in the hands, and can be treated by taking a tube from an eagle's or hawk's feather, making it into a shape that surrounds the wart, then using your hand to turn the tube so as to split the area around the wart.
Make it into a depth in the flesh and remove the warts from their root, if you prefer, do the same with a copper or iron tube like this:
The upper part of the tube should be thin, closed, and easy to handle so that the fingers can hold it and twist it. If you prefer, treat the warts like I did in the section on wart treatment with fire or sharp medicine.
Chapter 83.
In the images of the instruments used for injection in diseases of the rectum, diarrhea and cholera.
The syringe may be made of silver, or of brass, or of copper, hammered or struck; and such a machine may be made small or large according to those who use it. So the one used for treating small children is made small, and that for those with narrow or sore bottoms is made very soft - The image of a large syringe:
The top of the cylinder to which the funnel is attached is wide for this purpose, and has a partition, as you see it, and the bottom which enters the rectum is quite smooth and very thin on one side, with two holes and one in the other side.
The bore of the needle should be as thick as the rod or a little thicker, and the drug-holding funnel made from the bladder of an animal or from thin sheep's skin should be made in the form of a small saucer; its diameter should be an inch.
Many holes are pierced in it as it rotates, and the distance between each hole is about the thickness of a finger; then a thick thread made of twined yarn, ten threads or more, is wrapped around it like a saucer. If drugs are placed in it, it is tightly bound in the head of the syringe between two stones, and then injected. This is an image of a funnel and a hole:
And the method of injecting it is to fill the rectum or bladder with the drug while it is heated, and then lay the patient on his back and extend his legs.
Then a blanket or sheet is placed underneath, and the tip of the syringe is coated with grease or egg white or saliva of the cow or something like that, and then it is gently inserted into the rectum; then the servant of the funnel takes both hands and squeezes it strongly until all that is in the syringe is emptied into the intestines.
Then the syringe is removed and the patient's legs are tied to the bed, and if the medicine prompts him to come out, he should grasp what he can and if he sleeps all night it will be more beneficial in healing, for if injected into the ailments of diarrhea and hurried to come out, let the injection be kept until healed.
If it is in the rectum with hemorrhoids or painful tumors, then the syringe should be very gentle, smooth from the syringes used to inject children, and this is a picture of a gentle syringe stretched on its skin:
Chapter 84.
In the treatment of wounds.
I have mentioned in the division of treating what resembles cauterization and I am recalling here the treatment of it with the hand and drugs to the extent of completeness, I say that surgeries differ according to the thing that is present with the surgery and according to the position that the wound falls on.
The things that are present with surgery are numerous, such as a stone piece, a sword fragment, a knife, a spear, a stick, an arrow, and so on, from many things.
And as for surgeries according to the positions on the body, such as a wound that falls on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, liver, and other organs.
And I am describing the treatment of some surgeries to make them a standard and a law for all surgeries, and I begin with simple head wounds, especially because the compound will be mentioned in the first door of this book.
I say that when a simple wound occurs in the head and it is not a bone fracture, you look at it; if it is a stone piece or something similar and the skin has only been torn, and the wound is large, and you fear for the patient's well-being that a hot swelling will occur, then hurry and drip on the back of the neck. And do not delay it and bring out blood for him according to his strength if it does not prevent the phlebotomy, especially if the blood that comes out of the wound is small; let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wound.
And warn the patient from filling up, drinking and coarse foods; if a swelling occurs on him, let him decrease food, do not approach meat or drinks, and carry it on the wound if an inflammation occurs on it; A cotton cloth soaked in rose oil alone or with the drink that contains astringency.
And if the hot swelling has been avoided, carry it on the wound if it is soft with its blood and has not changed by the air that I will describe to you after a little, but if it has changed by air, carry some ointments on it.
Until it drains pus, then treat it until it heals, if the wound is large and has been cut with a sword or similar, and its edges have not joined together with the sutures, gather it with sutures as I describe in sewing abdominal wounds.
If the skin has been exposed to the bone and has become attached to a small hook, cut it off, then treat the wound with medications that form a hard tissue to replace the skin, and order for the patient to eat foods that have strength like heads, soups, and similar things.
If corruption has occurred in the skin but has not attached to the bone, cut off the腐した part and throw it away, then treat the wound; if there is an artery or a vein that sheds blood and has not been stopped by medications, examine the artery.
If it has been hit, but it has not detached (from the body), cut it with a scalpel and tie it up; and if necessity requires, when these mentioned things are not effective, then wrap it up tightly with this cloth while it is bleeding; if these wounds are small, simple, and
Before it changes by the air, the recipe for the الذرور is that a part is taken from the licorice, two parts from the resinoid, three parts from the burnt lime or non-burnt, all of them are ground and sifted, and it is stuffed into the wound and tightened tightly until it sticks to it firmly.
It hardens with blood, then it is tied up with bandages from above and left alone until it heals, and ginger may do this by itself if you do not have licorice or myrrh.
This action can also be done by the two in many major surgeries if he mastered its placement on him and tightened it, and the wounds were soft with their blood unless they changed them air. However, if they had changed them a little change, especially if it was in summer time.
There is no meaning in placing this grain on him by what we have mentioned that it carries some of the lubricants or carries it with a porridge made from barley flour and water and honey until it discharges pus, then treats it with all the treatment until it heals.
If a fracture occurs in the bone and is easy, then draw it with the splint, and I have mentioned treating head fractures while they are still simple in surgery at the neck, if the wound occurred in the neck, there is no difference between its treatment and that of a head wound when it is simple.
If he has cut a nerve in the neck or a blood vessel, there is no remedy for it except to avoid treating it with something that constricts it severely like zinc and salt because they harm the nerve and stimulate it.
No cold substance should be placed on the wound at all because the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection with the brain, which is the most honorable organ, and what you treat it with of soft substances such as washed linen soaked several times with water and then with oil or rosewater and kohl.
If it has been washed several times with fresh water and all the mineral stones in this state, and lubricating ointments, and if the wound is large, use stitches or wrap his lips with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
If there is a depression in the wound and a pocket has formed at the bottom of it, where pus has collected, then plug it in the lowest place, if there has been an interruption in the vessel in the wound and you have observed that his blood is flowing, then amputate or tie or suturing it if necessity requires.
If the wound has cut some or all of the vocal cords and the larynx is intact, then sew the skin together on the cord and smooth it out and return it to its natural shape, then tighten it tightly and leave it for a few days.
Then treat it with ointments that contain astringent and drying agents until it heals, if the wound has affected the bone, then loosen it as much as possible or what can be removed, and if you are not able to do so, then leave it until it putsrefies and heals and makes it easier to remove.
If the wound is soft, sprinkle on it the powder we have described, if it has putrefied and become bone, then treat it with what is mentioned in the section on chest surgery and surgery between the shoulders.
If it is a stab wound from a spear or a knife and you see that it has a depression, then look out for it. If the wind comes out of it, then know that it is a killing wound. If it does not have a depression and is soft with blood, do not put any powder in it or tighten it at first, so that the blood does not become stagnant in its depression.
Let it turn to the heart and kill the patient, but put in it a poultice that attracts [the wound] and change it twice a day. If you do not have a poultice, put an old cloth on the wound to soak up its fluids and let the patient sleep on the wound.
Let it flow out what has collected in it, if it has been three days or more since the wound occurred and there has been no cramps or abnormal pulse, and he is in good general condition, then know that the wound has healed. Treat it with sutures and continue all the treatment until it heals.
If it is impossible to see him and the wound always flows, then know that he has become a nasir; treat him from his door. The patient on the wound does not flow what gathers in it, even if he has passed for the chest or back wound, treat him with what was mentioned above with the stitch.
If he is large or with seeds if he is small, if he has affected the bone and cut it into pieces, examine the wound and hurry to remove those fragments if they are healing well then leave them until .
It is rotting in the wound then it will be easy to remove, and as for the other wounds that occur in the various organs their rule in treatment is the same as what we mentioned.
Chapter 85:
In abdominal wounds and the exit of the intestine and sewing it up.
The patch that exposes the abdomen may be large or small or medium, so the large one may exit from it an intestine or several intestines, so introducing them and sewing them up will be more difficult and harder.
And the small patch may also be more difficult from another aspect, so it is necessary to make it easier to introduce the intestine into its place at once; if it does not hurry to introduce it into its place, it will swell and thicken, so it will be more difficult to introduce it; for this reason, it has become better than the small patches, the medium-sized patch because it does not cause difficulty in introducing the intestine as it does in these two types.
And know that sewing the abdomen is on four faces the two annual stitches are suitable for sewing the abdomen and sewing all other surgeries, and the other two stitches are special to doing all surgeries except that they are special in sewing the abdomen.
And I will describe them to you one by one with explanation and clarification, and I say that if the wound is small and it has come out a thing from the intestine and difficult to return it, then it is due to two faces either because of the smallness of the patch as we mentioned or because the intestine has swelled because of a cold wind.
If so, then it should be heated by dipping a sponge or wet cloth in lukewarm water alone, or cooked with incenso, myrrh, and cardamom and rinsed with it until the gas is dissolved.
And he may do this with a drink that has astringents in it, which is better than water alone in dissolving the gas, and if you see that the gas has dissolved, then rinse the intestine with water that has been cooked with galangal or ginger, for this will ease its entry with the least effort.
If it cannot be returned after this treatment, then make a small incision in the cloth with the instrument that you use to cut boils and the first treatment is better if it can be made, for one is forced to make an incision out of necessity and when the means are exhausted, and this is a picture of the tool:
It should have one end bent and limited, and the other end be unlimited and its thin end not be as sharp as a syringe but slightly curved, and it is an instrument similar to a small scalpel as you see, so if the wound widens and enters the intestine, then its response to its natural shape.
And its specific place, if you can do that, is better, and if the cloth is wide and is in the lower abdomen, then the patient should lie on his back and make his legs higher than his head, and if it is in the upper abdomen, then he should make his head and chest higher than his bottom.
And the same applies if the cloth is in one side of the abdomen, so you should always make your intention and purpose the side where the surgery is higher than the other side, and thus it should be used in major surgeries and in medium-sized surgeries.
And as for minor surgeries, you should put it as best you can then prepare a companion to hold the cloth with both hands and bring it together, and then take off a little at a time for the stitcher.
This is a common form of suturing, in which you take an needle or a set of needles that are as wide as the wound and then leave a space at one end of the hole equal to the thickness of your thumb, and刺 one needle into each side of the skin without inserting a thread. You gather the skin and the fat on either side of the wound, so that it forms four slits, and then you tighten it with a doubled thread around the needle from both sides so that the edges of the wound come together tightly.
And leave a space equal to the thickness of your finger, and刺 another needle and then link it with the thread as you did with the first needle, and keep doing this as much as you need needles - let the needles be medium between thick and thin.
Because the fine needles cut through flesh quickly, and the thick ones are difficult to enter into the skin, so it is necessary that they be of a medium size, and it is not allowed for the needle to enter the edge of the skin near it
So that the flesh doesn't cut quickly and the wound doesn't open before it heals, and don't keep the stitches too far apart so that the wound doesn't heal, and then cut off the ends of the needles so that they don't hurt the patient when he sleeps, and make him cushions of cotton cloth on each side to hold the needle ends.
And leave it until you are sure that the wound has healed, and this type of stitching with needles is most suitable for small surgeries because you may only need one or two stitches or something like that.
Or the second common form of stitching is to gather all four edges, that is, the skin edges and the fat edges in one stitch with a needle having a slightly loose thread that is moderate in thickness and then, when you have completed the stitch with this needle, return it to the place from which you began
Let the thread be knotted from above the wound so that the suturing is according to the stitching of the dress which is tightened with it and placed between each stitch and a stitch after the thickening of the little finger and this stitch everyone knows it.
With this stitch, a surgery had been performed on a man in his abdomen who had been stabbed with a knife. The wound was more than a palm-width and had broken the skin. It had exited his intestine by about two palms' width from the middle intestine and the wound was in the center of the abdomen.
He had left his intestine outside the wound for twenty-four hours, after which it healed in about fifteen days. He was treated until he recovered and lived for many years thereafter, managing all his affairs. The doctors judged that he would never recover.
It is strange that I did not treat it with ointment because I was in a place where there were no medicinal supplies. I would put old cotton on the wound twice a day and rinse it with honey water until it healed.
As for one of the two types of special stitching, I will mention it based on the text of Galen: "You begin the stitching from the skin and insert the needle from the outside to the inside, so that if it passes through the skin and through the muscle going straight down the length of the abdomen,
I left the edge of the peritoneum on the side where I inserted the needle and passed the needle from inside to outside at the other edge from within the mesentery. If you pass it, pass it again in this same edge from the mesentery from outside to inside.
And leave the edge of the peritoneum that is in this side and pass the needle from inside to outside at the other edge from within the mesentery. Continue passing the needle, while passing it inside the peritoneum to the edge of the mesentery on its side, until you pass it completely.
Then begin also from this side and draw the line with the edge which is of the peritoneum in the other side and take out the needle from the skin which is near it then put it back in that skin and draw a line with the edge of the peritoneum which is in the other side with this edge from the bandages.
And take it out from the skin which is of him, and do that again and do it a number of times to the point that sews all the surgery on this example, and the phrase which describes this sewing that sew in the way of the tailors for the fur.
That sew the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the skin and leave it once from the other side until you finish, And as for the second type of special sewing which he also mentioned, this is his words in text.
Is that sew her on an example of what they sew people of the healers that gather each part to its counterpart with nature and add the edge of the peritoneum to the edge of it other and the edge of the bandages to the edge of it also, this is be on what I describe you.
The needle should be sewn into the edge of the bandages near you from the outside and run it inside alone and leave the edges of the peritoneum then return the needle and run it from the outside to the inside in the edges of the peritoneum both then return it also.
And run it from inside to outside in the edge of the bandages other which is in the opposite side, and this kind of sewing is better than the easy general sewing and is the sewing which mentioned before, so this is the words of Galen, and some have said that may be sewn with two needles. And that is that you enter within him a single thread and begin by entering the needle from your side and run it to the other side and enter another needle from the opposite side then run it from your side according to sewing of tailors, whether.
And know that if the breach is in the middle of the abdomen, then sewing it is more difficult than in all other places of the abdomen, and as for treating the wound, its ruling in treating it is like the ruling of all wounds, that is, if you recognize the wound fresh with its blood before it changes by air, and you return the bowels and traced and tightened it, then carry on it the crushed salt.
If the wound has been changed by air, then carry on it some ointments which you prepare yourself until it discharges and the sutures fall out and the peritoneum and mesentery heal, and then treat it as you treat all wounds until it heals.
If you do not have medicines, carry on it from when it begins to pus old cotton and replace it twice a day as I have told you until it heals, for you usually do not need another treatment unless the wounds are complex, so that it does not participate in the pain of the organs.
It is necessary to immerse a soft cloth in moderate heat oil or rose water and place it around the places between the ribs and armpits, if he feels pain or fermentation in his bowels, for that is often exhibited, so inject him with a black bitter liquid.
Especially if the fermentation has reached in the bowels and has become a penetrating wound to his abdomen, and know that what was of the bowels thick is easier healing and what was of them thin is more difficult to heal.
And as for the intestine known as the small intestine, it does not accept healing by surgery that has taken place in it at all, because of its great number of vessels and their thickness and the softness of its flesh and its proximity to the nerve, and if the throb has reached the wound, and you recognize it fresh, return it according to how you returned the intestine.
If it has passed a period and it has turned green or black, then you should tighten it with a thread above the place that turned black to prevent bleeding, because there are veins and arteries in the throb, and then cut what is below the knot.
And make the ends of the thread attached from below the surgery, take them out of it so that it is easy for you to remove and extract them when the sac falls and the wound becomes infected. He mentioned the wound that appears in the intestine, but if a hole appeared in the intestine and was small.
For some people it may heal on its own, because I have seen a man who was stabbed in the stomach with an arrow; the wound was to the right of the stomach, and as time passed it became a fistula from which stool and wind came out, so I treated him on the assumption that I would not be able to cure him. I kept tending to him until he healed and the area healed over, so when I saw that the area had healed over, I was afraid for the patient that a bad incident would occur in his gut, but no bad incidents happened at all, and he stayed in the best state. It is true that he eats and drinks, has relations, goes to the bathroom, and takes a bath; some experienced people say that if a wound appears in the intestine and it is small, it should be stitched up in this way.
And take large ants with open mouths, and gather the two ends of the wound, then place a ant between them, so that it sticks to the wound and does not fall apart, then place another ant next to it.
And keep doing that with several ants as much as the wound permits, then cover it and sew the wound, and those heads will remain attached to the intestine until the intestine heals completely, and the intestine can also be sewn with thin thread.
The one that comes out of the intestinal ligature after entering a needle; it is done by taking the end of this thread from the intestine and pulling it gently, then tying a thin twisted cotton thread to its end, and then inserting that thread into the needle. And he sutures the mesenteric channels to the intestine, and then returns them to the cavity; this method of suturing with wormwood and the mesentery is done out of hope and expectation.
If the tear is large and wide, especially in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy or hope for recovery.
Chapter 86.
In treating colds and nasoscopy.
Know that any wound or growth, once it has persisted and aged, turning into an ulcer, and keeps draining pus endlessly, it is called, in general, a nagging wound, and we call it an ulcer, and the nasoscopy...
is, in truth, a complicated, tangled, hard white mass with no pain, resembling the hollow of a bird's feather.
For this reason, some have named it "feather", and it may be wet, constantly discharging pus, which may sometimes decrease, but often remains constant, and may be thick or thin, and soft or hard.
I have mentioned in the division when mentioning surgery that any ulcer that does not heal and does not grow meat has one of nine causes, one of which is either a lack of blood in the body, or its thinness, or because there is hard flesh inside it and on its edges, preventing good meat from growing. Or that it is often damaged and dirty, or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the substance it emits is of poor quality, or because the treatment does not agree with it, or because a kind of plague has occurred in the city, or because there is a special nature in the city.
Or that it is often damaged and dirty, or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the substance it emits is of poor quality, or because the treatment does not agree with it, or because a kind of plague has occurred in the city, or because there is a special nature in the city. As well as those mentioned in the city of Saraqusta, where diseases are difficult to mature and injuries heal slowly by nature, or because it contains one or more bones, which I have all explained in detail, along with their causes, symptoms, and treatments using medications, in the division.
It is imperative that I inform you of the treatment for naso-laryngeal polyps and the rhinitis which develops through manual labor, know that polyps can occur in all parts of the body; some end in large blood vessels or nerves.
or to peritoneum or to intestine or to bladder or to rib of the ribs or to spine of the back or to joint of the compound joints such as the hand and foot; some lead to the vicinity of a chief organ, etc.,.
So, whatever naso-laryngeal polyps are like this characteristic, they are difficult to heal and require a lot of effort and ignorance to treat; if there are any polyps that have not reached the locations I mentioned before and for which I begged and hoped for treatment.
And I wanted you to arrive at knowing that; take a copper or iron probe if the naso-laryngeal polyp passes in a straight line, examine it with it; and if there is curling in the polyps, examine it with a thin lead probe because lead softens its body.
will split when it enters and curve towards the curling; and if the naso-laryngeal polyp has many openings, you cannot determine them with the probe; so take one of its mouths and inject it because the moisture you inject will travel to the other openings and flow out.
of it and then continue the inspection in any direction you can to determine if there is a bone or nerve; or if the naso-laryngeal polyp is hollow or far away or near or a single one with many openings; stand on all of this with your entire energy from your weak examination and pain when you stretch your hand over the area.
and other signs and causes leading to the polyp, if you have stood on all of this as a truth then proceed with confidence to the treatment which is that you look; and if there is a polyps then.
The wound should be cleaned with a sharp instrument, and then the dead flesh and infected tissue around it should be removed.
If the wound is in the mouth or has a growth or ulcer, it should be treated until it heals. If the abscess is deep, it should be cut open as much as possible and then all infected tissue and excess flesh should be removed.
Then use sutures to close the wound, and pierce it with iron needles. Repeat this several times until the sharp instruments eat away all the infected tissue in the abscess.
Then treat it with ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh until it heals. If this does not work, or if there is a bone inside that causes the problem, then open and clean it as described earlier.
It may be a blood vessel or an important organ as we mentioned earlier. If the bone is exposed and there is some decay or blackening, scrape it to remove the decay then treat it to promote healing. If it does not heal or continues to produce pus, repeat the treatment.
Be aware that you have not reached all the infection. Examine it again and remove all the infected tissue, scraping and cleaning it thoroughly. Then close it with sutures or bandages. If it does not heal, there is still some deep-seated infection, so examine it again deeply.
Scrape and clean it thoroughly, and if the bone is small, try to remove it gently with forceps or tweezers.
If there are many bones, try to remove them all carefully, and if some ligaments or muscles obstruct your way, cut them away, taking care not to injure the bones.
If you are unable to remove the bones at that time, carry on the wound what makes it rotten and leave it for days until what is around those bones from meat and tendons becomes rotten and keep the wound so that the wound does not heal.
But instead, put on it if you are afraid of that a gauze dipped in sulphur powder with oil or a Gauze dipped in Egyptian balm or one of the green ointments because when those ligaments rot and the bones become rotten, it is easy to remove them and pull them out.
If it is a single large bone like a leg or a femur, and the part that has rotted is only its face, then scrape it thoroughly until that darkness and rot go away, and then seal the wound. If the rottenness has reached the bone's marrow, there is no choice but to spread it.
And cut it all off to where the rot ends, so then treat it until it heals, and I tell you a story that was presented to a man in his leg, so that it may be an example and help in your treatment, this man was of the age.
towards the age of thirty, he experienced pain in his leg due to a movement of material from inside the body until it connected to the leg and became a great tumor, and there was no cause from outside, then time passed with the mistakes of doctors until it opened up the tumor.
It shed a lot of materials and became infected, and many outlets for pus and bodily fluids appeared on the leg, and it was treated by a group of doctors for two years, but there was no skilled person in hand surgery.
He intended to treat me, and I saw his leg, the fluids flowing from those outlets in a great stream, and the man's body had gotten thinner, and his color had turned yellow, so I inserted the probe into one of those outlets, and it came out onto the bone, then I examined all the outlets.
And I found that they communicate with each other from all sides of the leg, so I went in and split one of those openings until I exposed some bone, which I found was rotten, had eaten away, turned black and putrefied, and had bored through until it reached the brain, so I spread out what was revealed to me.
And he was able to the rotten bone, and I think that there is no other corruption in the bone than what I cut and spread out, and I removed it then I forced the wound with healing drugs for a longer time so it didn't heal, and then I came back and revealed the bone again above the first exposure.
And I found the corruption connected to the bone, so I spread out what was revealed to me as well of that corruption, then I threw forcing it and it didn't heal or come together, then I also exposed it, so I kept cutting the bone piece by piece and trying to heal it, but it wouldn't heal until I cut off a piece of the bone about an inch.
And he took out the brain, then he healed it with healing drugs, so it quickly healed and was cured, but this repetition in his work and cutting because of the weak patient's condition and his fear of death because it would happen to him in every time from excessive vomiting a dark red color until it completely healed.
And it grew back in the place of the bone, solid meat was cured, his condition improved in his body, and his strength receded, and he handled his affairs without causing any problems that would harm him completely, if a bone broke in a certain place in the body.
So it should be spread out on this characteristic, that you take a bandage and tighten it on one side of the broken bone, then order someone to hold him up above the bone, and make another bandage of thicker wool than the first bandage.
Then tie it on the meat below the bone, and spread out the meat from the place you want to spread out so that the saw doesn' t hurt the meat, and you put a board or panel under the bone firmly.
For if you do this, the saw will not be deterred from cutting into the rotten bone; and it is necessary that the chisel should be a little above the place of the rot, lest there should be in the cavity of the bone some rot which does not show itself on the surface of the sense, so that you have to chisel it again.
If the bone is rotten and has not come out but touches each other and the rot is in the middle or in some of it, then you should peel the flesh from all sides, then you put the plank from below, then you chisel it from the first side where the rot is.
If you have finished chipping it, then chip it from the other side and let the chip be a little away from the rot as we said before; if the rot is in the joint, cut off the rotten joint itself and chip the bone where it touches from the other side.
If the rot is in the connection of two joints, there is no way to treat it except by chipping; if the rot is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, the matter in treating it is very difficult, but you should peel off the rot wherever it appears and scrape it and clean it as much as you can.
And with what method do you make it straight for you if there is no obstruction of blood or nerve; and know that the saws and chisels to cut these bones are many according to the position, tilt, thickness, fragility, size, smallness, hardness and looseness of the bones. For this reason, you should prepare for each type of work a chisel adapted to that work.
And know that the works themselves may indicate to you the type of tool you need, if you have had a long experience and knowledge of the arts of this craft, because the skill of the craft and the sight of its types are diseases. He may deduce for himself what chisel suits him for each disease, and I have drawn for you in the last of this book several tools.
This will make them examples to follow and standards to measure others by, God willing, a picture of a saw:.
Another saw image:.
A small saw image:.
A large saw image:.
Another small abstract image:.
A wide abstract image:.
An abstract image with an enclosed cavity:.
Another cute abstract image:.
Another complex-ended abstract image:.
A small abstract image resembling a probe:.
Another small slice image:.
And its end, like a staff, has many positions in which it can be used to adjust the joints of bones; an image of an abstract that is suitable for grinding what has been punctured in the bones:
Its end is a sharp triangle with edges made of Indian steel; this is also how all the abovementioned gears and slices should be made, an image of an abstract:
Chapter 87.
In cutting off limbs and spreading out bones.
The ends may rot due to a cause from outside or from within; if you treat this decay with remedies and treatments, but they do not work, and you see that the decay is spreading in the member; there is nothing to stop it.
It should be cut off at the point where the decay has reached; this will save the patient from death or a great misfortune, which is greater than losing the member; and a sign of this is that the member becomes discoloured until it seems as if fire had burned it.
Or it may rot after becoming black, until that decay spreads to what comes next to that member and takes hold in the whole body; you should cut it off; likewise if the cause of decay is the stinging of certain animals such as sea scorpions, snakes, or leeches, etc.
If the corruption or sting is in the tip of the finger, cut off the finger without hesitation. Likewise, if there is injury to the hand, cut it off from the wrist; do not allow the corruption to spread and reach the elbow.
And if there is injury to the arm, cut it off at the elbow joint; if the corruption spread and reached the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder; this will cause the patient's death. Instead, use other treatments according to one's ability.
And do the same for the leg if corruption occurs in a toe, cut off the toe at one of its joints; if it occurs in a finger of the foot, cut off the foot up to the ankle joint; if it reaches the knee, cut off the leg up to the knee joint.
If the corruption has reached above the knee, there is no other choice but to leave it and let the patient die; the method of cutting off a limb or its parts is to tie a knot at the lower end of the member you want to cut and another knot above it.
And let the servant of one band extend it to the lower part and another servant extend the upper band; remove the meat between the bands with a wide scissor, so that all the flesh is exposed; then cut or spread it; it is necessary to place linen cloths on all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the correct place, which would cause the patient additional pain and a hot swelling; if bleeding occurs during your work, quickly stop the bleeding or carry some slicing agents to stop the blood, then continue your treatment.
Then bandage the injured member with a suitable bandage and treat it until it heals; I will tell you an example that happened to a man in his leg, which is exactly the same symptom that I described; namely, that a blackness appeared in his leg with a burning resembling fire.
And that corruption was the first thing that happened in his finger until the man took all of them, and he came out from himself when he saw the corruption run in the member with the severity of what he found of pain and burning, so he cut it at the joint and healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, the corruption appeared to him in his eye in his ring finger, so he intended to treat it with what the hand carries of medicines after I cleaned my body, and the corruption did not retreat and kept moving in the other finger.
Until the corruption took place in the hand, so he invited me to cut his hand, I refused it upon myself for the retreat of that corruption and also feared for him when cutting his hand with death because the strength of the man was on falling, so when he became desperate from me, he turned to his country.
So he told me about him that he recovered and only cut his hand, and this story tells what happened of a similar case and may serve as a help in what happens from this kind of disease and may be a guide to draw from it and work on it.
Chapter 88.
In treating blisters and the method of injecting medicines into them.
If a lump develops in some fleshy organ and its duration is long until it gathers length, then it bursts or dries up and all that was inside it of the duration stays behind, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel.
And the skin that is on it is like a rag, it has thinned out and was not serious in its corruption so as to affect the bone or the nerve or the ligament, and from here it deserves to be called a blister, and has not been called a pimple unless the duration of it increases until the corruption affects one of these organs.
So it is called a pimple or a rash, and its treatment is to cut all that skin off as it curls up, especially if it has thinned out and has become like a rag, and I am sure that it does not stick to the site due to corruption.
If you wish to patch the skin, and it has not deteriorated to that extent, and there is thickness of meat in the skin, then treat it with the Egyptian medicament.
which is a paste and oil and honey and pepper mixed in equal parts, all of which are ground together and cooked on the fire until the paste thickens and resembles honey, then you take what you need from it and thin it with water and honey and inject it into the abscess and clamp its mouth and leave the medicine inside for two hours.
Then you squeeze it by pressing it, doing this for several days until the abscess is cleared and the foul smell goes away, and sometimes you can inject it with ash water if you don’t have this medicine, that is to say, take the ash of holly or oak wood and mix it with water.
Then filter it and inject it until you are sure that the abscess has been washed out, for there is no possibility of a response to Egyptian medicine or ash water, so inject it with water and honey mixed with some ground pepper.
Or inject it with honey and wine mixed, because honey has the ability to purify and wash out, and wine has the ability to stick to the abscess, especially if the wine is thick and dried up, so if you do this several times and are sure that the abscess has been cleaned, then inject it with anything that promotes flesh growth.
Such as taking the cream of nuts and dissolving it in rose water and astringent drink, or injecting it with some of the other medicines and ointments that we have proven their qualities in the article on ointments, for if the mouth of the abscess is narrow and does not accommodate the syringe.
Then widen it slightly with an iron bar or insert a twisted thread in the Egyptian ointment or the syrup ointment so that it widens, and likewise if the mouth is also wide, gather the lips together with stitches and leave what can enter without further addition.
And so, if his mouth from which pus flows is elevated towards the top, then split it in the lowest place so that the pus flows downward; because the pus, when it is accumulated in a hollow place, prevents meat from growing there.
If you cannot split the cavity towards its bottom as you wish, then make the organ lean in a way that makes it easy for the pus to flow as you desire; according to what is appropriate to you, and make sure that nothing of the pus is trapped inside it.
As for the binding medicines that are placed on the cavity from the outside and the way they are applied, take one of the binding ointments that matches what you want and spread it on a cotton cloth; may the cloth be as large as to cover the whole cavity. Then, with a scissors, cut an opening in front of the mouth of the cavity that is wider than the mouth of the cavity by a little bit; then spread one of the soft ointments on another cloth according to the size of the hole and place it there with a separation from the mouth of the cavity so that pus can easily come out; do not remove the large cloth until.
for several days, and as for the one on the mouth of the cavity, remove it at each time so that what has accumulated in it comes out; and to know if the pus is a lot or a little or thick or not thick.
and also, check the location of the cavity itself; does it hurt the patient or not? Is there swelling or not? Then, if your treatment proceeds in this way and you see that the material that comes out is little on the mouth of the cavity.
then know that the cavity has adhered or is about to adhere; then cut it the next day or on the third day, and when you open the wound, replace the cloth and renew the ointment; if pus comes out of the cavity after a long time, which is thin, do not despair that it may adhere.
He will heal soon because some people slow down the growth of flesh in their wounds, and others are the opposite. If he comes out of the abscess after many days with non-cicatricial pus, know that the abscess has not stuck together, and if it takes a long time for the abscess to stick together
And his condition prolonged, increase in drying the medicines, and let the medicines be moist in their constitution and dry in their strength like the palm tree gel, if it has been increased by a lot of sarsaparilla, and among the most effective things to treat is that the palm tree gel is taken.
And solve it with olive oil and sprinkle on it the old moderate alcohol in its consistency, then mix it with it and use it, or you can do the same action if you do not have palm tree gel, honey if you cook it until it hardens, and then use it, or take a mixture of myrrh and date and almond, grind them together and mix them with honey. Then dip it in a cloth and tie it on the abscess, or dip it in honey that you have cooked until it thickens, sprinkle medicines on it, and put the cloth on it and tighten it.
And you can use the same thing, but instead of olive oil, use the long zerancon root, and the ash of the aloes tree, and the ground quassara and hyssop, grind them together and mix them with honey that has been cooked until it thickens, sprinkle medicines on it, and put the cloth on it and tighten it. If the abscess does not heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption in it.
And has affected the bones or the other hard nerves or ligaments, treating it like the treatment of a hernia.
Chapter 98.
In the treatment of the inguinal abscess, nail disease and a protruding toenail, and splitting the healed fingers.
The inguinal abscess is a lot of meat that grows under the nail of the thumb or foot, and maybe it grows in all the fingers, so if its matter is prolonged and neglected, it swells and becomes hot and inflamed.
And corruption and filthiness have reached the root of the nail, until it eats it; and perhaps it has corrupted all of it; and the corruption has reached the bone, until it has a stinky smell, and the end of the finger is wide and its color is like blood; so when you treat it with what we mentioned in the division, and your treatment does not benefit him.
So it is necessary that you cut with iron all the waste that grows from the nail, and then burn the wound after that because burning in this is very beneficial, and if the bone was healthy and the nail was also healthy.
And the angle that contains the nail has squeezed the meat to the inside and made it whistle and damage it, so you should put a thin mandrel under the nail's angle that whistles the meat and raise it above and cut that meat gently.
And you put on what is left of the meat of the burning, corrosive drugs until it all goes away, and then treat it with ointments until it heals, and if the corruption has affected the bone, so you should cut that bone and take it out because it will never heal as long as there is corrupt bone.
If you see the corruption and decay moving in the finger, cut it in one of the phalanges as mentioned earlier, and then treat it until it heals, and if the nail has received a blow or has been injured and caused strong pain, so you should bind the patient first.
Then split the nail with a sharp scalpels cut at an angle from top to bottom, and be careful not to reach the meat below the nail, because you would cause great pain in the patient and increase the swelling of the meat, which would then become a source of additional pain; and then treat the area to relieve the pain.
And the extra finger that develops in some people's hands may be all meat, and sometimes it has bones and sometimes it has a nail, and the growth of some of them is at the root of some finger joints.
And be the plant of it in some phalanges of the fingers and which grow in some phalanges of the fingers do not move and which grow at the joint of the finger perhaps moved, what was of it only cut him it is easy that he cuts it when its root.
And as for what its plant is in the root of the joint, its treatment is difficult, so it should be turned away from cutting it, and as for what it grows on the finger at one of the phalanges, it should be cut first Its meat is cut in a circle to the bone, then spread the bone with one of those saws that are appropriate for that.
Then treat it until it heals, and as for the union that presents between some of the fingers, often is this presented, and this is what is born with him, and at joining a wound or burning fire and similar, it should be split up.
Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then place between them a thread or a cloth soaked in rosewater so that it does not stick quickly and separate between them, or put between them a thin sheet of lead until the place heals as should be.
And likewise, if the union of some fingers with the hand is presented, split up this union according to what is convenient and suitable for the shape of the member.
Chapter ninety.
In cutting the appendix.
The doulis are twisted thick veins filled with phlegm that occur in most of the body's organs, and they are most common in the legs, especially in the calf, the achilles, the heels, and the heels, so it should be used first That the body is shaken from the black paste multiple times strong shaking.
Then drain the patient's blood, and as for the treatment of it with iron, it is done in two strikes, one that split and remove the black blood, and the other that sweat and remove all of it, and as for cutting it, it is on this feature That the leg is first drained with hot water Yes.
Until the thick, viscous blood thins, then tie the patient's leg with a scarf from above his hip to below his knee, and then split the vein in one place or two or three wide splits.
Then let the blood out with your hand from the bottom of the leg to the top, and from above to below, until you extract what is sufficient for him or what his strength can bear, then tie it up and order him to avoid foods that generate black bile, and vomiting and bleeding are repeated.
When the veins are filled, and this harms the patient, and his leg is shaved if there is a lot of hair, then put him in a bath and soak his leg in hot water until it turns red and sweating occurs, or he exercises strongly.
If he does not bring him a bath to heat the member, then split the skin opposite to the vein with the length either at the knee or at the heel, and then open the skin with hooks and peel off the sweat from all sides until it is felt by touch.
And when it appears, you see it red and tinged with blue, then when it is finished with the skin, you see it like a string, then enter underneath it with a smooth hook that cannot feel, then make another cut near that cut as much as three fingers.
Then peel the skin off the sweat until it appears, then raise it with a rod as you did and hang it on a hook as you did first, then make another cut or cuts if needed.
Then shave and cut him at the heel, then pull it out and shave it again until it comes out of the second cut, then pull it towards the first cut, and do this until it is pulled from the third cut.
If he does not respond to traction and slings, insert a strong sutured thread, twist it, tie it, and pull it; then introduce the hook and twist your hand in all directions until it comes out; be careful that it does not break, because if it breaks, it will be very difficult for you to re-attach it.
And there is a risk of harm to the patient from it, so if you have slung all of it, put on the site of the wounds a pile of wool soaked in wine and oil, and treat it until it heals; if the daliah is stiff and has twists and turns in all directions.
And it should not be straight as we have said, so you should split it when every direction of its twists and turns, then hang it on the hooks until you have slung all of it; and be careful when you split it that you do not cut the sweat or wound it, because it will be very difficult for you to re-attach it, so be careful with your effort.
The image of the hook used to slings the daliah:
Image of the blind hook:
It should not have a hook like other hooks, nor be sharp at the end so as not to wound the sweat, and it should be thick in bending and smooth because if it is thin, it will cut the sweat with its thinness; but it should be thick as we have said.
Chapter 129:
In slings for a civil service.
This sweat is generated in the legs in warm countries such as Hijaz and Arab countries, and in warm countries, little-soiled skins may develop, and sometimes it may develop in other places than the legs in the body, and it is generated from infection that occurs under the skin.
As it also happens inside the bodies of animals, such as insects and worms, and mustards between the skin and meat, and the sign that this sweat begins to occur is that there is a severe inflammation in the leg, then the area where the inflammation occurs begins to swell, then this sweat starts to come out from that area.
As if it were the root of a plant or the bone of an animal, and when its tip appears, it should be wrapped around a small piece of lead weighing from one dirham to two dirhams, tied up and left the lead hanging from the leg.
And whenever something comes out of it to the outside, wrap it in lead and tie it up; if it grows longer, cut some of it off and wrap the rest up, and do not cut it from its root before all of it has come out because if you cut it, it will shrink and go into the flesh, causing a wound and rotten in the place and an ugly ulcer.
For this reason, it should be managed and pulled a little bit at a time until all of it comes out, and there is nothing left of it in the body; and sometimes from this vein may come what is five cubits and ten in length.
And it has reached me that it came out of a man twenty cubits, and if it stopped for you while you were treating him, then insert a tube into the opening and clamp it tightly with the body for a long time until everything in it is discharged, and try to rot the place with medicines for days.
Then treat it with tumor treatments, and this vein may have many branches, especially if it appears in the joint of the leg or in the leg itself, so that it has many mouths, and it comes out from each mouth a branch, as we have mentioned in the division and what came before.
Chapter 92.
In slicing on worms that develop under the bone, which is called bull's disease.
This disease is called "bull's disease" in some of our countries, because it often affects cattle; it is a small worm that develops between the skin and the flesh, and it creeps into the body all over, going up and down.
You can see it moving with feeling when it wriggles from one organ to another until it breaks through at a place, and it comes out and forms itself from the filth of some feces as the worms and snakes do, and the scabs of the plums do in the belly.
And it is expected that if it [the pestilence] spreads in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open it and exit, thus nullifying the eye; this often happens. So if you want to treat and remove it, it only happens when it spreads and appears to the sense of touch.
So one should tie what is above and below it with a tight bandage, then split it and remove it, because if it sinks into the flesh and you don't find it, carry the kick with fire until you burn it; and the most expected is that it will ruin the eye as we said.
If you see it has reached the head near the eye, tie it under the forehead tightly and split it and remove it; it is also necessary to take care of the patient's body by purifying it with drugs that facilitate the formation of pus and bad, putrid flesh, and be careful of foods that generate pus.
Chapter 93.
In the split on the disease known as nafr.
This disease, which is called in our country nafr, is a pain that appears on some organs and then moves from one organ to another; I have seen it on what I will describe for you.
I was called to a sick woman in some boories; she exposed her arm and showed me a small lump in the vein of the arm, so after staying for an hour, I saw that lump moving with the arm faster than anything, it looks like mercury as it rises up to the shoulder.
If it salutes from one place to another, the pain disappears from that place and remains in the shoulder, then she sat for an hour and it moved throughout her body until it reached the other arm, and she told me that it circulates in all parts of the body as I saw.
I was surprised by the speed with which it moves from one organ to another, and I had never seen this disease with my eyes like this before; I have only seen it move from one place to another without my seeing it move from one place to another as I saw it on this woman.
I did not value it except that the woman was of the Bedouins dry body, bare veins; so from here arose that wind which moves and must not appear on this calculation in the rich people and the damp bodies with hidden veins.
If you want to treat it and the owner feels pain, then he will appear to you as we have mentioned, so tie him up quickly above and below and split him until that stuck wind comes out and clean the place.
If you don't see it with your eyes, treat it by shaking the body and what drives the winds and dispels them, such as moth of the rotten and moth of the skaphenge and similar remedies,.
Chapter 94
In Removing Arrowheads.
The arrows may vary according to their types and according to the locations they take in the body. As for their variation according to their types, some are large and others small; some are hollowed out and some are not; some have three edges and others four edges.
And some have tongues, and some have shards. As for the members which it falls in, it is of two types: either the members are principal hollowed ones like the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestine, bladder, etc. or they are attached to them. So when an arrow falls in any of these members and the signs of death which I will describe for you later appear to you, then it is necessary that you avoid removing that arrow from her, because death will overtake its owner in most cases. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow does not hide in the depth of the member, then remove it and treat the wound. One of the signs of the brain when a arrow hits it is that it will cause severe headache, dizziness, and tinnitus.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow does not hide in the depth of the member, then remove it and treat the wound. One of the signs of the brain when a arrow hits it is that it will cause severe headache, dizziness, and tinnitus. And redness in the eyes, redness on the tongue, stiffness, confusion of mind, and loss of speech. Sometimes, there will be blood from the nostrils or ears; sometimes, the speech will be lost and the voice will cease; and water-like moisture will come out from the site of the wound, similar to meat sauce.
If these signs appear, refrain from treating the patient and removing the arrow if it has not come out. As for the signs of an arrow: If it hit the heart and was close to the left breast, and you felt it as if it had become embedded in something hard, not in something hollow.
And perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to the pulse, and blood flows from the wound black, and then followed by cooling of the extremities and cold sweat, and be aware that death is certain to descend, and the sign of an arrow if it hit the lung, the flow of frothy blood from the wound.
And the vessels that follow the neck swell and the color of the patient changes and he breathes loudly and asks to inhale cold air, if the arrow hit the diaphragm in the chest, it would be close to the small ribs, and breathing is great with severe pain.
And he sighs and all the members of the shoulders move, and if the arrow hit the liver, followed by severe pain and blood came out from the wound similar in redness to the liver, and if the arrow hit the stomach, perhaps something non-digested comes out from the wound.
And his order is clear, and if the arrow hit the abdomen and penetrated it, and something comes out from the wound or pus or an intestine that has torn apart, there is no hope for treating him or removing the arrow, if the arrow hit the bladder and urine flows.
And something comes out to the outside, and the pain on the patient becomes severe, so know that he is doomed, and as for the other organs, such as the face, eyes, throat, shoulders, upper arm, spine, thighs, and legs, etc., they may be fine or not.
When the arrow does not hit a vein or a nerve and the arrow is not poisoned, and I will tell you some of what I have seen about these arrows so that you can infer from it to treat yourself, that an arrow had hit a man in his eye socket at the root of his nose.
And I took it out for him from the other side under the skin of the ear and it healed without any harm to his eye, and I took out another arrow for a Jew who had fallen it in the skin of his eye below the lower eyelid, and the arrow had disappeared, and I only attached its small end which adheres to the wood.
It was a big arrow from the arrows of the hardened composite quills, iron-squared, smooth, without any notches, and it healed the Jew, and no harm came to his eye, and I took out another arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arab.
It is the one that has two notches and I split it between the jawbones, and he had fallen in his ring, so I softened it until I took it out, and the Christian was safe, and another arrow came out for a man who had fallen an arrow in his stomach, and we estimated that he would die from it.
So when it remained for about thirty days or so, and there was no change in its state, I split the arrow and pretended to be angry at it, and I took it out, and he healed, and no harm came to him, and I saw a man who had fallen an arrow in his back, the wound clung to him.
So when it was after seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh, and I saw a woman who had fallen an arrow in her stomach, the wound clung to her, and the arrow did not change her state, nor did she find any harm for it in any of her natural actions.
And I saw another man who had fallen an arrow in his face, the wound clung to him, and he did not find much pain for it, and there are many like this, and I took out an arrow for a leader of the sultan's soldiers, which had fallen in the middle of his nose, which leaned to the right side slightly.
And the arrow disappeared entirely, so I was called to treat it after the fall of the arrow for three days, and I found that the wound of the arrow was very narrow, so I opened it with a thin needle, and he felt a tickling and pain under his ear from the right side.
I desired that the wound from the arrow should be on one side, so I bandaged it with a strong plaster in the hope that the place would swell and the mark of the arrow would appear; but this did not happen, nor was there any sign that the arrow had reached the place.
I waited for a long time with the bandage on it, but no accident happened; then I sealed the wound and the patient continued to lose hope of its removal until he felt the arrow one day in his nose, so he told me the news; then I put sharp caustic medicine on the wound.
Until it opened and I probed it; I felt the thin tip of the arrow sticking to the shaft, then I increased the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until we could see the tip of the arrow; then I went with it for a long time, about four months.
Then, when the wound had widened and I was able to put cleats in it, I pulled it and moved it, but it did not respond to come out; so I kept on soothing it and devising ways with some tools until I caught it one day with firm cleats as their image appears at the end of this book.
The doctors were considering that the cartilage of his nose would not heal, so I sewed it up and the patient healed completely; there is nothing that hurts him at all; and I tell you about how to remove some arrows so that you can make this a standard and evidence for what I did not mention.
Because the parts of this industry and its details cannot be understood by description or covered by a book; the skilled craftsman measures a little based on a lot, what is present based on what is missing, and he derives a new work and a new tool for unusual emergencies.
If a man descends from this industry, I say that the arrows come out of the organs in which they are stuck on two types: either by pulling from the place from which they entered, or from the opposite side, from where they came out.
If the arrow is protruding from a fleshy part, it should be pulled out and removed. If it does not come out at the right time, you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it putsries, which will make it easier to pull and remove. The same applies if it has lodged in a bone.
If it does not come out at the right time, you should also leave it for a few days and try to pull and move it every day; it will come out. If it does not come out after a few days, you should drill around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a small drill until it widens, then grab and remove it.
If the arrow has lodged in the skull and has penetrated one of the cavities of the brain, and some of the symptoms I mentioned to you have appeared from the sore, do not pull out the arrow; leave it for a few days so that it can recover.
Then try to pull and remove it, if it is deeply lodged and does not come out with pulling, use the drill around the arrow as you have described, then treat the area until it heals. As for the arrow that has hidden in a part of the body. And disappeared from the senses; examine it with the probe, and if you feel it, pull it out with some tools that are suitable for this purpose; if you cannot reach it, due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth to which the arrow has gone, and there is no bone or nerve or blood vessel near it.
Then make the wound bigger to reach the arrow and be able to remove it; if it has two heads, grab them so you can extract the arrow, if you cannot extract the arrow by breaking the heads and cutting them off to get rid of it.
And if you try to remove the arrow at any place, use your fist with the hooks in all directions until you get rid of it and be gentle to the extreme not to break the arrow so that it becomes difficult for you to draw it out and remove it, if you could not do it from your time.
Then leave it for a few days until those muscles around it rot then try again because it will be easier at that time, if something blocks you and causes bleeding, use what we mentioned from the treatment in its door, and preserve your effort from cutting a muscle or a nerve or a tendon, and use the trick.
In every way you can get rid of the arrow and let it be gentle and care and stabilize as I have described to you, and you should use when you draw out the arrow that it becomes on the form that was on him at the time of the arrow because it is more suitable.
If you cannot do that, use what you can of shapes, and as for the arrow that comes out from the opposite direction either it has come out something to the outside or you will find the tip of the arrow by touch from above the skin close and see him coming out.
Then split it on what you can hold the hooks then draw it out, and it will be easier to come out, if it clung to the bone, let your fist turn around until the arrow affects the bone and expands itself then draw it out.
Or leave it for a few days and try again until it comes out, if the arrow tip has fallen and you want to use pushing, then insert the hollow tool into it so that its cavity enters in the arrowhead tip then push it with it.
If the arrow is hollow, push it with a tool that enters into that cavity and the arrow will be easier to come out, if the arrow is poisoned, you should curl up the muscle that has become poisonous, all of it, if you can do that then treat it with what is suitable for that.
If the arrow has struck the chest, or the belly, or the bladder, or the rib, and is near to what can be felt by probing with a probe, and you are able to make an incision on it, then make the incision and preserve the cutting of a nerve or of a vein, and bring it out.
Then sew the wound if it needs to be sewn, then treat it until it heals, the image of the knots that are drawn with which arrows are extracted:.
The ends are made to be semi-cone shaped like the beak of a bird, it is made as if it were a cold one if you grasp the arrow or something that you do not leave behind, and she can make various sizes large and small and medium, all this according to the size of the arrow and the width of the wound and its narrowness.
Image of the hollow tube:.
Image of the solid tube:.
This is closed at one end like a club to facilitate its entry into the hollow arrow and push it, and.
Chapter 59.
In draining veins.
The veins that are customarily drained in the body are thirty. Among them, sixteen are in the head, two are known as the temples, and two are known as the eye sockets, which are called the eyes.
And the erect vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein in the tip of the nose, and the jugulars that are in the neck, and the two veins that are in the upper lip from the mouth, and the two veins that are in the lower lip, These are the known vessels.
And the veins that are drained in the arm and hand are five. One is the occipital, which is on the lateral side, and it is called by the common people a vein of the head, and Akhlah, which is the middle vein, and it is composed of a division from the bicipital and a division from the occipital, and it is called by the common people a vein of the body.
And the olecranon, which is placed on the human side and is also called the olecranon, and is called by the general people the armpit string and arm cord; it is placed on the radius; it is that which adheres to it; and it is that which appears above the thumb clearly and the olecranon.
And the vein between the index and middle fingers, which has two branches; and in the leg, three veins, one is the one under the kneecap on the lateral side, and the second is the soleus, and its place is at the heel from the medial side, and the peroneal vein, and its place is at the ankle from the lateral side.
And in the other leg, there are three veins like them; and the two veins behind the ears, their benefit is to cut them for chronic colds, headache, and chronic scaly scabs of the head, and the way to cut them as I describe.
That is to shave the patient's head and scratch its back in the place of the two veins with a rough cloth, scratch it well, then choke the patient's neck with a turban until the veins appear at the back of the ears, in the two low places on the head; then search for them with your finger, and wherever you felt a pulse under your finger, there mark with ink.
Then you take a surgical knife, which is known as the Neshl, and insert it under the vein in the skin until it reaches the bone, then you raise your hand with the vein and skin up, and cut the vein with the skin in one piece, and the length of the piece is two fingers clenched together.
Or close to it, and send from the blood the amount you want, then tighten them with strips of cloth and leave them until they heal, and has been mentioned at the beginning of the book cutting them and shaping them, and the two arteries in the temples, their benefit is to cut them for chronic headache, severe headache, and chronic eye strain.
How to Tie Them Tightly Around the Neck With a Turban Until the Arteries Are Visible, So That the Pulse Is Easy to Feel; Then You Will Be Able To Learn How to Use the Bloodletting
Then, Insert the Scalpels and Cut the Veins, As You Did with the Other Two; Let the Blood Flow as Needed, Then Remove the Turban from Around the Patient’s Neck and Place Your Finger on the Vein for a While.
Then, Place a Cotton Pad and a Headband on It, Tighten the Bandage, and Leave It to Heal; The Benefits of Cutting the Forehead Veins (As Mentioned Previously) Were discussed When We Explained How to Cut, Thread, and Stitch the Arteries; These Techniques Are Used to Treat Chronic Face Diseases Such as Seborrheic Dermatitis, Scalp Lesions, and Hemorrhagic Spotting.
How to Tie It Tight Around the Neck With a Turban Until the Arteries Are Visible; Then, Take the Scalpel (Which Is Called the Scalpels) and This Is Its Image: [Image of Scalpel] .
Then, Place the Tip of the Scalpel on the Same Vein; Hit It With a Spindle or Something Similar to Create an Incision, Let the Blood Flow as Needed, and Then Remove the Turban from Around the Patient’s Neck and Tighten the Bandage So That It Heals.
It Is Preferable to Use a Wide Scalpel; However, The Blade Should Not Be Sharp, As in the Case of Other Scalpels; Instead, It Should Be Slightly Curved to Facilitate Cutting; Cut It Along the Veins Because the Bone Is Close by, So There Is a Risk of Breaking the Bone If the Scalpels Are Too Thin.
The Veins in the Eyes Are Beneficial for Treating Eye Diseases Such as Scabies, Hemorrhage, and Conjunctivitis; The Method of Tying Them Tightly Around the Neck With a Turban, Then Cutting the Veins While Standing Next to the Patient's Head; Use a Small Scalpel That Is Slightly Wider Than the Veins.
If there is no flesh at the site, then if the trocar is fine at the tip, it may break, and then you will send for blood and put a cloth on them and tighten them for one night and then undo them; as for the piercing of the nose with a needle, it is beneficial in a hot fever.
For severe headaches and diseases of the face, such as a red mark that appears on the nose, especially if it is chronic, and the method of treatment is to have the patient strain his neck, then grip the nose with your left hand and take a thin, long trocar.
And then insert it into the middle of the nasal cavity, straight ahead, because sweat does not appear in this area, so blood will flow immediately; your hand should be slightly relaxed while holding the trocar, and send for blood as needed and then tie it up for a night, because it will quickly clot.
As for the lobes, their benefit is to relieve shortness of breath and the beginning of leishmaniasis, skin diseases such as black vitiligo, smallpox, poor sores, and nodules; the method of treatment is to have the patient wear a scarf under his neck, and the healer stands over the patient's head.
Then the patient sits on a chair, and then sweat is allowed to flow freely for a while, slightly longer than before, and then you do the same with the other sweat; then untie the scarf.
And then tighten the sweat slightly so that the patient does not choke, and leave it until the next day because it will heal, as for the jugular veins, their benefit is after draining the pharynx, because it benefits from a leishmaniasis in the mouth, bad teeth, bad gums, and poor sores.
Which are in the nose and around it; their method of treatment is to have the patient sit in front of you, and tighten his neck with a turban, then turn his lips and look at the two sweats, distinguishing one from the other by their darkness.
And also, that they are surrounded by thin black veins, so cut them off, if it does not form with you and you do not know what it is, then aim to cut the largest and most obvious one, and do the same for the two veins in the lower lip.
As for the two veins that are under the tongue, their benefit is that they are cut after the bloodletting of the hard palate for the glands that form in the throat from disease of the uvula and diseases of the mouth, and how to cut them off that you sit the patient between your hands facing the sun and raise his tongue and look under the tongue on one side and a vein and its color towards black.
Cut and preserve them, do not press too much when cutting them, because there are veins underneath them, so blood may flow from those veins. And as for the three veins that are cut in the elbow, they are the ones that it is customary to cut in all people, and the cutting of them is done in two ways.
Either by stitching with a wide الريحاني (a type of needle) or زيتوني (oliven) to the thickness, or by cutting with a skinnin' knife (a type of scalpel), which is the النشل [This is its image] -Image of the wide الريحاني needle-.
It should be wide as you see it so that it can open the veins that are filled with thick, dark blood. And this is an image of the زيتوني  (oliven) scalpel -Image of the oliven scalpel-.
And this needle is less wide and sharper, which is suitable for cutting thin veins that contain pale yellow blood. And this is an image of the skinnin' knife   -Image of the skinnin' knife-.
This النشل  (skinnin' knife) is suitable for cutting and is available in various widths and thicknesses depending on the size of the veins, and it can be used to identify others, and it is well-known among craftsmen.
And as for the basilic, which is one of these three veins, the benefit of its sectioning is that it draws blood from the illnesses that are under the throat and neck, coming from the chest and abdomen. The surgeon should take care when he sections it and should be on a string of it, because there is a vein underneath, if he makes a mistake and increases the cut with the scissor, then cut that vein.
If there is no appearance of the basilic, you should avoid it and turn to something else, or request a portion of its branches.
Or you can explore the site with your finger until you recognize the pulse, then mark it with ink.
Then tie the arm and cut the vein with a knife, taking care that the blow falls away from the vein; if you see, when you tighten the bandage, air blowing in the place where you have marked with ink, then this blowing is the expansion of the vein, so leave it aside.
If you see the blood pulsing when you bleed, and if the blood is thin and red, then know that it is arterial blood; at this point, you should quickly place your finger on it for a long time, and then remove your finger; if the blood stops, then tie the arm.
And leave it, and beware of neglecting the patient; let him be on a string, and do not move it for a while until he heals, and if you cannot get a cure for him in your time, cut the artery when it appears to you; because its ends contract and the blood stops.
Or take a lemon peel, cut it in half and tighten it with the ribbon on the vein securely for another day; if the blood stops, then treat him as mentioned earlier by placing the cubes that stop bleeding; cutting his blood is not difficult in most cases.
For a small wound and the bandage in the arm, know this; but as for thick sweat, its benefit is that it draws blood from the top of the head and the bottom of the body, because it is composed of a branch of basilic and a branch of pipal as we have said.
The bandage should be on the neck of the one who bleeds; because underneath are nerves; if it increases in stitching the scalpel and hits the nerve, there will be numbness that is difficult to see and may never heal at all; this nerve often appears to the touch.
If it becomes obscure in some people and is thin, so you cannot see it, then your bandage should be a cut with the axe, avoiding the nerve as much as possible; if the sweat is between two nerves, then make the sweat run lengthwise, and as for kefal sweat, its benefit is that it draws blood from the head.
It is beneficial for eye diseases and it is necessary in this sweat, especially if you want to bandage it with a olive scalpel or a wide rihaani scalpel because it is safer all the veins because there is no artery or nerve under it.
But it is necessary for you when bleeding to avoid the scalpel head of the muscle only and seek the soft place, and it does not hurt him if he did not hit in the first blow that he returns to him by bleeding several times; but it might swell in some people if he did not bleed in the first blow.
But that swelling does not harm him at all; as for the method of bleeding and its effects, and what should be brought to repair it, you must first know that bleeding is either used to preserve health only.
either used in diseases, and which is used to preserve health and sustain it and guard against the occurrence of diseases, that bleeding should be in one of the three veins in the elbow, namely kefal, akhal, and basliq, and the bleeding should be in the first spring when the signs of fullness appear.
The bloodletting should be done on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours have passed since daylight. As for the bloodletting used in diseases, there is no fixed time for it, but whenever need and necessity call for it, whether night or day.
And at any hour and at any time; it is not appropriate to bleed children until they reach the age of fourteen, nor to bleed old people who have passed sixty years; so whoever intends to bleed for any reason.
It is appropriate to purify his gut before bleeding with a soft enema if there is a lot of trapped waste in it so that it does not ooze into the veins during bloodletting from the rectum, and it is not appropriate to bleed him who is bloated nor the drunk nor the intoxicated until they disappear.
And he should also avoid bloodletting after a disease has passed, or a bout of vomiting, or a change in the sexual partner, or excessive intercourse, or exhaustion from exercise, or staying up late, or fasting, and everything that strengthens physical or mental power; then you should see if the blood needs to be thinned before doing so if it is thick.
By food, drink and medicines if he can do so, then he should go to the bathroom or do some exercise so that his blood is thinned and bleeding from him in the morning is more effective; he should also free himself on that day from all harmful psychological things.
such as worries, anger, fear, and all physical symptoms such as excessive fatigue and exhaustion, intercourse, and so on; and bring to his session the things that are used by people customarily of kinds of perfumes, incense, entertainment, and similar things, each person according to what he can afford.
Then the bleeder should sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the person being bled sits; then he rubs his arm with the bleeder's hand twice or three times, and ties the tourniquet tightly and folds it twice or three times; let the tension be moderate.
For tension, when it is not moderate, either by excessive tension which obstructs the flow of blood, or if it relaxes too much and also obstructs the flow of blood, then after the tension has been released, one should rub the joint with his hands, one on top of the other.
Until the veins swell and can be felt, then a little oil should be applied to the area, especially with a sharp tool, and the thumb of the left hand should be placed on the same vein below the location that needs to be clamped for a short time so that the vein is not affected by the blow. Because there are veins that can be found like a vein that is affected when clamped, and some veins are full of air. So, when the clamp is placed on them, they move down under the clamp and deceive the fasser, and the clamp does not open the vein if it opens, it only opens slightly.
So, the fasser should be stable and careful in all these matters, then he lowers the clamp. If the vein opens at this time, otherwise, he will repeat it a little below that location or above it with haste if the area does not swell.
If the patient's condition improves, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage as it may cause a hot wound, and then repeat the procedure if desired, if the clamp was inserted and the opening was small and the flow of blood was weak.
And fear that the required amount of blood may not come out, so repeat the procedure in the same hole with care and make the opening slightly larger, and do this quickly before the area swells, because in many people, the area may swell when the small opening is opened.
If you see that it has swollen, do not repeat the procedure because it will not help, put something of oil on it, because it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this case than oil itself or any other fats.
Use oil of tar in all your venesections for those vessels that cannot be made to bleed, and this may also be done with the two antidotes, Farouk and Shakhzaniya. If either is applied to the site, the blood will thicken and become thicker if it was thin.
If a lump occurs in the place of venesection, this often happens, especially for those who have not venesected except once or when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put on the lump an sponge soaked in warm salt water and tie it for an hour, so it will thicken.
And it should be done after the blood has come out of the vein completely, or from another vein, for what remains in the site after days a little black or green, it does not harm that, if you liked, carry on it something of the sap and dissolved salt.
Or something of the juice of the food and similar things, often a lump and a knot occurs when venesection basliq, so put your hand on it, if he found him ylaa at the time of his examination him, then that is a bad knot, so be careful not to put anything on him of what we mentioned.
For it may bleed from him a vein, but bandage him with what is in it to stiffen the site, then treat him with all the treatment until he heals, and it should be taken out of each person's blood according to his strength, and what appears of the color that prevails in the blood.
If the blood is black, let it come out until it turns red, and if you see him thick, send it out until it thins out, and if he was sharp, send it out until his sharpness goes away, and it should be for a person who is full and strong and needs to remove blood all at once.
That the venesection vein is expanded and the scalpel is wide, and if he was weak, then it should be the opposite, and it should be taken out in installments and its hole should be narrow, and the best used in venesection the vein that is heated, stirred, cut, not sewn.
This hit of phlebotomy is free from bleeding and cutting a nerve; it is safer and more beneficial than the longitudinal or transverse phlebotomy. And if one is accustomed to felling [the vein] by phlebotomy, then he should feed him before phlebotomy something of bread soaked in water from pomegranates or skirra [a type of grain].
If he is irritated and draws out blood three or four times, then if his disposition is cold, before phlebotomy, let him eat bread soaked in water from the mihya  [a type of fruit] or honey perfumed with afsih  [a type of spice] or sweet wine perfumed with rosewater.
If felling causes fainting due to a lot of blood leaving, one should drink water from meat and perfumed sweet wine, use ghalaat   [a type of spice] and massage with it his chest, and use all that we have mentioned in the section on fainting.
Who is prone to vomiting, and as for the one who wants to refresh his arm and move his blood a second time, it is obligatory for the one whose phlebotomy is for excessive vomiting and his strength is weak that he should move the blood little by little according to strength in successive days.
As for the one who wants to refresh his arm and move his blood a second time, and his body is strong, he should do so in seven or nine hours from his first phlebotomy, and as for the one who wants to attract blood from his body to the opposite direction of what it has leaned towards, it is obligatory that he should do so on the second or third day.
As for the one who has a lot of blood in his body, it has warmed up and caused a fever, it is obligatory that he should draw out his blood all at once and draw out a large amount of it and widen the opening until felling causes fainting after checking all the conditions of phlebotomy. And to put your hand on his pulse when the blood is flowing so that death does not occur in place of felling, for this often happens if the phlebotomist is unaware and neglects; it is not necessary if you want to refresh his arm and move his blood a second time.
And the mouth of the wound has closed and it is difficult for the blood to come out so that you grip it strongly or twist it forcefully, because this is very bad, but either you leave it until you let it go again, or you shift with the blade of the scalpel what has frozen in the mouth of the wound.
or carry on him something of salt which has been dissolved in water or carry on him something of the Antidote of Farouk or of Shakhznayya and grip it gently so that the blood comes out, because if the sweat has swelled, leave it.
And do not touch it until the swelling subsides, because if necessity requires to let go of the blood again, and there is no choice, either you let it go on that site again or you let it go in the other arm or in another sweat.
And as for the cord of the arm to be purged, it is purged with a replacement from Akhl and Basliq because he is made up of them, and the method of purging him that the patient enters his hand in hot water until his arm becomes red and sweat appears clearly, and then you pull above it with the bandage a little tight.
Then you purge the sweat on a slight deviation, not a width or length, and let the opening be wide and your purging him is above the wrist joint a little, because if it is impossible for blood to come out, put the hand back in the container with hot water and let the blood run in the water.
until it reaches your need, because if you are in the summer season, you may be satisfied without putting your hand back in hot water, and most of what makes blood run in hot water is in winter time, and purging this sweat is safer than all the veins. Because it is not under it a striking sweat or a nerve, and as for the benefit of purging Asilm from the right hand, it is beneficial for the diseases of the liver, and the method of purging him that you pull the wrist of the hand with the bandage, or with your hand after putting it in hot water until it swells.
Because it is not under it a striking sweat or a nerve, and as for the benefit of purging Asilm from the right hand, it is beneficial for the diseases of the liver, and the method of purging him that you pull the wrist of the hand with the bandage, or with your hand after putting it in hot water until it swells. It is very evident to the sense, and then you separate it a little on distorting it slightly, even if you cut it all off, it did not hurt him at all, and be careful that you do not put your hand in the syringe because below the fingers is a nerve and the place is naked from meat, and then you bring the hand back to hot water.
And leave it running blood in it because if you don't put it back in hot water the blood will freeze in the mouth of the vein and stop flowing, so when you take out a capacity of blood need put on the vein oil and salt so as not to quickly stick together.
And this is what you should do with every narrow branch, as for the benefit of draining it from the left hand, it is beneficial to the diseases of the spleen, and you do the same thing in draining the palm as you did in the second one, and as for draining the safaan, its benefit is to the diseases that are at the bottom of the body such as diseases of the wombs.
And the reten tion of menstruation and kidney diseases, and chronic sores on the thighs and legs, and similar diseases, and the way to drain it is to let his foot enter the hot water and carry it with oil until it drains the veins, and the vein's place is at the heel, visible towards the thumb.
And it branches off from him many branches, so drain it in the widest branch of him or at the heel where it meets together, that is best and safer, because if you drain it on the face of the man, be careful with the nerves that are under his face.
And make your drainage for him by distorting it as if you want to cut it off, and the syringe is sharp, and if the blood does not come out, let his foot return to hot water and leave the blood running in it until he empties, and if the phlebologist misjudges the vein in the first time.
Let him raise [the patient's] leg a little further, for the site is sound and there is no danger of it causing any harm if he takes care not to hurt the nerve as we have said; nor should he do this to the other foot's metatarsus, in either case, and as we have said, the site for the perineum is at the heel on the back side.
The benefit of raising the leg is for pain in the hip if that is due to hot blood; and the method of raising it is to make the patient enter the bath, and hurry and tighten his leg from the hip to above the heel by four fingers with a thin long turban, because this only appears like this.
If it appears, then amputate it, or split it open; for the site is sound, and it is very hard to find it in most people; if you do not find it.
Nor has it appeared to the sense at all; so amputate some of its branches, which appear on the back of the foot towards the index and middle fingers, while taking care not to hurt the nerves, and send it with the amount of blood that you want.
Then loosen the bandage and put a cloth on the frayed site, and tighten the site; for it will soon heal.
Chapter 66
In bloodletting and its use.
The cupping glasses may be of horn, of wood, of brass, or of glass; and bloodletting may be with a condition, i.e., drawing blood, or without a condition.
And this bloodletting without a condition has two aspects.
And the  "akhdeyn" [i.e., the temples/forehead] which are both sides of the nape, and the  "khad-al-sawaq" [i.e., the jaw/lower chin] which is below the lower jaw from the mouth, and the  "kahal-at-al-sawaq" [i.e., the shoulders], and the  "aqa'iq-at-al-sawaq" [i.e., the sacrum] on the back of the loins, and the  "az-zuhur" [i.e., the biceps/upper arms] which are in the middle of the arms, and the  "al-ghufraf" [i.e., the legs] and the  "aqa'iq-at-al-ghufraf" [i.e., the femurs].
The cupping draws blood from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, for this reason the strength of sanguinal withdrawal is not exceeded by venesection; nor should cupping be used with fire or without fire in any disease that is caused by over-fullness so that the body as a whole may be emptied.
When the need for cupping arises, whether due to a disease or by way of habit, we practice it at any time in the first, middle, or last month, and in any other time.
Since some people, when their blood becomes too abundant and needs to be eliminated by cupping, experience a weight in their head and headaches; or feel swelling and redness in their face, head, and neck; or suffer from itching in their face and buttocks; or experience darkness and inflammation in their eyes; or have irritation at the site of their hairline.
Some people experience excessive laughter, while others find blood taste in their mouths and their teeth loose blood; some salivate and bleed; and some have frequent dreams featuring blood, redness, wounds, and injuries, among other similar signs. So when we observe any of these symptoms
Especially in the middle third of the month, we order cupping after two or three hours have passed since daylight. The benefit of cupping with needles is that it relieves head weight and causes water to flow into the eyes.
However, it should be performed after all the body's fluids have been emptied. This type of cupping can replace venesection in cases of head coldness and flu, but one must beware, as it may cause significant harm.
For this reason, elders should not use it, nor those with cold-related illnesses in their heads; nor those who have become addicted to it, as it may lead to forgetfulness.
For this reason, cupping masters should lower their hands with the cups slightly down to prevent the generation of forgetfulness. As for neck cupping, it is an alternative to venesection in the jugular vein (acompani).
Therefore, it is beneficial for bronchitis and shortness of breath, and a cough and fullness, and it should be raised by a little hajama because if it was brought down, it would generate weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for the hajama of the temples, it benefits from the pains that occur in the head, blindness, headache, and constriction, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is a substitute for bleeding basilic; and it should be ordered to the barber that he does not lower his hand with condition so as not to cut a vein and cause bleeding.
As for the hajama under the chin, it benefits from plague in the mouth and decay of the gums and other diseases that are in the mouth; and it may stand in place of bleeding the nasopharyngeal glands, which are in the cheeks; and as for the hajama of the shoulders, it benefits from the palpitations that occur due to fullness and heat.
As for the hajama of the inner part of the arm, it benefits from what is beneficial for bleeding the three basilic, akhal and qifyal veins because it draws blood from all those thin veins that are in the flesh, and draws those thin veins from other thicker veins so that it reaches to the thick veins.
It should be ordered to the barber that he does not make a deep cut because the place is bare of flesh and there are nerves and veins below it; and as for the single anus that is clamped on the coccyx, it benefits from hemorrhoids of the rectum and sores of the lower parts.
It should be ordered to the barber that the anus is large and made of copper because the place needs a strong clamp and it might break a glass anus and make many conditions; and as for the leg hajamas, they reduce fullness significantly.
Because it draws blood from all the body and benefits from chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder; and it brings on menstruation; and it benefits from boils and warts; and its benefit is close to the benefit of hajama of the legs.
The method of applying the swabs is that first the swab is empty and sucked moderately; do not prolong putting the swabs but place them quickly and remove them quickly to accept the pus into the wound evenly. Continue doing this repeatedly and continuously until you see the wound turn red and open.
The redness of blood appears, then it is cut and repeated slowly again and again, then look at the condition of the bodies, so whoever among the people is cheap meat, porous pores, it should be cut once only so that it does not become inflamed.
And order the barbers to widen the incision and deepen it slightly and adjust the swab lightly and gentle movement, if there is thickness of blood, it should be cut twice. In the first, a path is opened for the serous fluid and its wateriness, and in the second, to extract the thick blood.
If the blood is very viscous, we will cut once to achieve the goal. In general, if we want to extract little blood, we are content with one incision, but if we want to extract a lot of blood, we will make more incisions, and if we estimate that the blood is thick.
It should be cut at a moderate depth, and the average depth is within the skin. What should be used when applying the swabs, and what should the barber avoid? As for whoever has skin that is thick, hard, dry, and porous.
It should be coated with oil that opens, softens, and dissolves. As for if it is in summer time, like the oil of khir, or chamomile oil, or almond oil, or castor oil.
If it is winter, like oil of marjoram, or flaxseed oil, or poppy seed oil, or olive oil. If the wound is thick, cold, and hard, use oil of mustard, or flaxseed oil, or castor oil, or althaea leaf gel.
If the person who was bloodletting had wide pores, the meat should be trimmed of fat, and those who should wash their cupping glasses after bloodletting with rose water or cold water or water from wild grapes or water from pumpkins or water from mallow and so on, and as for one whose blood was very wet.
He should wash his cupping glasses with vinegar or water of myrrh and spice and so on, and as for one whose phlegm was thick, he should wash his cupping glasses with old wine or water of marshmallow or cooking of black mustard or chamomile and so on, and it is necessary to beware of bloodletting in the bathhouse and after the bathhouse.
It is necessary that you use after leaving the bathhouse an hour or two, and it is not necessary for anyone to sleep after bloodletting, what is necessary to prepare for the person who was bloodletting and the person who was cupped before and after bloodletting.
You must look first; if the person who was bloodletting or the person who was cupped was jaundiced, and what is predominant in his blood is severity and inflammation, he should take the cooling foods such as pomegranates, artichokes with vinegar, lettuce, garlic, calamus root, and mulberries and so on, and make his diet chicken and lamb, cooked food, and lamb chops and so on.
And if his disposition was cold, he should drink honey syrup and the syrup of myrrh or calamus root and aromatic grain and order to reduce food, and make his diet chicken, quail, sparrows, and pigeons, cooked food, and lamb chops, and it is necessary that the drink on the day of bloodletting and cupping be more than the food.
And it may be necessary that he drink in some times for some people from the antidote of saffron or drug of musk or calamus root before bloodletting and before cupping or after it to strengthen the main organs and thin the blood, and it is not necessary to drink it from those who were dehydrated.
And as for the clamps that are without condition, they are those that are placed on the liver and spleen and breasts and on the abdomen and navel and the site of the kidneys and right hip because these organs do not bear condition upon them, and it is intended by them either to draw blood from an organ to another.
For example, we place the clamps on the breasts in the case of nosebleeds, or we use them to relieve an organ of a cold wind that has settled in the organ by placing the clamps on the abdomen and navel, for they loosen the organ and heat it and remove the pain to dissolve that wind.
It may also be placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stone, with the force of the grip opening it might open the clogging or remove the stone from its place; likewise, when placed on the liver and spleen in a wind that causes confusion in them, and these clamps can be used empty by suction only.
It can be used with fire and can also be used filled with lukewarm water in the cases of colic, for example; it fills the clamp with very hot water by itself or with water that has been cooked with some herbs that are suitable for this purpose.
Then it is filled and placed on the site and gripped and removed and repeated as many times as needed, and this is a picture of the clamp that is used with fire:
It is a size of two open fingers on what we have described, and its depth is half a cubit; there is a small hole at about a quarter of it from one side, as much as an needle can enter; it is made of Chinese brass or yellow brass, thick at the edge.
It is smooth and even, so as not to hurt the organ when it is placed on it, and there is a thick bar of brass or iron in its center, where the torch is placed; this clamp can be made larger than what we have described, or smaller according to the disease.
If you wish to examine the part, then the children's and thin men's plucks are not like those of robust men and bald bodies. And as for how to place this pluck on fire on the member, that is that you light a thread with fire from a tight cotton or a small candle of wax and put it on the middle of the stiff penis which is in the middle of the pluck.
So that the fire rises towards the lower part of the pluck so as not to burn the patient's body, and then it is placed on the member and the finger on the hole which we have mentioned above, so that when we hold the pluck, we do not need to remove the finger.
And the steam comes out on that hole and the pluck sits on its place, then you light the thread as described and repeat it if needed, and as for the pluck used in a disease of water, there is no stiff penis or hole.
And it is used by filling it with water and placing it on the member only, and this is its image:
And this pluck, the larger it is so as to contain a lot of water, the better it is, and there are many kinds of these plucks and their making.
Chapter 97
In hanging the pluck.
The pluck is used in most cases in the members that cannot have plucks put on them because of their small size, such as the cheek and the gum, or because the member is bare of flesh, such as the finger and the nose, and so on.
And the way to use it is that you intend from the plucks which are in sweet water, free of impurities, then you leave it for a day and a night in sweet water until it starves, and nothing remains in its cavity. Then the body is purged first by vomiting or bleeding, then the member is wiped clean.
Until it turns red, then put it on it, so if it fills up, it falls down, and if it is possible to suck the site with a pluck, that is more beneficial, otherwise, wash the site with vinegar and then with plenty of water and massage and squeeze it, and if the blood kept flowing after the fall of the pluck, and that was seepage, so put a cotton cloth in cold water.
Place it above until the discharge stops, and if there is a lot of blood, sprinkle it with powdered soda or tar or something like that from the constrictors until the blood stops or put halva halves on the raw spot.
Leave it until the halva sticks to the spot, and blood stops flowing, and if re-bandaging is necessary, do not use those bandages if others can be used instead, because if bandaging fails to stop the flow of blood, the wound site should be cleaned with fresh blood.
Or if you feel something in the spot, it will stick to the place; and if you want to fall down, sprinkle a little tar or salt or ash on it, so that it falls on the place.
The third door.
In Jaber.
This is also a door from and what needs it in the surgery of medicine, which is the repair of fractures and the incident jaw in bones.
Know, my children, that some people may claim this door is not for doctors and laymen, and those who have never studied the ancient books or read any letters from them.
For this reason, this art has become lost science in our country, and I have never found it useful at all. But I benefited from it all due to my long reading of the books of the ancients and my efforts to understand them so that I could extract knowledge from them, then I stuck to experimentation and practice for most of my life.
I have drawn for you all of it in this door from what my knowledge encompassed. And my experience has passed on it after I have brought it close to you and removed the complexity from it as much as possible, and clarified it fully, and illustrated many pictures for you of the instruments used in it.
So that it is increased clarification as I did in the two preceding doors, and there is no power except by Allah, the High exalted.
Chapter One.
Chapter One: You must first understand them and stand firmly on the truth of them, you and whoever else is eager to learn this noble craft other than you.
I say that whenever someone has a fracture, or a dislocation, or an abrasion, or a fall, you should immediately go to clean it or draw blood, or both. If there is no obstacle like weakness of power, or if it is a child or an old man who has fallen, or if the weather is extremely hot or extremely cold.
Then he should restrict his diet to cold legumes, poultry meat, and chewed food, and he should avoid drinking, meat that is tough, and eating a lot of food that fills the veins with blood until he ensures that there is no swelling, and does not expect any discharge from the wound.
Then the patient should return to his original treatment, which he usually follows; if the fracture heals with a reduction (immobilization), the patient should eat thick, nutritious food that is firm and not easily digested, such as stews, rice, and offal. And eggs, fresh fish, thick drinks, and so on. Know that broken bones in mature men and old people will never heal and fuse back to their original state.
The bones of their hands and feet will remain flexible, and nature will grow something like glue on the broken bone in all directions; this gluing will hold it together and tighten it until it heals.
It will be bound together so that it comes to be extremely strong and tight as it was before, without any obstruction in its actions; and this is due to the fact that the bone has been healed naturally.
This is why the patient's diet should include foods that are firm, sticky, and thick as we have mentioned; know that the types of fractures may vary depending on the bones they affect, because a fracture in the leg is different from a fracture in the head, and a fracture in the chest is different from a fracture in the spine.
And so do all the other organs, each one contrary to the other. We will come to the description of each type of fracture in its own section, explained in detail and separate from the others, and the type of bone fracture may also differ from itself.
For it may be that his fracture is a fracture without any fragments, and it may be that his fracture is along the bone and there are fragments and excesses that heal and do not heal and the fracture is with a wound and piercing of the skin and the fracture is a slight crack.
And each type has a specific technique for repairing it, as will be mentioned in detail in its own section. One of the signs of a bone fracture is its curve, and its tangibility and sensitivity to touch, and its sound when you tap it with your hand.
So, when there is no apparent curve or sound or pain when you examine the bone by moving it slightly, and the patient does not feel much pain, then it is not a fracture, but rather a callus or a light fracture or a slight crack, and it is not appropriate to move it at all by stretching or tapping.
But carry it with the medications that will be mentioned later, when it is in place, and then tie it gently, and know that when the bone breaks and crumbles into two parts without any fragments, each part has fallen from its owner.
So, you should take action to correct and align it as soon as possible before a hot swelling occurs, because if a hot swelling occurs, then leave it for a few days until it subsides, and then align it with the best available gentleness and skill.
And know that repairing and aligning it is easier than the bone that has fragments, and then it is tied as will be mentioned later, and if the bone has fragments, then it is necessary to stretch the broken limb from both sides, hand or leg.
If the member is small, use your hands; if it is larger, use two strings; if one string and a hand, let the member be placed on a level with its natural shape until the broken bone pieces are extended, and then remove those excesses in their places with all the wit and kindness you can.
Take great care so that you do not cause the patient pain or discomfort with your actions; at that time, you should touch and feel them with your hand to see if there is anything out of place, and correct and level it as best you can.
Be careful not to over-stretch or force the member excessively, as many uneducated people often do; they often cause hot inflammation or a wound in the member by their actions, which you may have seen from their actions on numerous occasions.
Then, after it is adjusted, maintained, and tightened, let the member remain静 in rest and peace; let the patient not move it at all during his wakefulness and sleep, and during his turning and turmoil, and during his defecation and all his movements; strive to make the member's position one that does not cause pain.
That is because if he feels pain or discomfort when the member is in a certain position, he should move it to another position where he does not feel pain, and he should strive for the member to be in a level, straight position.
To prevent the member from becoming deformed once it has healed, and as for how to tighten the broken member, it is as I have described to you; be aware that broken members differ in their size, whether small like the arm, finger, wrist, etc.
The bandages should be wide and hard, as the broad ligament suits a large member and tightens it evenly from all sides without any disorder; then, let the member rest in its natural position until it is healed.
Then, after you have finished preparing the wound, you should apply the appropriate ointment. In a loose fracture on the site of the break, then you should begin to wrap the bandage on the site of the break itself three or four times depending on what the member deserves and slightly tighten your hand with the bandage, then you go with it to the upper side of the break site.
With less tension than when you tightened the broken site, then you should separate a little from the break site and slightly loosen the tension until you take something suitable from the correct position, then you take another bandage and wrap it again on the broken site.
Rolls, then you go with the roll to the lower side of the break, and let your action be as described when wrapping the first upper roll; then you place between the rolls of the soft chafing or holes that match what it deserves to correct the break.
If there is a deformity, and if not, do not place anything in it; then wrap another bandage on top, and then level these tight wraps with your clock if there is no swelling or hot tumor.
If there is swelling or a hot tumor, then carry on him what calms that tumor and gets rid of the swelling and leave it for a few days, then tighten the bandage on it when the time comes; let the splints be made from half-cabin-sized carved wood, carefully prepared, or be made from oak tree branches.
The which is made from cypress or palm branches or acacia or kale and so on, whatever is available; let the size of each splint be in this shape and form exactly.
Except that the splint placed on the broken site should be thicker and wider a little than the other splints, and the length of the splint should be made according to what suits the broken member in size, shape, image of the splint:
Then tighten the splint with another bandage according to your first tension, and tie it with tight threads according to what we have mentioned about the tension, which is that your tension on the fracture site should be more. The tension should be less as you go farther away from the fracture site.
The threads should be medium in thickness and softness, and they should be made of wet cotton because if the threads are too thick like what I have seen from ignorant people who make their threads from wound-up cotton strips, it is a great mistake.
Because the tension will then be out of balance, and thin threads won't reach what you want to achieve with the tension, and there shouldn't be less than a finger's width between the splint and the splint.
If the patient hurts with the splints in the correct places, then put something soft and fluffy under them so that nothing hurts him, and we will come to mention what happens if there is a fracture with a wound and a breach has occurred in the skin.
Know that not every broken bone needs to be splinted on the first day, because a large bone shouldn't have splints put on it until after five days, or seven, or more, depending on your security against the risk of a hot swelling.
This is a feature of bandages that were used to heal fractures, jaws, and breaks, a simple, quick-drying, general bandage that can heal most types of wounds, especially for children and women, as it is not affected by heat or cold.
It is to take the dust of the stone, which is the chaff of flour stuck to the walls of the mill when it moves, and to knead it as it is without sifting it with egg white, and to make it not thick or thin, then to roll it up.
A different kind of plaster, which sets the fracture, dislocation and sprain; taken from the kaffir, the palm-nut, the tamarind, the myrobalans, the myrrh, the annatto tree and the Indian madder; ten dirhams each of the first, five dirhams each of the second, twenty dirhams each of the third and fourth, and twenty dirhams for Armenian or Roman clay. All the materials are ground and mixed with water of the arnica or with egg-white if the patient's humor is dry; then this plaster is used, for it is a good composition and quickly sets the broken bones and is suitable for most people, because it is neutral.
Another plaster that is good for fractures and sprains; taken from myrobalans, kaffir, palm-nut, white line, date-palm and rose-apple; six dirhams each of the first, five dirhams each of the second, twenty dirhams of Armenian or Roman clay, ten dirhams of mastic; all ground, sieved and mixed with water or egg-white then used.
A plaster for joints and loose bones, which soothes the pain that affects them and reduces bone noise and fractures; taken from wool, which is dyed with a certain dye; then immersed in vinegar and oil and applied to the affected area; this plaster does not have a strong healing power.
But it is excellent for soothing hot swelling and relieving pain, especially; another plaster that sets the broken bone; taken from wild poplar and acacia paper; both ground and applied as a wet poultice; another brief plaster that can be used when the bone has healed.
And if you want to dissolve the remaining swelling, take from the root of the line, chamomile, purple amaranth and wheat bran; all ground and mixed with a plaster; if the part is heated, mix it with kaolin, or if it is not heated, mix it with cucumber water or water then use it.
A second poultice, stronger in its effects than the first, is used when a hard tumor develops at the site of a broken bone. It is made with a part each of marjoram, hemp seed, wormwood, king’s bole, marshmallow root, and lavender.
All the ingredients are ground and then mixed with either distilled water or fresh water, depending on the heat of the member and its motion. Hippocrates, however, does not mention in his book that a poultice should be applied to a broken bone when it heals.
Except the cerate made of wax and oil, nothing else should be used; it should be neither too thick nor too thin. Galen, on the other hand, believed that when healing a broken bone, one should apply substances with a certain degree of bitterness, such as myrrh, aloe, and licorice.
A poultice that is beneficial for weakness and pain is made with magnesia, beans, human hair, feather, marjoram, and salt. The amount of time the bandage should remain in place is not mentioned.
Then, if there is no improvement in the patient’s condition and there is no pain or itching and the broken bone does not move out of place, do not remove the bandage for many days. If, however, the member becomes painful or starts to itch or the bone moves out of place, then remove the bandage.
Act quickly and remove the bandage in time, without delay. Then, take a soft cloth or a sea sponge and wet it with lukewarm water and wash the member until the itching stops and the pain subsides. Then, leave the member alone for an hour.
Then, carry it with wool that has been soaked in vinegar and oil or rose water, and wrap it lightly. This will prevent the swelling of the member, the pain will subside, and any redness in the member will disappear. Then, return the member to its original gentle binding using a small amount of the poultice. Do not use the same degree of pressure as before.
And care for it until it heals, if you see that the tumor and redness and pain and swelling and all the symptoms have actually gone and you need to wrap and tighten, prepare it as you did before, whether or not something has happened to the member as we mentioned.
Do not remove it until after three days or four or five or seven, and may leave for twenty days; all of this is according to what appears to you of the state of the member as we said, until when the fracture becomes necessary and the meat is about to harden upon it.
And increase at that time too in tightening more than your first tightening all of it, and also increase in thickening the patient's food as we mentioned, if you see the site of the fracture has dried up and become weak more than what is due, then know that food is obstructed from reaching it.
So dip it in lukewarm water at each time you remove it, and let it be every three days; and ease the tightening slightly because by this action it runs to the member food and heals quickly, and as for what the ignorant of the cementers do from breaking the member again.
For if it does not heal first as it should and heals on a bent it is wrong from their act and great mistake, and if it were right they would have mentioned it in their books and worked it, and what I see of them in that there is no trace at all. The correct thing is that it should not be done, and the following will be said about this:
Chapter Two.
In the accidental fracture in the head.
The types of the accidental fracture in the head are many, and its shapes are different, and its causes are various; so from the fracture there is that which is due to a sword strike, and it may be that all the bone is broken up to the point where it ends at the membrane under the bone. As does the impact in wood.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called a "native" fracture; or if the sword's cut only some bone and only slightly exposed his face, but did not pierce to the end, then this type of fracture is called an absolute avulsion fracture; and the wound in these two fractures may be large or small.
Of the fractures, some are crushing or concussive and their cause is a blow by stone or falling on a stone or similar; this fracture is either piercing almost to the membrane below the bone, or it may be in the face of the bone.
The wound in these two fractures may be large or small; and of the fractures, some are hidden inside the bone due to thin hair; it is a crack that runs.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called "shيري" (hairstory); and among them is a fracture that results from falling or hitting a stone and the like, which enters the surface of the bone and becomes for the site a depression as it presents to the copper when it is subjected to a blow; it enters part of it.
More of this is in the wet head bone, like the heads of children; and all these types of fractures may have exfoliated fragments or non-exfoliated fragments; we will come to mention the treatment of all of them in its place; and we recognize all these types of fractures by examining them.
And examine with  spiders and remove the rotten meats from it, and as for the "shيري" type, it is known by examining the bone and wiping and staining it with ink, then the fracture appears black; and the treatment of the fracture looks first at the signs of the patient.
If you see from his symptoms what indicates a clear sign of fear such as bitter vomiting, spreading and loss of mind, loss of voice, fainting, eye redness and its redness, and similar symptoms of illness; do not approach the patient or treat him because death has already occurred with these symptoms in most cases, it is inevitable.
If you see signs that do not alarm you and for which you wish to seek safety, then take action in treating it. That is because if the wounded person comes to you at the beginning of their injury and that was during winter days.
It is necessary that you strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case, and if it were during summer days, then you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day before it corrupts what is under the bone from the membrane, which would lead to those symptoms we have described.
If the bone fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain, and if it was accompanied by a concussion and injury, then you should cut off the damaged and infected part according to what I have described to you, which is that you shave the head of the injured person.
And expose the bone in any way possible and according to the shape of the wound and what is easy on the patient, if it appears to you blood or a hot swelling, then accept that with what is necessary.
This is that you fill the site with cotton wicks soaked in vinegar and oil of rose, and you clean the wound until the swelling subsides and the bleeding stops, and then you take to compressing and removing the bone, and this work has two aspects.
One aspect is that you cut the bone with a smooth and narrow blade, and this is its picture:
Then you use another cutter wider than the first one, and this is its picture:
Then you also use another cutter wider than the second one, and it is necessary that you have a set of different cutters, some wider than others, and some shorter than others, with very sharp edges, and let them be made of Indian iron or good steel.
And use gentleness in striking the cutter so that the head does not shake and is not injured, and if the bone were strong and hard, then you should drill around it before using the cutters, they called them non-penetrating drills, but they called them non-penetrating drills.
Because it does not exceed the limit of the skull bone to what is beyond it, because the drill has a round letter on what is below his sharp head resembling a collar or a small circle that prevents him from diving and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
You should take this drill, which is suitable for the thickness of that bone, so that it is ready for each skull, and the drill is equal to the length and width of that sharp head, and this is a picture of three types. From the drills large and medium and small: .
And as for the method of drilling around the broken bone, it is that you place the drill on the bone and rotate your fingers until you know that the bone has passed through, and then you move the drill to another place and place between each hole The thickness of a knot or something like that.
Then cut between each of the two holes, and do this as much as you can with all kindness as we have said, until you pull out the bone by hand or something else from some of the tools that I have prepared for that.
Like the axletree and the clamps, and you should be very careful that the drill or cutter does not touch anything of the membrane, if you have broken the bone and it has healed from being attached to the membrane, and you have removed it, then you should strip it off.
And the roughness of what remains in the bone is smoothed with another tool that resembles the cutter, except that it should be thinner and lighter than all other cutters, and if there is anything left of small bones or fragments, take them gently with whatever tools you have.
Then treat the wound after that with sewing and ointments, which are mentioned, and as for the other side of this work, it is a side that is easy to determine without any doubt, and we have mentioned it in general terms, and this is what he said: "The cure of fractures is the following: The doctor must first of all prepare the patient for the operation by fasting him for three days before the operation and giving him only water, so that no food reaches his stomach. Then he applies a local anaesthetic to the area to be operated on and puts it to sleep with it. Then he cleans the wound well with water and soap and rubs it until it is completely dry. He then opens the wound slightly using surgical instruments and examines the fracture. If the bone is broken into pieces, he joins them together by means of wires or pins and fixes them in place by wrapping them with a bandage. If there is only one break, he cleans the wound well again as before and uses a drill to make a small hole in the bone at each end of the fracture. He then inserts a wire into each hole and twists it together, thus holding the bone in position. The wire must be long enough to go through both holes and strong enough to hold the bone in its place while the bone heals. If there are multiple fractures, he uses more wires or pins to fix them in position as needed. Once all the wires and pins are in place, he covers the wound with a bandage. After the operation, he must give the patient medicine to relieve pain and prevent infection and dress the wound daily until it heals." This is what they have mentioned and what we have translated above from Arabic into Greek. You should first begin by exposing the bone part from the location where the fracture is most severe and common. Until you expose that part, place the lens end of this segment under it. This is its image:
The lens portion of the segment should be smooth and not cut anything, and the sharp part of it in its sides going in length as you see so that the lens segment is supported on the membrane and the sharp side of the segment in bone then strike on the segment from one side.
With a small hammer, gently cut all the bone as it rotates. You will be safe from the membrane, there will be no terrible accident, even if the therapist is the ignorant people and the cowardliest people, yes, even if he is sleepy.
If anything remains on the bone from the membrane in some positions of the bone, then peel it off with the lens end of this segment and get rid of it gently, because it will get rid of it without injury or fear.
If the bone fracture has not reached the membrane, and the part that is broken from the bone is flat, and some roughness and shavings are left, then it is necessary to strip off that roughness and remove those shavings with a gentle forceps, so as to be able to use something of different proportions from them, in order to be able to use them in every place according to what leads you to it.
And the same shape of the broken bone, and it is necessary to use in your inventory first; then use a larger one, and then use a smaller one, and keep doing that until you get to using its smallest and thinnest ones.
As for the other small hairline fractures and the mild fracture, you should use a treatment appropriate to each case, as this is not hidden from anyone who has even the least experience in this field and stops at what we have written and clarified in major fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed when you remove the bone, you should take a piece of cotton cloth to match the wound and dip it in rose oil and place it on the mouth of the wound. Then, you should take another cloth, folded or folded in three. Dip it in rose water and oil and place it on the first cloth, and do this with the lightest possible weight so that you don't burden the membrane too much. Then use a wide bandage on top of it, and only tighten it to the extent that it holds the wound in place.
Leave it with this remedy for a day or two until you are sure of the heat swelling, then remove it and use the ones that come with it, such as powdered ghee, ground myrrh, powder of cassia, and sassafras, and so on. This is done by making the drugs into powders.
Sprinkle the powder on the wound as it is dry, in bulk, and use a medicine that will gloss over but not burn. Take great care in cleaning the wound while treating it so that there is no grease or dirt, and never leave pus to collect in it.
For because pus, if it gathers on the membrane of the brain, corrupts and smells it up, causing a great misfortune to the patient. It may also happen in the membrane of the head when it is exposed by the removal of a bone, especially if treatment is neglected.
Blackness on the surface, examine it to see if it has appeared on the patient's symptoms as mentioned above; know that he is certainly doomed, and if the blackness happened because of a medicine put on it, and there was such power in that medicine that it caused this blackness.
Take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them well, and smear them with a cloth, then place it on the membrane, then treat it with the appropriate treatments until it heals.
Chapter 3.
In the repair of the nose if it is broken.
Be aware that it is not broken from the two sides of the nose all at once or one of them, because they are bones, for the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, but may be injured and bent and dislocated.
If one of the sides of the nose breaks, then you should insert your small finger into the hole in the nose and level out that fracture from the inside with your index finger and thumb from the outside gently, so that the nose returns to its natural shape. Make sure that you do not cause further pain or injury to the patient with your actions.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger does not reach it, then it should be leveled with a slight thickness rod, and if the fracture is on both sides, do the same, and he should hasten to repair it on the first day of the fracture.
If possible, and otherwise after the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided, then you should insert a thread of cotton into the hole in the nose if the fracture is on one side, or two threads if the fracture is on both sides.
And let the threads be slightly thicker than what fills the hole in the nose, and some of the early surgeons mentioned that you should soak the threads in fat and replace them every day. However, I do not see this as necessary, and it is better to soak the threads in egg white mixed with flour powder.
Then leave the threads in place until the bone heals and the cartilage hardens, and you can insert feather pipes into the nose at the site of the thread insertion, after wrapping them with a soft cloth. This will help keep the break in place and prevent the patient from having difficulty breathing.
This is not a necessary step, unless you want to do so. If you choose to make the threads yourself, then wrap the nose with gauze dipped in vinegar and oil, or a mixture of vinegar, rose water, and honey, or talc. These substances help reduce swelling and promote healing.
If there is no hot tumor, then it should be stuffed from outside with fine semolina and finely ground myrrh that has been kneaded with egg whites; then a soft pad should be placed on it and the nose should not be bound at all, for if the nose bones break a little.
Or if it has fallen apart, it should be split and removed with the tool that is suitable for it, then the split should be sewn and treated with what heals and mend of the balms that are appropriate for this, for if there is a wound inside the nose it should be treated with the string and use lead pipes. until it heals.
Chapter Four.
In the repair of lower cheeks if they break.
If the lower cheek has broken and there is no wound, then you can easily see if it has been broken from the outside only and has not broken into two parts and sunken towards the inside; in that case, its knowledge is easy.
The finger should be inserted from the left hand into the mouth of the patient if the fracture is on the right side, and the same applies if the fracture is on the left side: insert the index finger of the right hand into the mouth of the patient and raise the fracture edge gently from the inside to the outside.
Your other hand, from outside the bone, should rule it to adjust it; if the jaw has broken into two pieces, then you should use the rod from both sides to align it until it is adjusted, and if it has been a tooth that has split.
Or if it has separated, then tighten it with a thread of gold or silver or abresin; then place the oil on the broken cheeks and put on top of the oil a soft cloth and put a large tight splint or a piece of leather the length of the cheeks. Then tie it up from above according to what seems right to you and suits the fixation until it doesn't move, and order the patient to rest and eat soft foods; if you think that there is a change in shape in any way on any side, then hurry to correct it on the third day.
Then tie it up from above according to what seems right to you and suits the fixation until it doesn't move, and order the patient to rest and eat soft foods; if you think that there is a change in shape in any way on any side, then hurry to correct it on the third day. Then he fixes what is contained in it with the dust of the millstone with egg white or with fine semolina after you remove the paraffin from it and put a soft splint on the bandage, as long as that bandage sticks to it and does not change the condition of the bone, leave it.
Do not loosen it until it heals and the fracture becomes stronger, for this fracture often becomes stronger in three weeks; if during that time there is a hot lump, use what we have mentioned repeatedly to alleviate it until it goes away.
And if the fracture is with a wound, if the bone has been cleared of a shard or shards, soften them in what suits you to remove them from the tool; if the mouth of the wound is narrow, widen it with the forceps according to your need.
Then, if you have removed those shards and there is nothing left, line the mouth of the wound if it is wide; otherwise, carry one of the pastes that are suitable for this purpose. And mend the wound until it heals,.
Chapter V.
In mending the shoulder blade when it breaks.
More often than not, the shoulder blade breaks from the front at the end of the scapula; its fracture is on one of three faces: either it breaks and shatters into two parts, or it simply cracks, which is easier to mend.
Either it causes shards in the fracture, which is more difficult to mend; or it is with a wound, and the work, if the fracture is without a wound, is to bring two servants: one to adjust the upper arm next to the broken scapula, and the other to extend the neck towards the other side.
Then, smooth the fracture with your fingers until it takes on the right shape and there is no bump or depression; if you need to extend it further, place a ball of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit.
And let the bone be of a length according to your need, and let you stretch and raise the clavicle, and press the sphere with your hand until it is level as it should be; if you cannot draw the side of the clavicle out because it has gone deep into the body, then let the patient lie on his heels.
And place a medium-sized block of wood under the elbow, and tighten the server's elbow to make it rise until the clavicle that is deep rises up; then fix the break and level it with your fingers.
If you sense that a piece of the clavicle has broken and is moving, then you should pierce it and gently remove that piece; if the piece is stuck in the bone, then you should prepare one of the blades you have prepared for this purpose. After the clavicle is under the machine that preserves the fascia, which is a machine made of wood or iron, and this is its image:
It resembles a spoon without a handle, and its width is according to what you need in the size of the bone, whether large or small; and its length is according to what you can work with; and let there be two sides as you see, one side wider and the other narrower.
If the puncture wound you made when you removed the piece of bone is wide and you have prevented the heat from forming, then sew the wound shut; and if the wound is easy to stitch or you are afraid of the formation of heat, then bandage the wound with bandages according to the size of the wound.
If a hot swelling forms, soak the wound in rosewater and vinegar or drink, or carry it with the bandage made from ground oyster shells mixed with egg white. And place a soft board under it, then take a bandage that is folded twice on the board, and you will take a splint from a thin board. It should be three fingers in width and length, too; then fold it up and insert it into a cloth; and then insert that cloth with the plaster into the position of the turban which is on the site of the break; and then tighten the turban over the break as it turns. And wrap it around his neck and under his armpit, the correct one, and under the patient's armpit; and roll it a few times on each side as you see that the tension holds the break firmly together, which is something that is not hidden from you.
And your purpose in all of this is that the plaster does not move from the broken bone. And for that, you should examine the patient every day; and whenever the bandage relaxes and you see that the plaster has moved, then fix it and tighten the bandage, and then let the patient sleep on his back, and make a small pillow under his armpit when he sleeps at night.
So that his shoulder rises above his side, and the fracture of the collarbone is raised with the increase in the height of the armpit; or tie his arm to his neck, and do not remove the bandage unless a accident happens from itching or swelling for twelve days.
Then renew the bandage if you see a face for that. And respond in the tension and leave it until it heals, and the fracture of the collarbone becomes more stable and stronger; this takes twenty-eight days. It may be that in some people it is less than that.
Chapter Six:
In the repair of a shoulder fracture: Little do shoulders break in their wide position; they only break their letters, so when one of them breaks or breaks in the middle, it is only known by touch; and according to what it looks like, so much is fixed.
You can use all your skill and cleverness to shape it back to its natural shape, and then carry on with the plaster, adding a mixture of powdery raisa with beaten egg white and soft lye, and put a turban bandage over it.
A thin bandage the size of the shoulders or slightly wider, if under the splint, chiseling in a place on the shoulder fizzing that chisel with a soft file until the splint is level, then tighten from above with a long turban.
Tighten securely and make sure the bandage does not move, check the bandage every day, if it moves, tighten it again and level the splint if it shifts position, let the patient lie on their side correctly, and the shoulder will heal in 20 days.
A day or five and a quarter of twenty days; if you have completed this period, then the bandage will come off safely; for this bone is not afraid of its fracture or its splintering out, and if it protrudes from the bone, it will be embedded in the skin, so split it and pull it out. And do as I mentioned in treating a broken collarbone from reducing the swelling if something like that happens.
Chapter 7.
In fixing a broken collarbone.
The chest can break in the middle, and this is not common; most of the time it is the ends that break and crack. Its symptoms include leaning towards the bottom, severe pain, difficulty breathing, and coughing.
And sometimes blood may flow, and the chiseling in the broken bone will be noticeable by touch; to fix this, let the patient lie on their back, place a cushion between their shoulders, then clench their ribs between your hands from both sides, and suavely level them as much as possible.
And align until the bone returns to its original shape, then cover it with a bandage and a soft chisel, and place an upper splint made of thin wood, such as plywood or teak, supported by strips of cloth wrapped around it. Then, carefully tie it to the broken bone so that it does not come loose, and pass the bandage around the shoulder blade several times and tighten it firmly, then check the bandage at all times, and whenever it relaxes, tighten it again.
If necessary, remove it at the acromion if there is discomfort or a swelling in that area, then hurriedly remove it and take off the bandage and repair whatever has been exposed to the treatment process and then put the bandage back on if you see that. Face it and tighten it firmly so that it heals.
Chapter VIII.
In the repair of ribs, if they are broken, know that the ribs are located in the thickest places behind the shoulder blades and the ends in front; it is only because they are fibrous that their sensation cannot be felt by touch.
And repair it by making the fracture even with the fingers on a solid face until the shape is even as it should be, and then bandage and tighten the broken bone with a splint if necessary; for if the rib fracture is inclined towards the inside, it will cause severe pain for the patient.
And lose as in the loss that is exposed to those who have a rib (fracture), because the bone can break the diaphragm and also cause difficulty in breathing and coughing up blood, which makes treatment difficult; the early people used to deal with it by many tricks.
Some say that the patient's diet should be such that it causes wind and gas to be generated, so that the abdomen swells and stretches, pushing the fracture towards the outside; we hate this because it may cause a hot swelling if it has not occurred, and if it has occurred then it increases it and confirms it.
Some say that a plug should be placed on the affected area, then it is tightened with force, which is similar to measurement, but they fear that the plug will draw dirt to the affected area due to its weakness; some say that the affected area should be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil.
And make a poultice between the ribs until it is full, so that the bandage is even if you wrap it on a curve, and then treat the patient with the treatment of the shoots from food and medicine, if he seemed sick strong matter that does not bear. And the bone was poking the diaphragm painfully, and we were afraid for the patient, so it should be cut on the site and reveal the fractured rib then become under it the machine which keeps the fascia which has been described earlier and gently cut the bone and remove it.
Then we bring the edges of the wound together if it is large with stitches and treat it with ointments until it heals, if there was a hot lump in that time, then hurry up to dip towels in rose water and place on the site and treat the patient with what calms the lump from inside as well.
And he lies on the side that is easier for him to sleep, until he heals,.
Chapter IX
In repairing the spine and neck.
Meanwhile, the spine and neck bones if they are fractured, and what is less exposed to that and more exposed, as well as the vertebrae of the back, too, so if this was displayed to someone and you wanted to know whether it would heal or not. Look, if you see his hands have become weak and numb and dead, and he cannot move them or stretch them or close them, and if you prick them with a needle or poke them with it, he doesn't feel it, or find any pain in them, then know that he will not heal, most likely, he is doomed.
If he can move them and feel the pinch and poke, then know that the bone marrow has survived, and the patient will heal with treatment, if back bones are like this and you want to know whether it will heal as well or not.
Look at his legs; if you see that they have become weak and what has happened to the hands has happened to them, then, when he lies on his back, wind and stool come out without will, and if he lies on his stomach, urine comes out without will. And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate, he cannot do so, so know that he is dead, so do not worry about treating him, because if there was nothing like that for him, the matter would be lighter, and the treatment of what happened was that you seek to calm the hot swelling.
By placing rose oil alone or with fried egg yolks on the affected area three times a day until the hot swelling subsides, then tie a supportive, dried compress on the site and bind it tightly, and order him to remain still and motionless.
And he should not sleep except on the side that does not cause him pain until it heals, and if a chip or something has become detached from the bone due to the injury, then you should cut through his skin and remove that bone. Then you should stitch the wound if it is large, and then treat it with salving ointments until it heals, and if the last vertebra of the tail bone breaks, which is the hunchback, then you should put your thumb from your left hand into the anus.
And the broken bone should be made level with the hand, as much as possible, and then a bandage and support should be applied if needed, and then it should be tightly bound.
If you sense a chip of the broken bone, split it open and remove it, and then treat the wound with the treatment mentioned above until it heals.
The tenth chapter.
In fixing a hip fracture.
A hip fracture is rare, and if it does occur, the bone may crack at its ends, causing pain, swelling, and a tendency to bend inward, with a decrease in sensation in the affected leg.
Fixing a hip fracture involves running your hand over it to determine the nature of the break. If the fracture is located in the ends, you should attempt to straighten it out as much as possible, so that it resumes its natural shape.
If the fracture is in length or has turned inward, lay the patient on their stomach until it is ready for you to set that fracture. When you have made it even, you will carry it with a bandage, and then you will put a splint of wood or skin over it and tighten it.
Do not be afraid that the fracture will move or that the splint will disappear and become even in the depressions, filling it with something until it takes the tension and becomes even. Order for the patient to sleep on his back or on his correct side, because if he experiences a hot swelling.
Do not stop massaging and setting it until the hot swelling subsides, and carry what soothes it as mentioned above, then go back to setting and tightening it as it should be, for if there is a fracture in the bone or a piece has broken off from its edges, it should not be removed.
And do not touch it, but make it even from the outside as we mentioned, and leave the tension on it until it heals.
Chapter 11:
In setting a fracture of the arm.
The humerus is what is between the elbow and the shoulder head; if it breaks, then set it with one of two methods: either that you take a curved stick that is smooth and medium thickness on this image:
and bind its two ends with two bands, then hang it from a high place and let the patient sit on a chair, then throw his broken arm over the stick so that his elbow is sticking into the middle of the stick's curve, then hang something heavy above it.
Or let a servant hold it down, then the doctor will even out the fracture with his hands until he sets it back to place, and the other face is that the patient lies on his feet, and a bandage is hung around his neck by a strap.
Then order two servants to adjust what is above the fracture with their hands and the other to adjust what is below it, and let each of them extend to his side. If you want the adjustment to be stronger, then tie a bandage under the fracture and another above it, and let each of the two servants extend it to its side.
If the fracture is near the shoulder blade, then the band should be placed under the armpit and the other under the fracture towards the elbow, and likewise if the fracture is near the elbow, then the band should be placed on that location and on the elbow itself.
Then the fracture is gently straightened without violence until it is level and well healed, and then it is tightened. If there is no swelling, heat it with hot compresses. If there is a swelling, then do not tighten it until the seventh day and put a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and rose water on it.
Until the swelling subsides, then it is tightened. The method of tightening is to place the bandage on the fracture and then place a new cloth wrap on top of the bandage and gather the arm on the shoulder itself and place his hand open on his armpit,.
and carry the wrap and tension on the arm and shoulder to allow the arm to support the fractures if it does not prevent you from doing so, and do not let anything change with the broken bone, if you fear that something will change with it, then use the splints.
This is that you place a splint on the fracture itself, which is wider and stronger than all other splints, and so that there is a finger's width between each splint, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture by three fingers on each side.
Then tighten the splints with the tension you mentioned in the first section.
That your tension is stronger on the site of the fracture.
And the tension is less as the fracture gets further away, if you see that putting on the splints and tightening as we mentioned while you are setting the member from your time then do it.
And if you fear the heat swelling, then leave the tension and splints until the seventh day as we mentioned, and then examine the bandage every three days to ensure that there is no itching or swelling or that food cannot reach the member due to excessive tension, so fix all of this as we have mentioned.
If you are confident that nothing of the sort will happen, do not unravel the tourniquet until many days have passed, and let the patient lie on his back with his hand on his stomach. Place a well-filled sock under the armpit.
And check every time, whether night or day, that the shape of the broken member does not change or that the tourniquet has relaxed; correct all this with your own effort. Let the patient's diet be soft at first so that, when the bone is about to harden, it will be strong.
So it is necessary to make his diet thicker, for the arm and leg usually get stronger in forty days; then it should be undone, and he should use the bath and have treatments with the ointments that are suitable for that. If the fracture is gross and dislocated.
Do not unravel the tourniquet from him until fifty days or two months have passed, according to the case.
Chapter 12.
In setting a fracture of the arm.
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the radiate bones; one is smaller and is next to the thumb, and the other is larger and is placed under the small bone from below; so it may happen that a bone breaks alone, whether it is large or small, and it may happen that both break together.
If the small upper radiate bone breaks, then setting it is easy and healing is faster; and if the lower bone, on which the smaller one rests, breaks, then the fracture is poor and healing is difficult, and the worst of them is when both bones break together.
So the doctor, when setting it, should make its extension easy with care so that he straightens it; and if the large bone is the one that breaks, then he should make the extension more difficult; and if both bones are broken, then he should make the extension very strong.
The shape of the hand should be formed when it is healed and extended on a cushion, and the thumb of the hand should be raised above all the fingers, and the little finger should be lower than all the other fingers, and the patient should sit on his heels with his back straight.
The cushion should be at an equal height with the hand so that the patient may not be troubled.
Then the servant of the arm is extended from below either with his hand or with a bandage and another servant is extended from above in the same way, then the doctor straightens the bone until he returns it to the best form possible, and if it is a fracture of the bone into pieces, it is remelted.
Respond to every fragment in its place Your effort, if there is a fragment that appears to be clean and pierces the skin and you have no hope of repairing it, then split it on the way mentioned above, and if the fracture is with a wound, I have dedicated a chapter for it.
Then take the treatment of that from there, if it is displayed in your first repair and a hot lump, the patch cloth with qurtti made with rose wax and white balm, let it be average between thickness and thinness, and tighten the cloth gently until, when the lump subsides.
Then remove the qurtti and apply the bandage made from ground bones with white egg, then carry the splints and let the splint that is placed on the fracture itself be wider slightly and stronger, and know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most cases.
If the fracture is in one forearm or in both arms together, then let your tightening at the site of the fracture be stronger and tighter, and whatever you turn to tighten it towards the top or bottom, let the tension be slightly looser as mentioned above at the beginning of the chapter, and if.
The cloth that is wrapped around the fracture should be soft and wet, and it should not be too hard, and let the thread used in it be made of special silk, average between thinness and thickness as we described, and examine the member and ligament after a few days.
If something happens, it must be fixed like a itch that affects the member, it should be rinsed with warm water until this itch subsides and the member is left without tension for a night until it rests then re-tighten it.
If the tension has relaxed and the bone has receded or something similar, fix it all with your effort, and see also if food is prevented from reaching the member due to excessive tension, you should loosen it slightly and leave it for a few days until it reaches it, then tighten it again.
If the sick person has not been exposed to any of what we mentioned, he should not be healed until after twenty days or something like that, then hang the sick person's hand on his neck and let his arm be moderate, and save his effort from disturbed movements, and make his sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture of the arm is healed in thirty days or in two and thirty, and perhaps it is healed in twenty-eight days, all of this depending on the conditions of the humors and the conditions of strength,.
Chapter 13th
In healing a broken hand and fingers.
The palm of the hand and the joints of the fingers are less likely to suffer from fractures, but they are more prone to injuries, so when the hand or finger is injured or fractured.
The sick person should sit on a chair in front of him on an even level.
Then the doctor should place his hand on it and extend it, then the bone-setter puts a splint on it and straightens it until, if there is no hot swelling, then bandages and braces are put on from above, according to the site.
And I have included it in a soft cloth, and if the fracture is towards the bottom of the palm, make a half-sphere of a soft cloth and order the sick person to grip it with his fractured hand, then tighten it with a long cloth.
Let the splint be made of leather which is soft, so that the skin may be adapted to the curvature of all the hand and tightened on what is appropriate, if the fracture is outward, then it should be made of a splint above and another splint from below in the hand so that the hand remains open and erect.
Then the strain is carried out as the hand rotates and tied with the ligament between the fingers, if the fracture is in one of the phalanges of the finger then it should be made straight on what is appropriate, then it is tightened with the hand. If you want to make a small erect splint for him to support the fracture.
If it does not move, then if the fracture is in all the fingers like the middle or the index or the ring or the little finger, they should be made straight and tied with the healthy finger that follows it or all of them should be tied on what is appropriate, this is better, or you can put a small erect splint on it.
As we have said in the thumb and check when you set it, and away from the hot swelling, so confront him with what is appropriate when something happens of that, as he repeated his description.
Chapter 14.
In setting a fracture of the thigh.
The thigh bone often breaks and can be felt by touch because it moves forward and backward, and its repair is done by tying a ribbon above the fracture and another one below the fracture, and the patient lies on his face.
Then each ligament is extended to its side on what is appropriate, this if the fracture is in the middle of the bone, and if it is near the root of the thigh then a soft ribbon should be tied, whether from wool or something like that.
At the root of the thigh towards the genitals so that the extension is above, and the other ribbon should be under the fracture, and also if the fracture is near the knee then the ligament should be near the knee so that the extension is down, and then the doctor straightens the bone with both hands until he returns it to its natural shape.
When the bone has united well, then the bandage and traction should be borne; if there is no heat tumor in the member, but there is a heat tumor in it, then leave it for days until the heat tumor subsides, then return to its treatment.
As for tightening it, it should be wound around the fracture with a solid wide tourniquet twice or three times and what is left of it, then the leg should be wound so that the heel is at the root of the tibia and a long thread should be inserted between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, and the ends of the thread should come from above on both sides.
Then wind on the leg and thigh what is left of the tourniquet, then make on the thigh at the site of the fracture the splints and make one splint on the tibia bone, then stuff the gap between the thigh and the leg with soft rags to make the tension even.
Then start with the strong tension from the middle on the site of the fracture three or four turns, and whatever the distance is between the bandage and the site of the fracture, then your tension should be weaker and softer and looser.
Then go to the ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and the leg, bind it with what follows it from the splints that are above, then pass the ends of the thread down until they end at the ankle of the foot, then also tighten them with the ends of the splints on the other side.
To make sure the bandage does not come off its place, then leave the tension on it as long as there is no swelling, beating, or puffiness in the member, and if any of these things happen, then hurry to solve it and fix all that has happened as we have mentioned above.
If there is a bone splinter, then it should be leveled if you can, otherwise tear it off and treat the wound with what was mentioned before so that it heals, and this fracture may be tightened from the thigh without adding the leg splints.
As we have mentioned in the arm and forearm, except that fixing it in this way does not cause the patient to limp, and if it is fixed alone without including the leg with it, there must always be a limp for its owner.
And know that the thigh becomes strong in fifty days, or increases a little or decreases a little, all of this on the basis of differences in humors and other conditions,.
Chapter XV.
In Breaking the Kneecap.
If the kneecap is broken, it is rare, but it may be injured a lot; if it is broken, it will either be split or fragmented in its parts, and that will be with a wound or without a wound.
And stand on all of this through the sense, and fix it by making what has separated from its parts even with the fingers so that it comes together and is reunited according to what one can be able to make the correction and gentle treatment, then wrap it in a bandage and carry it upon it a round cast if it needs it.
And tighten up from above with the tension that is appropriate for that, then take care of all the conditions that we have described in all breaks such as hot swelling and so on by meeting each complication with what is suitable for it until it heals,.
Chapter XVI.
In reducing a broken leg.
(There are two bones in the leg, one thick which is called the femur and another thin which is called the tibia, and both of these bones are subject to the same types of fractures as the two arms.) (Therefore, its repair is the same as that of the arm and the work is one; if both bones break, the leg will rotate in all directions, and if the thinner bone breaks, it will rotate towards the front, and if the thicker bone breaks and this happens from below, it is something that is not hidden from you.)
(So, use stretching and leveling, and tie the splints according to that. Unless it is necessary for a severe fracture with many fragments, to make the stretching less and lighter, and be careful in repairing it.)
(And in the leg, there is an additional work compared to the arm, which is that when you have finished all your work and the splints are even, take two branches of pine wood that is used for leveling the floors between the slats, or be from the palm leaves or something like that.)
(And choose from them what is slightly thicker in thickness and is not thin, and let its length be the length of the leg from the knee to below, then wrap a rag twice on its length and put one on the side of the leg and the other from the opposite side.)
(And from the knee to below the foot, then tie the two branches in three places on both ends and in the middle; with this strap, the leg will be prevented from swaying right or left, and it will be well secured; a branch of wood can also be used along the leg.)
(And put it in there to protect it from movement, and the most you should do this with a fracture, especially if it is accompanied by a wound, then examine the leg every day and take care of it thoroughly in terms of swelling or ballooning or any other.) When something like this happens, treat it accordingly until it heals, and the bone of the leg heals in about thirty days or so.
Chapter XVII.
In breaking the bones of the leg and fingers.
While the heel is never subject to fracture, and the bones of the leg may occasionally be so, the fingers are more likely to suffer from injury than from fracture.
If one of the leg bones is fractured and you see these bones beginning to separate, let the patient place his foot on the ground in a standing position, then come and place your foot on what has risen from those bones, and level it out.
until they return to their places, then put the bandage and splint on top of it, and place a small board underneath with two flat ends, and firmly tighten it using bandages and any other requirements that you may need.
If after three or four days the bandage is removed, you will find that the bones have healed; if some of the fingers were broken, fix and level them as described for the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger, wider than those described above; and under the foot place that board which you have described, tightening it firmly. If two or three or more of the bones were broken.
Then make a splint for each finger, of its own length, wrapped in a soft cloth; and place the board at the bottom of the foot, with one end resting against the sole of the foot, so that it is well supported.
You should not forget to take care of all that we have mentioned to you in terms of all the symptoms of fracture, and treat each one accordingly.
Chapter XVIII.
In breaking the femur and pubic bone of women and ذكر (i.e., referring to the male anatomy).
When the woman's vagina has broken and caused her to become paralyzed, she should sit with a slight tilt towards her back, and then gently lean her towards the side of her back a little at a time so that the midwife can hold her from behind. Then, the midwife should stuff cotton into her vagina until it fills up and becomes like a ball inside of it.
Then, the midwife should gently shake the woman, and raise her pelvis a little at a time. This cotton will come out until it reaches the entrance of the vagina like a ball, and the fracture of the bone will be restored. Then, she should put a bandage on her back to prevent her from moving around too much, so that when she wants to urinate, she can remove the cotton carefully so that she can urinate.
And return it to the way it was first entered, and then go back to her initial bandage. She does this for seven days or so, because it will heal. If you want to take a sheep's bladder, you tie a tube around its mouth and put the whole bladder inside her vagina.
Then, blow into the tube with force until the bladder swells inside the vagina. The fracture will heal. Then, stuff it with cotton and stand for a few days as described above until it heals. As for when a bone in the perineum of a man or woman breaks, use it to repair it.
And smooth it out as we have described in the hip bone. The correct way to deal with these unusual fractures, which are not common, especially for those who have some experience and understand my book. Yes, because the fracture itself will massage you in most cases.
On the right path to repair and tighten it, so understand. As for ذكر man if his femur bone breaks, he can put a pigeon's bladder inside it, then put a bandage on it and leave it for three days or so until it heals.
Chapter 19.
In repairing fractures of the bones when there is a wound.
It is imperative that, when one has a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially if the bone is large, such as the femur or the humerus, or similar, you should promptly perform a procedure called "fasciotomy," provided the conditions for fasciotomy as we have previously outlined are met.
If the wound is bleeding heavily, you should promptly cut it with a powedered acid if you do not have anything else available, and then proceed to set the fracture on that very day; do not delay it.
If swelling does not occur, then if it does, you should postpone setting the fracture until the ninth day so that the swelling subsides, and do not touch it on the third or fourth days at all, as doing so will result in poor outcomes.
If the broken bone is protruding from the skin and is exposed, you should gently repair and smooth it with your hands and a small amount of wire, or use a tool made of iron that is about the length of seven or eight fingers. Present it for inspection to the extent of the wound.
The surgeon should prepare three or four of these, as needed for the treatment of different types of fractures; they should be slightly thicker to prevent them from bending when pressed upon during surgery.
They should have a sharp end, with a bend in one side, and be thickest at the top, gradually tapers down to thinner at the bottom; this is its illustration:
They are called in Greek "perimerysion," and a small mallet should be used to gently tap the edges of the fracture until the bone is reduced and aligned.
If the fractured end of the bone is thin and has not been properly taken by the tool, you should cut that bone to make it suitable for the tool; if you are unable to set the bone using what we have described above, then cut the bone with a similar knife.
Or spread it with one of the presses as much as you can, then scrape what remains in the bone from roughness and thin scales, so if you returned the bone and found the patient after returning him a sharp pain that hurts, know that the bone has not returned to its normal place.
If you can return it to its normal place, do so, for you will benefit the patient greatly, so if you have finished setting the bone, dip a cloth in a black astringent mixture, and especially if you are in summer, do not put any ointment or fat on the wound.
So that it does not happen in it putrefaction and corruption, then use the casts while your free from setting the bone, and leave the wound open by cutting threads on the bandages with a pair of scissors on the size of the wound.
And be careful of all caution that you tighten the wound with the fracture, for often made this foolish physicians by causing their patients death or a pus or a gangrene Let your tightening be soft and relaxing contrary to the tightening of the other fractures.
If the wound is bad or a large wound and you are afraid of some bad symptoms that we described and he finds pain in the position disturbing do not put on it casts, and make him bandages of stiff cloth in the place of casts and tighten it.
If after a day or two you see that the wound has begun to generate pus, remove the cloth that you put on it with the black astringent mixture, then use the threads and ointments that we usually treat with them wounds like the quadratic ointment and others, and it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage.
And check the wound every morning and evening until it heals and heals, and it is necessary that you set up the member in a way that the pus flows down easily, if passed for the wound several days and it did not heal or the pus did not stop from it, know that there are small pieces of bone.
It is necessary to examine the wound with a probe. Whatever particles are found to be loose should be removed and expelled. If any of these particles remain attached and invade the surrounding tissue, causing pain, then cut and remove them in any way possible.
If the wound exhibits a discharge, putrefaction, or any other form of putridity or corruption, then treat it with the corresponding therapeutic measures described in the chapter on "Wounds".
When a large bone, such as the femur or forearm, is fractured and a piece of bone has come loose and is embedded in the surrounding tissue, do not attempt to move or remove it. Often, this will lead to death. However, if you leave it alone, it may fall out by itself after 20 or 30 days.
Therefore, when you examine the wound, if you find an area that can be treated, do so. Otherwise, leave it alone.
Chapter 20.
In treating the complications that arise from certain fractures.
These complications often occur when the fracture has healed, especially those that are near joints. This can distort the shape of the limb and may prevent it from functioning normally.
If the complication is of a soft nature, use medications that contract or tighten, such as aloe, licorice, myrrh, pomegranate, and other similar substances. You may take some of these, or all of them, and mix them with a tight-binding substance, such as a strengthening agent, egg white, or vinegar.
And carry it on the complication in a bent form and tighten it tightly and leave the tension undissolved for several days, then dissolve it and repeat the process if necessary until the complication goes away, or you can use a sheet of lead firmly secured around it.
If the complication has turned to hardened knots and has become tight and difficult to remove, split it open from above and trim off the excess with a scalpel, or file it down, until it goes away. Then treat the wound to allow it to heal.
Chapter 21.
In the treatment of a fracture that has healed and the member has remained thin after that.
If a bone fracture has healed and the member has remained weak after that, it is due to several reasons. One of these reasons is either due to the breaking of the ligaments and tying them in a way that does not meet the requirements, or due to over-tightening of the ligaments, preventing blood from flowing to the member, or due to excessive stretching at the wrong time, or due to a lack of blood in the body of the patient and its weakness.
To treat this, the patient's diet should be improved and their body enriched to increase blood flow, using hydrotherapy, introducing pleasure and joy, and so on. Then, tar (a type of resin) is applied to the member to draw the medicinal properties of the tar towards the member, providing it with a lot of nutrition or keeping it wet with lukewarm water. So that food can flow through it and return to its natural shape.
Chapter 22.
In the treatment of broken bones that have healed and become misaligned, preventing them from functioning as they should.
When a member that has healed after a fracture becomes misaligned or distorted, it's time to take action. However, the member has not stopped performing its natural functions, so we should not accept the words of those who claim to set bones from the head, as many ignorant doctors and orthopedic surgeons in our country used to do this.
This action is highly questionable and can lead to great harm. However, if the deformity and complexity are recent, it should be soaked in water that has been cooked with herbs that relax the muscles, such as kholmi leaf, king's acacia, and so on.
And it should be bandaged with soft dressings, such as diacilon, or taken is a paste of kholmi leaf, and the same for the other options mentioned earlier.
When the deformity has developed and become fixed, and there is no more movement in the joint, and it has become rigid, then if the deformity is severe enough, and the condition has not improved with time, it may require treatment with a steel brace.
The bone should then be cut at its top to release the joint's connection, and any remaining deformity or bone should be removed with gentle cuts. The area should then be carefully treated with the mentioned methods until it heals.
Chapter 23
The jaw is a joint that comes out of place, hindering movement and disfiguring the member, causing severe pain and discomfort for the patient. Therefore, when one of the jaws is affected, it should be promptly restored to its original position.
Do not delay it at all, because if it is delayed, the joint will swell and cause pain that is difficult to treat. This can lead to muscle spasm and severe pain for the patient. Therefore, one should not delay or move or extend it during this time as it can often lead to further discomfort and pain.
However, if it occurs, one should promptly start by bleeding the patient and then leave them alone until the swelling subsides slightly. Then, the member should be rinsed with hot water and oil and carefully restored to its original position. And each member should be treated as mentioned above in its own section.
The chapters on the jaw have also been arranged according to what was mentioned earlier in terms of fractures from the top of the body to the bottom, and:
Chapter 24:
In the treatment of a lower jaw fracture.
The jaws usually slip out of place, and their dislocation can be partial or complete, causing them to relax slightly. نحو the chest until drool from the patient's mouth, and he can not hold it or be able to open his mouth and stutter speech, if his collapse is slight may return in most cases of himself with the slightest thing.
If, on the other hand, the dislocation is complete, you should hurry to restore it and not delay it at all; that is, that a servant holds the patient's head and the doctor puts his thumb of his hand inside the patient's mouth if the jaw is dislocated from one side.
Or, if the jaw is dislocated from both sides, the doctor should put all his thumbs and all his fingers outside to level it and order the patient to relax his mouth and let go, so that it goes in any direction; the doctor levels the jaw and pushes the jaw back into place.
If it is difficult to restore it, especially if both jaws are dislocated, use hot water compresses and oil until it is easy to restore them, and do not delay restoring them at all, as we have said; then, when they have returned and been levelled and the patient' s mouth has closed, put a piece of torn cloth over it with a mixture of wax and oil.
Then tie it gently with a loose bandage; the patient should sleep on his back with his head between two pillows so that he does not move to the right or left, and he should not try to chew anything but make his food soft.
Until the pain goes away and the jaw is set, he can eat whatever he wants, but he should do it gently and not strain to open his mouth when eating, drinking, or yawning until the jaw is healed.
If the jaws do not return to their places after they have come loose at any time, and this does not happen to them; often a patient will get feverish and have constant headaches, and sometimes his stomach will vomit repeatedly; so if you see this, know that he is damaged.
And often he dies from that in ten days,
Chapter 25.
In the repair of dislocated shoulder and neck.
While the shoulder, due to its connection with the chest, cannot be dislocated from the inside and may be dislocated from the outside; this must be determined by touch. The patient should lie on his back and extend his arms.
Then, with your hand, firmly press on the location; it will return. Then, place a bandage and splint and tighten it. As for the side that is next to the neck and connected to it, it rarely dislocates except on rare occasions; if it does dislocate one day, then it should be repaired and aligned as mentioned above and whatever seems appropriate to you.
Then, place a bandage and splint and tighten it. Order the patient to stay in bed and rest until he recovers; with this single treatment, the neck side will return if it has also come off its position.
Chapter 26.
In repairing dislocated shoulder.
Know that the neck can dislocate in three ways: either towards the side of the armpit and downward, or towards the direction of the chest, or upward toward the back of the neck; these occurrences are rare.
Nor does it dislocate towards the back of the shoulder, nor does it dislocate towards the front due to the presence of the nerve; most likely to happen is that it comes out toward the side of the armpit, especially in those whose flesh is thin, as it leaves quickly and enters quickly.
As for those whose flesh is thick, it is different; meaning that it comes out with difficulty and goes in with difficulty, sometimes a person may suffer from a blow or fall that causes swelling of the neck and feels like it has dislocated, so you should test that until you are certain about its status.
When he then advances in his treatment, and recognizes the jaw if it is towards the bottom toward the armpit, if he connects between the dislocated shoulder and the true shoulder, then you will find between them an obvious difference, and you will find that the head of the shoulder is deformed and under the armpit, when touched, the head of the shoulder seems like an egg.
The patient cannot raise his hand to his ear or move it in all directions, nor can he dislocate it towards the chest or above; so you will find that this is obvious to the touch and does not hide.
This jaw can be easily reduced if it is soft or the patient is a child; reduce it by having an assistant raise his hand above his head and then you make your thumbs under his armpit and raise the joint with force towards the top to its place, while the assistant raises his hand and extends it upwards.
Then lower it, and he will return quickly; if he does not return as we mentioned above and the jaw has been dislocated for a long time, then the patient should bathe in hot water and use the following drugs: cook the root of khasmagh, halba, and ikleil al-מל�ك in water and use it.
Then the patient lies on his back, and you place a ball of wool under his armpit, which is moderate between softness and stiffness; then the doctor places his heel on the ball and grasps the patient's hand with his and extends it downwards.
And push the ball with his foot, and he will return to a standing position; or you can reduce it in this way: bring a man who is taller than the patient and stand him from the side of the shoulder and put his armpit under the patient's armpit and raise his armpit up so that the patient hangs in the air. And another assistant pulls the patient' hand down his stomach, if the patient is light, then he should hang something else on him to weigh him down; so the jaw will return at once; and it may also be reduced in this way:
And it is that you focus in the earth a long wood, its head round as a grain of corn not thick nor thin, and then put under the armpit of the patient after putting on the head of the wood a soft cloth and the patient stands on the length of the wood.
Then he extends his hand down from the other side and also extends his body as well from the other side with force that the joint returns to its place quickly, if it was difficult to return it with all that we mentioned then use this treatment which is that you take a wood whose length is about two arms. And its width is the width of four fingers and its thickness is the thickness of two fingers, it has a round head to facilitate its entry into the depth of the armpit on this image: .
Then tie on the round head a soft cloth so as not to hurt the wood on the patient, then bring it under the armpit and extend the hand all the way down along the wood and tie the wood to the elbow, forearm and hand.
Then the arm is placed on a beam. The width of the beam and tie the hand down, leaving the rest of the body hanging from the other side, so that the joint enters in its place quickly, if it was possible to enter in any way at all should be placed under the armpit a ball moderate capacity of woolen cloth.
Then carry the bandage prepared from ground of the mortar with myrrh and egg white on the armpit all, as it rotates from above then tighten the ball under the armpit and wrap the bandage around the neck from above and hang his hand.
And he leaves it not to move his hand for seven days, and it is necessary that the patient eats little food so that the joint gets well quickly, then untie after seven or five days and exercise with movement if it remained stable and did not relax, then it has recovered.
If the joint dislocates frequently due to moisture or some other cause, it should be treated with cauterization using the three-pronged method described in the cauterization chapter. If this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days without the joint becoming stable,
If the joint dislocates frequently due to moisture or some other cause, it should be treated with cauterization using the three-pronged method described in the cauterization chapter. If this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days without the joint becoming stable, and it falls and relaxes and cannot be raised above, then know that the nerve in the head of the shoulder has been cut or extended or relaxed. In this case, the joint will never remain stable.
And as for the jaw that is towards the chest and breast and behind, it is returned by pushing and stretching with the hands until it returns, and all the tension and treatment are used until it heals. If it develops an ache after healing and its movement slows down,
So the patient should use the bath many times until that ache softens and returns to its first nature.
Chapter 27.
In treating elbow joint dislocations:
The elbow joint dislocates with difficulty and also returns with difficulty; it dislocates towards all directions, especially towards the front or back. The jaw is clear to you because it is within your vision and touch.
And when you combine the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, you will clearly see it by bending the joint; the arm cannot be bent or touched by the shoulder. You should hurry and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before a hot tumor develops.
If a hot tumor develops, it is difficult to reduce the dislocation; and if it dislocates towards the back, it is the worst of all types of dislocations and causes the most pain. It often leads to death.
And strengthen it if it is something that can be reinforced by extending the servant's hand with both hands and arm, and the doctor's hand from above the elbow and from below, and pushing the joint with the thumbs of all his hands or with the origin of his hand until he returns to its place.
As for if the jaw is forward, it may return by bending the hand once until it strikes with the origin of the palm on the shoulder which borders it, if the jaw does not return to the rear, then use severe force very strongly, that is to say two servants extend their arms.
And the sick person also has two servants who hold him so that he does not disappear when he is extended, and then turn the arm in all directions after it is wrapped on his hand a folded cloth or a wide cloth, and if he begins to handle the joint with his hands with ointment so that it comes easily.
Then he pushes the joint with a severe push until it returns, and after its return, it should be carried on the bandage which contains compression and drying with egg whites, and tightened with a firm tie, and the arm is left hanging for days.
Then dissolve it if the joint has remained in place, remove the bandage and leave it, and if you see that the joint has not become firm, then replace the bandage and ribbon and leave it for days until it does, then dissolve it, and if a movement occurs after the return of the joint and the removal of its bandage, then replace the bandage and ribbon.
And difficulty in movement, then use moisture in the bath and gentle massaging and poking until it softens or make a sheep's leg on the joint and tie it and leave it there for a day and a night then remove it and put it in the bath, if it sweats then scratch the joint lightly.
Then repeat the sheep' leg on him twice and a third time with entering the bath until it softens, and if you want to make him a cow's tail wet with skim milk with oil and tie it to him, do this several times, because it will soften and return to its first state,.
Chapter 28.
In the treatment of wrist dislocations.
The wrist joint often dislocates, and reducing the dislocation is easier compared to other joints, but one should hurry to reduce the dislocation within the first hour when it occurs, otherwise a hot swelling will appear at the site of injury.
When reducing the dislocated wrist, lay the injured person's wrist on a board, and have an assistant extend their hand, then the doctor should place their hand on the joint and push it back into place. However, one should check if the reduction has been successful by looking to see if the joint has returned to the palm of the hand.
Have the patient extend their hand and place their palm up when pushing and pulling their wrist back into place. If the joint is protruding outward and facing the palm, then the doctor should place their thumb on the same spot as the joint, and if it reduces, it's a good sign. Otherwise, bandage the area to reduce swelling.
And leave it alone, and don't repeat the injury, as it can't be tolerated, and we can't reduce it after a few days, but the joint remains in its place, and doesn't hurt the patient at all unless the hand becomes weak and can't grasp anything.
Then you will know that the nerve has been cut or damaged, and there is no way to fix it except to use a splint, which may help or may not be of any benefit. Once the wrist is reduced, apply the bandage described, then tighten it and leave it for five days.
Then the cast can be removed, and practice moving the hand. If movement is difficult, and there is swelling or stiffness, then soften it with warm water and massage it several times until it becomes softer:
Chapter 29.
In the treatment of finger dislocations.
Finger dislocations can go in any direction. When a finger dislocates, extend the finger and use your thumb to reduce the dislocation by pushing and pulling until it returns to its original position. Then, bandage the tip of the finger to support it:
Leave her for two days, and then let her go out walking until she stands upright on her own. If it is night, bind her to the same pattern. Do not unbind her during the day and practice walking, and bind her at night. Repeat this for several days until she becomes stronger.
And do the same with her if she comes loose from the inside of the hand, bind it to a direction. And do the same thing with her as you did the first time until she recovers, and do the same with her when she comes loose from other directions.
Chapter 30
In treating a dislocated spinal joint.
When a spinal or neck joint dislocates completely, or when many vertebrae have shifted out of place, there is no treatment as death will soon catch up with the patient.
A sign of this is that the patient's bowel movements happen without their control, and they often lose control of their limbs or one of them, or both. And if one vertebrae has shifted out of place, it can often lead to several others shifting as well.
It can shift in four directions, and if it shifts backward, it is called a herniated disc. The treatment for this is to observe the patient's response; if the herniation occurred during youth with no apparent cause, there is no cure or hope of recovery. However, if it was caused by a fall, injury, or anything else, then there may be a chance of recovery.
They mentioned several treatments in great detail, some of which are not beneficial and may even be harmful. I have shortened this section to focus on the key points that provide value:
I say that the herniated disc that shifts forward in the chest has no cure, nor can it be treated. Similarly, the one that shifts in two directions also cannot be cured or treated. However, I will describe and explain the treatment for the type of herniation that occurs in the back, especially since it is similar to what I have described earlier, which is to lie on their back.
On a platform level with the wall and spread a damp mattress beneath it so that his chest is not injured, then place a vertical beam embedded in a hole in the ground at one end of the platform near his head and another beam at his feet at the other end of the platform.
And a server holds the beam and let it not be nailed in the hole, and another server holds the other in this way, then you wrap around the patient's chest and under his armpits with a soft, tight cloth and extend the edge of the cloth to the beam at his head and tie it to it.
Then tie another cloth above his hips and above his knees and at his ankles, then gather all the ties and tie them to the other beam at his feet, then each server should move his beam to his side without removing the beams from their fixed places.
Unless they are nailed as we mentioned above, and the doctor should place his hands on the beam with force until it returns or he should place a panel there, then he leans on the panel with his feet until it returns, because if it does not return with this treatment, take a beam whose length is about three arms.
And dig in the wall that we mentioned, near the patient, a place to enter one side of the panel, then place the middle of the panel on the hernia, and the doctor should put his feet on the other side of the panel, and he should pull hard with pressure until he compresses the hernia.
And return to its place, and if you want to make it with the hand loop that is twisted by hand, it is that you bury in the ground at the head of the patient near the end of the platform two beams whose length is an arm, and at his feet near the other end of the platform too.
And let there be a distance of a hand between each beam, and after that, make in each beam a hole through which the loop passes and secure the beams firmly to the ground; yes, until it does not move at all, and he should enter a rotating stick, which is the loop that is twisted with the bandage in the two holes of the beams.
And at the end of it a hole has been drilled, which has been fixed with a stick whose length is a cubit, and in the other two sticks like that, then the bandage that you tightened on the chest of the sick man in the loop that is at his head and the bandages that you tightened on his legs in the loop that is at his feet.
Then he stands at each loop, his servant twisting his hand with the twine with which he twists the loop, and the doctor straightens the hump on what we have mentioned, and this is a picture of the loop and the strapping and the sick man:
Then, after the bandage is returned and the position is made even, it is necessary that the dry bandage be carried with egg white, then the splint, and then you put on top of the bandage a splint from a panel whose width is three fingers or something like that, and whose length is as much as the hump takes.
And on some correct pearls, then ties with the bandage that should be used, and uses gentle food for the sick man until he recovers, if there is still a little bump in the place at the end of healing, it is necessary to use the drugs that relax and soften while using the panel we have described for a long time.
And you can use in that a plate of lead, and it may expose a bump at the end of the spine, so he thinks that it is a dislocation and it is an extra bone that has grown and not to expose it with this treatment, perhaps death occurs,.
Chapter 31.
In the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the hip joint and the shoulder blade only show signs of wear, which does not occur in all joints as little wears and wrinkles, and the hip joint dislocates four directions,.
Since it dislocates towards the inside, outside, front, and back, and most of it dislocates towards the inside, and rarely dislocates towards the front or back, and the sign of dislocation towards the inside is that if you compare the healthy leg of the patient with the injured leg, the latter will be longer,.
The knee is more extended than it should be, and the patient cannot bend his leg at the knee. The place which is next to the knee is warm and warm spots are felt from before the head of the thigh has reached that place.
The sign of the hip which turns outward is that its symptoms are opposite to these symptoms, and the sign of the hip which turns forward is that he straightens his leg completely except that he cannot bend it without pain in the knee, and if he tries to walk, he is unable to do so in front.
The sign of the hip which turns inward is that he cannot straighten his leg without bending the knee before bending the arbi'ah, and his leg is also shorter than the other one.
The arbi'ah is relaxed and the head of the femur is clear at the hip socket, and as for the types of this hip (that turns inward), if it is old and has been chronic with its owner and he has not tried to fix it and has remained in that state, there is no cure for it at all.
Do not expose it, and as for the hip that has recently dislocated and is of any type of the four directions of the hip, hurry to bend the joint and extend it inward and outward and move it from side to side, so perhaps.
Return without needing any other treatment, if it doesn't return in this way, you should consider having a very strong servant who extends his leg from below, either with his hands or with a bandage tied above the knee on his leg, and another servant who extends it from above.
by putting his hands under his armpits, then tightening a loose cloth on the root of the thigh, and having another third servant who extends it either in front from the arbi'ah to the shoulder or behind to the back.
And let all of them be extended at the same time until the patient rises with his body from the ground and remains suspended, for this type of extension is a common type for the four types, if the jaw returns with what we have said and otherwise it is necessary for each type of the ones I mention of special treatment.
As for his special return if the jaw is to the inside, it should be that the patient lies on his correct side then a bandage is placed at the root of the femur between the head of the femur and the place under the ribs.
Then the bandage is extended from the side of the ribs up to the upper body towards the shoulder, and then another servant takes a strong arm and embraces the thick place of the femur of the ill patient and extends it strongly, so he returns to his place.
This type is easier than the other types of treatment that this member can be returned, if it is difficult for you and does not respond to this type of treatment at all, it should be that the patient's legs are tied together with a strong loose bandage on the heels and knees.
And each of its owner is the length of four fingers, and the ill leg should be extended more than the other by two fingers, then hang the patient on the head from a wood that is in the house, and it should be away from the ground by two arms.
Then you order a strong servant to embrace the head of the femur and hang on to the patient with another servant, and push the servant who embraces the femur strongly, so the joint returns to its place quickly, and his special return if the jaw is to the outside.
It should be that the patient lies on the deck according to what we described in the owner of the herniated disc, and the bandage is tightened on his ill leg especially and on his chest, then two woods are placed one at his feet and the other at his head, and an additional wood is placed in the middle of the deck.
The bandage was wet with linen to prevent harm to the patient, and a wooden plank was placed between his thighs so that he would not be drawn downward by the tide, then each servant extended to his side and the physician straightened the hip with his hands, for if it had responded to the return.
If it had not responded to the return, then he should place a board and press down as we have mentioned in the hernia, whether except that it is necessary for the patient to lie on his correct side, and if the dislocation is forward, then the patient's leg should be extended once while lying in this very description on the deck.
The physician places his right hand on the patient's iliac crests and then presses it with the left hand, and nevertheless he makes the pressure long down to the side of the knee, and if the dislocation is towards the back, then the patient should not be extended downward.
It is raised on the ground, but it should be placed on a solid thing, and it should also be from the patient' s hip away to the outside according to what we have mentioned of his lying on the deck and his belts are tight.
As we have mentioned above, and it should be used with a board on the position that the joint has come out, if it is completed The return of the hip joint as should not be hidden from you, which is when the patient extends both legs.
If you see them level and the patient clutches his leg and extends it without difficulty, then know that the joint has returned to its proper state, so at that time separate the hips and remove the bandage and tighten it with a turban tight enough so that the hip does not move in either direction.
It is necessary for the patient to be still for three days or four, then remove the bandage and tensi
Then wrap it up and bind it together, according to your first tightening; also leave it for three days, then untie it and slow down the walking on it for days until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 23.
On the Treatment of a Dislocated Knee.
A dislocated knee can occur in three ways: inward, outward, and downward; it never dislocates forward. The sign of a dislocated knee is when the patient is ordered to bend his leg towards his thigh.
If it does not adhere to the femur, know that the knee is dislocated; fix all sides of the dislocation by having the patient sit with his legs extended if he can tolerate it, and have him sit supported by his behind and slightly bent backwards. Then sit on his thighs.
Then lean your back against his face and make his leg between your legs; then secure his knee with your hands and interlock your fingers on his knee; then wrap your hands around the sides of his knee with force, and have another servant extend his leg until the knee returns to its position.
The sign of its return is when the leg adheres to the femur in a soft, unresistent manner; then wrap it and stick it to the femur, and tie it all together with a bandage for three or four days, then release it; it should only be used for little walking for several days until it heals.
If you cannot fix its return using the previous description, otherwise use the powerful traction with the bands described earlier in the treatment of the hip until it returns;
Chapter 33.
On the Treatment of a Dislocated Heel.
The heel can move slightly, or it can completely dislocate; the sign of a dislocated heel is that you see the heel swollen and protruding towards the direction it has dislocated.
And whereas the treatment for its removal is that it is easily returned by gently extending it with the hands and making it level so that it returns, and whereas its treatment when it has completely separated, it should be that the patient sits and a strong servant holds him from behind his back in the middle.
Then, with your right hand, hold his foot from above by the metatarsus and with your left hand below it in the place of the ankle bone; then, bring the foot towards you with your right hand, and twice more with your left hand, then extend the metatarsus with your left hand and push the heel of the foot up towards the leg with your right hand without being violent.
Do this twice as described, then push the metatarsus of the foot up towards the leg in the third time and while drawing by the ankle bone; if it returns in one or two times on this condition and you see that the foot is level, otherwise, repeat the work because it will return.
If it does not return for you as we described, otherwise, lay the patient on his back on the ground and drive a pole firmly into the ground between his thighs, and wrap a rag around it so that it does not hurt the patient; then, a servant should adjust his leg.
Then, another servant should extend the man's leg either with his hands or with a strap he binds around the neck of the man, then each servant extends the other's leg and the wedge is standing between the patient's thighs, gripping it so that his body does not tilt towards the lower part when extended, then the doctor should make the jaw level with his hands.
And another servant should hold the healthy leg down, because the jaw will return quickly; if it returns and you see that its recovery is correct, then carry the bandage and the spanner and tighten it with a number of secure straps and tie the foot to the strap from below, and you must avoid the nerve that is above the heel from behind.
So that the bandage does not hurt him too much, then leave it for two or three days; if the bandage relaxed, tighten it again, and then release it on the third or fourth day, and the patient refrains from walking for forty days.
If he tries to walk before this period, he will not be able to bear the joint and it will deteriorate and will no longer accept treatment; then a hot swelling will appear on him, and we should use what we have described above in another place to relieve it until it disappears.
Chapter 34
In treating a man's fingers.
The bandage should be made smooth, without violence; this is easy to do; if the joint is in a certain part of the sole of the foot, the patient should put his foot on a flat surface of the ground.
Or on a board while he is standing like a walker, and then you put your foot on what has been removed from those joints, and then kick it with your foot strongly until it comes back and you can see that it has become even and there is no bump in the place.
Then make a board under the sole of the foot that takes all of it, let it have two heads, and then tighten it tightly for three days, and then release it and keep it from walking for many days until it gets stronger and God wills no relapse.
Chapter 35
In types of dislocation that are with a wound or with a fracture or both.
When one of these things happens, and if treated and repaired, it often leads to death.
For that reason, one should not rush into treating such a thing unless he is skilled in the art, has long experience, is gentle and compassionate, and takes his time; and he should only use medications to relieve hot tumors.
In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful; except for what I hope for safety from damage with a light illness and it appears to you that there is some hope in it, so remove it with your knife at first before the tumor becomes hot.
If the member returns to what you wanted, then use the remedy that calms hot tumors and treat the wound with the appropriate ointments that dry it up; if the jaw is broken and there are fragments of bone that come off, cut them off. Follow in this regard what we have mentioned in simple diseases in their places.
And be careful on your part, and keep away from the path of risks, as we have advanced, and my advice to you is that it is safer for your reputation and more secure for your display before God if you do so.
