You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine, its fulfillment, and have concluded it with explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I completed this with a treatise, which is the part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And since the work of hands is closely guarded in our region and unknown throughout, the science has degenerated and become depleted, and there remains no trace of its power other than small descriptions in ancient books about what the hands have done. And from this comes error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and knowledge is estranged.
I believe I want to revive it by following the order of this treatise, according to its method of exposition and explanation and its abbreviations; and I will bring together the forms of cautery instruments and other tools for this work with the addition of explanations and preparations as needed.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has become neglected. And he who wishes to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the members, their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of their openings, and understand the movement and rest of veins, and from where they originate.
And Hippocrates says that the name without work is meaningless, and with work, it is powerful; and particularly in the art of the hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, will surely fall into error and harm others.
for I have often seen many of those who engage in this science and abandon themselves without knowledge or experience.
Because I have seen a foolish thing that affects the abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and affects the arteries of the neck. for this causes so much blood that the woman dies in his hands.
And see another miracle where a stone is removed from a man's chest, and the stone was large. it also removes a piece of the bladder, and he bled from his wound for three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; I knew well that if it was not cut out, he would die.
And see another miracle where he treated the duke of our land who had a broken leg and a wound from the fracture.
and the ignorant doctor tightened the fracture over the wound with strong force and left no space for the wound to heal, and he left it in that state until the end.
and instruct him not to dislocate it again.
and wait until the leg is completely swollen and bruised and comes to ruin.
I am called to come to him, and I hastened to go free the leg; and when I freed it, the pain disappeared entirely.
But any attempt at corruption was already confirmed within the limb, and it could not be healed.
and it does not cease the corruption of sending through the member as long as the member is completely dead.
And I also saw another wonder: the abscess became worse, and then it was inflamed due to the malignancy of its lordship.
For the ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not suit that one should touch it with iron if it is not in a part that can be entirely removed what is corrupted.
And for this reason, dear child, it is necessary for you to know that the art of healing is divided into two parts: that is to say, work where there is danger in many arrangements;
and I will show, in each part of this book, where there is fear and danger.
For this reason, it is important for you to guard yourself, so that the foolish eyes cannot speak ill of you.
If you take up your weapons in courage, and confront your enemies lightly but firmly, and use the best method, by the grace of God, you will achieve salvation and be happy.
and abandon the gloomy diseases of sorrow, healthily.
and remove your weapons of doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other in glory.
Galen does not mention any of his warnings: Do not take any dangerous illness too seriously, unless you are called a fool for it.
I have devised this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapters deal with fire cautery and medicinal agues, and the chapters are ordered from the head down to the feet.
and the shapes of instruments, and the tools for cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
The second sentence translates to: The following chapters are about cutting and piercing, and the use of suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar procedures.
and it describes the chapters arranged and the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar conditions.
and it is ordered from the greatest pain down to the least, and describes the shapes of the instruments.
So, remembering the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of aid and the harm or benefit of each condition.
I say that the qualities of aid, and its harmful effects, are the longest to explain and the most subtle sciences, containing secret answers.
and about this, many of the wise ones spoke, and agreed upon it.
and I will be content with few of my words, for I dread the lengthiness.
I say that cautery helps universally for every complexion where it has matter, regardless of the complexities. This is to know: a hot complexion with regard to matter, and a dry complexion without regard to matter.
In a hot and dry complexion, they combined matter, devised something, and said that cautery is great help. and the other ones said the opposite: that cautery is not worth for illness that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated for hot illness with heat or dryness;
and he who does the opposite of cauterization provides great aid for hot, dry disease that comes upon the body of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the heat of fire, you feel the body is warm.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found it to be true through experience.
And in every case, no one should intervene unless they have tried it themselves, and who knows by long experience the chapter of cauterization, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of illness, and the outcomes and the passage of time.
we have only fear from other complexions, especially for cold and moist diseases. And all agreed and came together for the cautery.
And know this, son, that cautery combines fire in a way that is a secret of healing, and indeed it is a greater kindness than the fiery medicine cautery.
For fire is simple, and it does not come from outside except to the member that is hot, and it does not harm any other member.
Burning medicines come from one part to another by removing, and bring to the limb diseases of great healing. and perhaps the patient suffers.
He does not hesitate because of his nobility and the goodness of his nature, unless there is excess.
And this is what I have found by experience and through the length of my service and study in the art, and it was about the truth of things.
and therefore I excuse the length of my speech, for I do not like to deprive you of the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives diseases from the body, as the philosopher demonstrates. or consider it in your thoughts.
And know this, my son, that there is agreement among them as to when cauterization should be performed and the prayers recited.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harmful pain is removed with the help of gentle cauterization. and especially when cauterization is for necessary and urgent pain, so that no greater evil comes to the member.
And never think, dear child, as they do wrongfully; for the illness that is healed by cautery does not relapse; and thus it should be done;
and thus it should be done; but it is not always as they should care for it, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion and dries up the humors that cause pain; it is a powerful remedy for quick healing, and its virtue lies in its effect and mastery.
And it is possible for the illness to come according to the constitution of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virtue.
and they are assembled within him as excesses through the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cautery is administered to him where there is little excess and moisture, just as cautery for stones due to pain and similar conditions, and this pain does not return. but this rarely happens.
And many people do not understand at all why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is indeed true.
but they do not believe that cautery is worth anything after medicine; their intentions are false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer remedies in any disease and they do not work, then let us use cautery, and it is effective.
Then it becomes clear that cautery is indeed the last resort of medicine, not at all according to the understanding of learned fools.
The ancients said that gold cautery instruments are more effective than iron ones, and they only spoke of fire for the quality of gold and for the high value of its substance.
and they said that the gold in cautery instruments does not rust, but this is not true because I have tried it, and I have found that it does indeed rust in no men.
and fire cautery is more valuable than metal, as they say. But even when you heat gold instruments, you are not sure if they are hot enough by the color of the gold, and they may cool down before you know it.
and if it is heated too much; it turns black from the fire. and thus it is enough hindrance.
Now we have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the way may be lighter to follow.
Fire cautery is useful for moisture and cold on the head, and it helps with conditions caused by a disease called "soda," and by many humors that flow from the head to the ears, and due to numerous dreams and toothaches and throat pain, and especially with all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged by a solvent medicine cleansing the third or fourth harmful substance, according to the virtue and age and habituation of the patient's illness. and then make the patient's head clean.
and then make the patient lie down with their head between your hands, and place their hands on some weight.
after, place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their two eyes; and when your two hands come together, if blood drips from the wound, heat the cautery called "olive" with which this form is made: and place the sign of ink on the joint, and then slowly and gently lower and pull your hand, disrupting it. then gently release your hand, and stabilize the joint when you see the bone begin to move slightly. and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you can see the bone, as I told you.
After taking a little silk thread, wrap it around and make it soft cotton, and place it on the dislocation, and leave it for three days.
After that, place the moistened cotton on it. and leave it until the inflammation subsides. After that, dress the wound with "tetrafarmace" until it is healed.
And they said to each other, as long as the wound remains open, more pus is discharged. and for this reason, aid is sought.
And they say that one must not leave the cautery for so long that the bone itself is burned; then remove the burned part from the bone, and it will be healed.
And he tells the other that one must let the cautery remain in place for as long as it takes, and push so hard that they make a gap in the bone just as wide as the turn of a woman's wrist to allow the humors to escape.
and the wound must remain open for a long time. After the wound, one must cure and dress it.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to be good in all cases, except for those who have no other choice.
and it seems to me that I should leave this.
because the tissues are weakened by continuous washing with liquid of a certain nature, as we testify in other members.
and also when the joint of the patient is weak by nature, and the initial appearance of cautery is safer and more mobile for me, from this I proceed to perform with safety.
When chronic pain persists for a prolonged period, the patient should use herbs and pills known as "coughing" remedies, as well as enemas and applications of oil and plasters. and if one performs the cautery as we have previously mentioned, it will not be effective. Take care if the patient's shoulder is of a strong nature and not too frozen. then cauterize deeply, as we have said above. After that, cauterize each corner of the shoulder bone, as we have said before, and also cauterize the part called "vasselz". and hold the eyes, which are used for applying suction. and take your hand so that you do not see anything just to the bone: the patients suffer much greater pain from this cautery than from others, and I will speak of that later;
and it is necessary that the cauterization of the horns be more subtle than that of the middle part of the head, and this is its form:
For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long When there is sudden severe pain in a part of the head, and the disease spreads to the oil, and the symptoms are purged with purgative medicines, and other treatments have been tried as described in the classification of diseases, and none of these help: Then he performs cauterization according to two manners, that is to say, with hot medicines and by fire.
If he cauterizes with hot medicines, it is when you press a sore on the skin and remove the crust and flesh in small pieces, then makes an incision where the pain resides in such a way that you can push back the sore from under the skin.
and when it is pushed back, if he holds the limb still and tightens it well, and leaves it thus for twelve hours. and then dislodge and treat it further with garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days. then place cotton soaked in butter over it until the pus ceases.
After the dressing, as long as it is healthy;
and if you see that it is not suitable for any of the burning remedies I have written about or the dosage for treating them,
The fire cautery is done according to this manner. Heat the fire cautery with this tool:
And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a shell or hat with a slight curvature, and it has a small appearance.
and place it on the painful joint, hold your hand and gently twist it a little, until half of the intensity of the pain is gone.
and relax your hand so that the artery does not feel pain, which is numb, and allows blood to flow abundantly.
After applying cotton in the form of thread, place it on the joint for three days. then I apply moist cotton soaked in butter, and then cure the wound with a bandage until it is healed;
and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare" (a kind of instrument), be sure to not block the artery in this migraine which is not very old.
of migraine
When you treat a migraine as we have previously explained in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery mentioned in medicine is not enough, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white.
and thus he should mark the affected area with a line half as long as a finger, and once his hand is steady, pull it away so as not to injure the artery or reach down to the bone.
and guard the jaw that moves when chewing, so that the nerves pay no heed to the movement or spasm does not come upon the patient, and beware of the blood flow from the artery when it is cut, for cutting it causes great fear, especially to those who do not know or are untrained and inexperienced. and leave the wound half-healed;
but I will tell you how to retain blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it hardens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not enough to heal the disease, and the patient suffers, cauterize the opposite side as well as we have said, and treat the wound until it is clean.
and if you see, apply the cautery that we have said in this chapter for the extraction of an artery, with the cautery having two blades. and this fire cautery is one of the best remedies for him and most helpful.
about the pain of the ears due to cold
When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and various solutions and treatments as we have mentioned in the previous section have been applied, but the pain persists, use this cautery called "point," which has the following shape:
After marking the entire painful area around the ear or both ears where the pain persists, move a little away from the top of the ear and mark the place where you have identified the joint. and make X marks around each ear;
after treating the joint, make it healthy.
regarding the torture of the mouth
The torture that must be cured by cautery is limited to those affecting fluid movement, as we have explained in the sections on illness.
and do not perform cautery on conditions that arise from dryness and nerve pain.
When you cure this condition of fluid movement from dryness and purging from the head and gargling, it is not effective. Therefore, you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries. one at the root of the ear, another slightly above the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips.
and place the cautery on the part that opens to the healthy space, and make it cauterize at the top of the ear, a little below the curve at the top, and another one in the temple just as far; and leave the cautery on until half of the heart is burned;
and this is the shape of the cautery:
and it resembles the scalpel we have described before, but it is a little more subtle, and it is necessary that the knife be slightly thicker.
After treatment, reset it as I have said before, as long as it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, but the patient does not benefit, and has no fever, then make four cauterizations. On the two horns of the head, take the head itself, and emit (or release) the limb called "vessel" as we have said before, and do no cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
and so it is cured as we have said above.
The term "de litargie" seems to be a
For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of medicine to purify his mind.
after warming the head of the patient thoroughly, place the mustard plaster on the occiput as described in the treatise on plasters.
and this is the method of cauterization: if you do as I have said.
If he is healthy in this way, it is good. and if he is not, apply three cauterizations with hot iron to the entire head down to the collarbone, and leave a significant space between each cauterization, two of which should be as large as possible.
and treat it as you would other wounds, and if you notice any infection, and the patient is suffering, apply a cauterization in the middle. and if necessary, apply two others on the two horns, and treat it until it is healthy.
and let the cautery be called "olive", as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be purified with earth and water as we have said before.
after cleansing the head of the patient, then apply the cautery to the head and each horn, behind, and thirdly on the spine of the neck.
and if you need more skill, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly and the illness is severe, then apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back. and let it grow until the most tender point is healed, and gently apply your hand. after the cure while it is healed, and perform the cauterization known as "olive" which we have previously mentioned.
From epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to purify the brain with years and other remedies that we have discussed in the section on great suffering from long-term medication.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, give them gargles and chewing, often cleansing the brain with good meats;
after the king has made his head steady in the middle, and he performs the cauterization according to what we have said before, and cauterizes the vein, and on each horn. and if the patient is far and suffers, he should have cautery as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the skin, on the spine of the back and neck, and have cautery with olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is sick, make them undergo cautery gently according to this method:
When, due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupt moisture and thick flux, then use cautery on parts as we have said for those with paralysis.
And if, due to melancholy, the excesses are declining towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist with sorrow, then give them something to drink that cleanses the mind as it has been previously discussed in the section on division.
After removing the head of the patient; after making the tortile (or bandage) well-placed, both circular and put it on the head;
and the patient should be crossed and held well from all sides;
After applying this remedy, take some butter from an old goat; and heat it gently over fire so that the patient can bear it; after evacuating the circle inside the joint, and leaving it to cool down;
and do this to the patient once each week with another good remedy, as long as they are healthy.
Or, if you must cauterize it, make many points at the cautery.
This method of cautery moistens the flesh increasingly;
and then place a moist cloth soaked in butter and gelatine on it.
of the eyes When the eyes come first through the signs I mentioned in the previous section, then begin and give to the patient something to drink, a purifying medicine for the head, and guard against all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath while fasting.
After that, he commands the patient to rest their head, and applies heat cautery to the head, and makes two cauterizations on both temples if the downward movement of the eye is in two parts, or in one if it's in one.
and cut across all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, making the cautery long according to the width of the temple.
and guard against the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it by applying pressure as you have been taught.
And I will teach you, during the extraction of arteries and cauterization of incisions, how to stop it.
and under no circumstances should one cauterize or burn the skin between the two rear bones.
and we see that it is cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then do the cautery that I have said at the beginning of this chapter, descending the ones: I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on both temples, and I cauterize where the collarbone joins the two bones. and if it requires more, cauterize gently over the eyebrow with all the small cautery.
When you medicate according to what we have said in the previous discussion, but it does not benefit the patient, then give the sick person three bitter drugs. After the king, take the chief (of the shoulder) and apply the fire cautery with olive oil as a medium. and make the cautery called "clavilis" on the joints, slightly pulling the hairs.
and guard the artery so that you do not block it.
This is the form of cautery called 'clavilis':
When the paper of the oil becomes softened by disease and moisture, then apply this cautery which is called "olive. Due to which the form is:
And if you see that making cauteries on the joints makes them as long as the bones,
and do not let go of the instrument until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
the hairs that prevent the oil from entering Never does it happen that the hairs of the skin are turned to a different color, and they prick the patient, and cauterization is performed in two ways. that is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
The fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even. and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in your care; after signing on the paper with a symbol as powerful as the flame, and it is like the beginning of the sign among the hairs;
then put moist cotton soaked in egg white and musk from the pistachio on the oil, then heat the cautery with which this shape is formed:
After cauterizing on the affected area several times, burn the surrounding skin;
and the signs of the success of the treatment are that you see the skin retreating, and the hairs standing on end at the tip of the oil.
then hold your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then put moistened cotton in butter until the burning is gone. after the treatment of healing as long as it is clean.
And after that come the hairs, and the paper is moistened, then begin the cauterization on the same place again, just as you did first.
and if the hairs are singed, cauterize while the paper is raised to its natural state and even, and do not let the oils from the hair prick the skin.
The medicinal burning cauterization is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take French soap and fresh charcoal, each one ounce, and grind them together well; and apply it gently if it does not cool down, then spread over the shape you have made as if from a mold, and place some paper on top of it. and if the disease persists only in one place, then surgery should be performed there, and also both places. and place some moist cotton wool underneath.
and the joint of the patient should be in your healthy hand, and place your finger over the joint, pressing it gently every time the patient feels a stinging from the medicine, for it also stings like fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body. And once the stinging has passed, if the limb is raised above the heart, and you see the paper lifting as if it were lifted by constriction of fire or by incision. and if it is so, then it is good.
If no, then apply more medicine to the limb or the medicine has not opened up completely, as long as your work is even and your joints are well-set.
then place a damp cotton cloth over the wounded area until the heat has subsided, after which treat the joint with the dressing known as 'dyafenis' and others, until it is healed.
And if you have to take care of yourself, be very careful with your work so that it does not seek out the medicine by itself.
And if the paper becomes soft after and the hairs prick in the oil, repeat the treatment on that joint which has been softened with the paper, just as you did before. after the treatment, until it is healed;
and this is the form of the wound with much pain;
And know that the bones of men are diverse in size, both large and small, according to your constraints.
and do not deviate from the right path for he who has the study of this art.
Of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have discussed regarding diseases, and your treatments do not benefit the patient, then it is necessary to perform cautery on them in this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head on your healthy side. and place the patient's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, and do not let go of his head.
after moistening a cloth with vinegar or juice of parsley on oil;
after heating the cautery instrument that is suitable:
and it should be shaped like the head of a quill, assembling the edge to be the cautery.
if you see that it is pointed from one end to the other, and if you see that it is also like a tent;
But nevertheless, this that is dry deserves to be moved for your work.
After pressing the fistula, it should be opened, and then drain the pus, and dry it. and if it closes again after opening, pull strongly on the bow.
after applying hot cautery, place your hand on the heated part with the oil, ensuring your hand does not move erratically. and apply the cautery to the fat of the oil, and the corruption.
If you begin the cautery near the bone, that would be good. If this does not work, apply the cautery again, and if you need to, do it a third time, and leave it for three days.
after applying a moist cloth dipped in butter, and treating the dry dressing until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, then apply an ague-corrosive medicine while the bone is exposed. and the treatment according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a kind of cautery for a fistula that no one of the ancients spoke of. Grasp the fistula firmly, and fix the place; after that, place a subtle pressure on it so that this is the shape: and it forms the quantity of a drop. and hold your hand firm, so that the patient does not move, and let the drop fall into its place.
and it is necessary to place on the patient a moist cotton ball in order to help them rest.
He plunges deeply into the wound from which the abscess flows, and the health returns through the marvelous strength of medicine.
And if the ulcer is clean through the cautery we have mentioned, that is good. If this is not the case, then it is necessary to administer ice or cold water, and return the ulcer to the body within the cold, according to what is appropriate for its place.
cracks in the lips Many times cracks appear in the lips, which are called "poil," especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these wounds as we have discussed in detail, and the treatment does not benefit, then use a small cauterizing instrument according to this form:
and places the medicine in those wounds until it reaches the root.
after healing, reset the joint until it is whole.
When an abscess forms at the root of the tongue or jaw, or in the uvula, or in the palate, or at the roots of teeth, after putrefaction and rot, it becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula. and you treat it as we have said before, but it does not improve. then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, hold your hand until the heat reaches the bottom and there is no more bleeding.
and do so once or twice after the treatment that we have mentioned in treatments, as long as it is healed;
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if that does not help, you must then discover the place and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medicine is ineffective, then place the sick person's head in a healthy place. after applying the heat for the cautery, watch for the formation of blisters, in this way that you place a bandage over the tooth.
and place the hot cautery over the patient's wound, holding your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
after releasing your hand, and recommencing the cautery according to your will;
after filling the patient's mouth with salt water, leave it for an hour and rinse with hot water.
And in this same manner, the tooth that was moving becomes confirmed, the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried up.
about the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is frost or chill, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then it needs cautery according to these two ways: and with butter cautery and fire cautery.
The butter cautery is such that you press the butter into a hot steel or copper spoon. after taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a stick, soak it in melted butter, and apply it gently to the painful tooth until it cools.
and thus do this often until the virtue of the butter reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that the moist cloth and cotton are too hard to work with, apply the hot iron to the painful tooth until the heat eases the toothache.
He should perform the fire cautery by applying it so that he pricks with an iron or bronze needle, making it thick enough for the flame not to reach the patient's mouth.
After heating the cautery, from which the shape will form, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down.
Do this often, as the pain will be just as intense on the following day or even more so.
And it is important that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the rush of that cautery and then sucks on a hot brick.
and this is the form of the cautery:
and perform cautery on the part of the body that you wish, according to your ability;
and this is the form of the cautery instrument:
Of scrofula When the scrofula (a type of swelling) is filled with cold moisture and unresponsive to medication, then apply heat to the cautery instrument afterwards, creating an opening for the steam to escape from the cautery onto the other part.
and then apply hot cautery to the abscess once, as is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
and if the abscess is small due to applying cautery according to its quantity, leave it thus for three days. and apply a moist cloth with butter until the burn is healed.
after healing, remove the bandages and tents as soon as it is healed.
When moisture conquers the channels of the body, especially when it arises from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first relieved by solvent medications.
After the fire cautery at the root of the throat, be careful not to go near the throat, and do not drink anything hot but a little.
After that, perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone and spine, and be it the cauterization known as 'clavicle' from which we have the form before.
and heal the joint as we have said before, as long as it is healthy.
When all and every illness of the promon (possibly referring to the pronate or palm of the hand) is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or stiffness, and it is an old illness, then make .II cauteries (two types of treatments) on their will; and another cautery, cut between the two mammals (possibly referring to the breast or chest area);
and this cautery, which is called "clavile" according to the shape as said before.
And if you see, perform cautery by pricking all the cautery points called "points" from which the form of the ear disease is as it is before;
and the points should be up to 30, or as deep as necessary.
After the treatment, reset it according to what is said above, and make the cauterization in three parts according to this form:
And because the cautery is lighter, because you do it three times in turn.
On the dislocation of the shoulder.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, remember the patients on their backs and sides; after that, open the passageway inside the swelling with your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated within, then apply the heat of the fire gently so that it takes on the right shape:
and cauterize the wound gently until it feels firm to the touch, and let the shape of the cautery guide you in making four cauterizations.
and for this reason, the cautery is made with a tool having three prongs, so that the shape of the cauterization consists of six cauterizations.
and the nerves vary according to the sensitivity of each person, and this is the shape of the cautery with three prongs:
And never should it be adjusted on this nerve, for there are eight burns.
After placing the fire cautery, apply crushed herbs with a cloth; After resting the patient, do not move the limbs for a long time until they are completely healed.
And if it is dislocated from above, such a thing happens poorly, then make a fire cautery on the thick skin with a cautery claw or many cauteries with sharp points.
For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and health returns to the patient.
When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach while it is being stretched from its natural state, catarrh multiplies within it, and conventional treatment methods do not help, then the patient should be careful on his back, extending his legs and arms. Then, make three cauterizations removing the skin with a knife, each about as thick as a finger, claving the cautery entirely through, and two more cauterizations on either side so that the appearance of the cauteries forms three angles, with enough space between them so they are not joined together when they become gangrenous.
and instruct them to perform the cautery so that they mark both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauter be according to this form without adjustment:
and if you undergo cauterization with a great cautery on the stomach according to this form;
and whoever has fear of this cautery, perform the cauterization by pricking and signing on the stomach in a dot according to the quantity that you see fit; then cauterize it completely at the cautery called "dot".
After the treatment we have previously discussed, as long as it is healthy.
As for the liver, it experiences pain from fresh and moist heat, and a great accumulation of phlegm, as long as it is severely deprived of its natural condition due to excesses. and the patient is treated with what we have mentioned in parts, but it does not help, and it is necessary that the patient be mindful of their head. and the sign of three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, removing the hypochondria, where the pains of the human body originate.
and say there should be enough space between each cautery, the thickness of a finger. and the cautery should be long throughout the body, and do not press too much with your hand on any part of the cautery.
and burn only the middle part of the heart, and the patient should be upright on their feet.
and if he cannot, lying down, extend his legs, and ease his breathing.
And if you wish to cauterize these wounds with a knife, being skilled and wise in the art, be careful not to burn all the heart, for you would cause severe damage throughout the body. and that it does not come to a boil, for the heart is very delicate at this place, and the wise ones know it.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know if it is within the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If he is on the bed, he feels the patient pain not too severe.
and if he is in the bandage, he feels severe pain.
And when this treatment requires the patient to look around, it is necessary that the patient keeps their head still.
and then seal the wound where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a ring, from which comes this form: And cauterize with fire until the colors are burned, and come just to the point of syphilis, while the putrefaction is entirely gone.
after the treatment, according to the treatment of effusions until it is healed;
and it is not advisable to use this cauterization unless by one who has studied deeply the art of medicine and whose hands have never failed in treating these illnesses.
Then he can safely operate, but I still think it is better to leave it.
Fire cautery
The ancients said that one should make cauterizations with tears from roots of aristologe, and in this manner: Take a long root of aristologe (a type of plant), the largest you can find, and ensure it is dry, as well as equally thick and long as your arm. and moisten it in oil, and hold it over the fire, and cauterize (the area) between the shoulder blade and the collarbone, and make smaller cauterizations slightly descending in the part that is under the beard.
and also cauterize between the fifth rib and the sixth, slightly declining behind. and I use cautery on the worst part, and another on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and along both sides of the pain, remove the cautery that is between the shoulders.
and do not press my hand, but open it firmly as if smelling something.
And they say that no ancient person should use the fire cautery like a razor, burning it and placing it between the ribs, as it reaches this abscess. and suddenly the pain arises, as we have said about the abscess of the liver.
But in this case, there is great fear among the patients, and many die now, or a fistula appears that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said about the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they attach three ways of cautery that are good.
Dislocate it in such a way that you make three cauterizations, or four, along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery of the fire that we have mentioned above.
and do not press your hand firmly on the entire cauterization, and let the patient be careful on their back.
and another method of cauterization is to heat the cautery tool with two nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
and hold the heart which is located in the mouse, or the pains come from the left side, and make the elevation according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
After that, burn the two edges until the heart is pierced on the other side, and then treat the cautery fiercely, and so there will be four.
And if you see that the cautery is completely burned at three edges.
After treatment when the pus has drained for a long time, this is more effective than any of the other treatments mentioned before.
Cautery is not effective against hydrops, except in the manner known as "asclytes".
When you treat it according to the methods we have described in detail, and your treatment does not benefit the patient, then you must perform four cauterizations around the wound, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the heart, two behind the back over the spine, and one on the anus. and the cauterizations should be close to the area of pain.
After leaving the cauterization open for a long time to allow pus to drain, do not leave the patient's treatment after cauterization. and healing would be hastened, and the two parts would be joined together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly should be the needle that we have shown before. and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is placed before.
When the feet are swollen in the hydroptic patient and are filled with yellowish pus, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger. and hold your hand with the cautery without pain returning.
And do not press too deeply, so as to close the natural opening; thus the heat from the fire will penetrate the flesh according to this form:
After that, make two cauterizations on each leg with the tip of the cutting knife; and let the cauterization be long, one on the inside of the knee joint and the other on the outside of the leg;
and leave the cauterizations healing for a long time without touching them, so they heal well;
After the treatment of the other treatments we have mentioned.
When abdominal pain arises from cold and moisture, and the retaining and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, it cannot be cured by any means. and you see the patient in great distress with strong pain, so make a severe cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken about before, or cautery of the stomach, at the cautery of the circuit. and I cauterize around the anus gently at every cautery, and carefully tie off the threads, and II cauterize on the thighs.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a burn on the finger, and a burn on every part, and small burns on the gentle stomach, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
**On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids**
When hemorrhoids are either internal or external, and they have been present for a long time, consisting of corrupt cold and moist humors, their treatment is as we have said in detail, but cauterization does not help. On the spine of the back, that which is entirely soaked with blood, gradually and in a triangular manner, and one should cauterize from below the wound, two fingers deep.
and if you think his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling on the face, then one should great cauterize the stomach as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on every part with a hot iron. and let the fire cautery grow long. After treatment, reset the shoulder as long as it is healed.
When you have finished all else, if the cautery seems too sharp, then take a hot iron and apply it thoroughly to that part. and hold it there until the cautery reaches the vein, from which the blood flows.
do this once or twice, and if there is much heat, cauterize each as we have said. after the treatment of wounds until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scalp, it will bring greater aid.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or incising, which we will describe in its place, such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
When no vein becomes fistulated, and there is swelling, putrefaction, and corrupt moisture, you must try all sorts of subtle remedies, and be sure to know at every stage how effective they are.
After heating the cautery to a sharp point, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered, and repeat the cauterization once or twice, or even three times, depending on the quantity required;
and beware of burning the sensitive nerves and great veins.
It goes to the core of the bladder and intestines, so be careful with these joints, and do not make fire wounds except on fleshy parts, and know that it is not always permanent.
After treatment, keep the joint as healthy as possible, and if the joints are successfully healed and the materials removed for a long time, then know that the joint is completely healthy.
and if the materials are not removed, know that the joint is weak and the bone is corrupted at its base. and thus, as one of these things we will tell in its place.
When the pain of a fracture comes with heavy bleeding and does not allow a woman to bear it, then you should perform cauterization on the wound from both sides, using the cautery claw that we have previously mentioned.
and we should cauterize it in the middle, if there are three cauterizations in a row, and this will bring greater help.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak due to pain and moisture, preventing the patient from urinating, then perform cauterization on the outside part of the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, both on the right and left side, making each cauterization about as long as a finger.
and he makes a fire cautery on the back, where it is needed;
and he applies the cautery as described above.
When the weather is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are ruined and their ends are delayed. and when they come, they cause great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the anus, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two fire cauterizations on the back.
and so the cautery should be done, as we have said.
When viscous moisture descends into the chest cavity and for this reason it becomes silent in its place, and the signs are that the affected leg appears longer than the other when measured together.
and it is found that the vulnerable parts are in the lower region, so it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the chest cavity with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the lung with a sign as it returns, so that the chest remains within the circle.
and if they are cauterized like those used to cauterize the stomach.
If this cauterization is not present, perform three cauterizations with hot olive oil, and make sure the cauterization is just as effective as all the others.
and heal it as long as it is healthy.
of the pain of the back (or "hainche" as written) When pain arises in the chest due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured using methods we have described in detail, but the treatment is ineffective, and the illness persists, it is ancient. So it is necessary for you to cleanse the patient of bad humours from foul or other good-looking pills. Afterwards, he performs cautery;
and the method of cautery is according to two manners: that is to say, the use of burning medicines and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many manners, some of which are as follows:
That you cauterize the wound of the spine with three triangular cauterizations according to this form, making them deep and wide, and there should be between each cauterization a distance as thick as two fingers, and they shall be olive-shaped.
Cauterization should never be done in the middle of the spine's top, for that reason there are three according to this form.
And if you see that the cauterization affects the circle we have mentioned in the dislocation of the spine,
but make it in such a way that the circle contains all the hair, and every part of the heart is burnt.
And this is the method used in sciatica when the pain is confined to the spine and does not reach the thigh or leg.
And if it extends to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations on the side where the patient feels the most pain, and one cauterization above the ankle on the left side slightly.
and it should be a cutting cauterization, burning the thickness of the heart.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to both feet or near the anus, cauterize there where he feels the pain three times or four, with a cautery called "point. And if it happens again, do more;
And if the pain is intense in the knee down to the thigh, perform a cauterization with a sharp or circular instrument, and be very careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave them too long so as not to burn the skin and large arteries, and do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have applied cauterization to the ankle of the foot, and left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the entire foot. After an abdominal solution, he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and the other, according to this manner.
And the wise ones say about the cauterization of the spine: this is how it should be done, take a piece of iron that is as thick as a small dagger or slightly thinner, and make incisions through it, either interlaced or alternating from one side to the other, with an interval equal to the size of a thumb.
and intertwine them over the two parts, and they should also be like new, and have a good iron made of it.
and this is the form:
and heat it until it is entirely red and emits steam, then place it on the sore hip of the patient, and turn to the healthy side.
and apply the cautery once the heat is gone, and leave it for three days. and then apply an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment of the ointment as long as it is healed.
Albuscasim says that we use this cautery little because of the fear of its reputation, and we see few who use it.
and nevertheless, these are good cauterizations, which the patient can endure, and the place where it is appropriate.
He uses the cautery of burning medicine if you make a tool to interweave with which you lower the edge of the door, and it is made of iron or steel on a long wall, and at the top it has two parts, and between each part there is the quantity of thickness of a finger. and they should be open above and below, and join together according to this form.
After that, place the board of the harness on the sick person lying on their side, and quickly put your hand over the board of the harness. After pouring between the two circles of hot awes (ash or charred material) heated over fire, leave it for an hour while the patient endures the heat and burn.
Because it has the same effect as fire.
and when the blisters have passed, take a clean hand with the instrument and raise the bandage of soft ash, leaving it for three days, and apply butter until the blackening from the burn is removed. and leave it for three days as the purification takes effect.
and this is the rear support after the treatment of wounds until they are healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, use the instrument that heals according to what you have done in increasing the hip.
and this is the method of hot water, which I have written about in treating rectal medicine. Take alkali and live chalk, in equal amounts from each, and grind them together, and put them into a new pot. or if it has a small opening, slightly larger than the tip of a razor, so that it can be entered.
or if it has a small opening, slightly larger than the tip of a razor, so that it can be entered. and place this over the affected area, well-packed, and put it on an alkali and hot compress, gently pressing until there are two layers of powder above it in your hand.
and leave it thus until the heat and moisture have completely dissipated, or as much as it can be packed, then take all that heat and pour it into hot water on an alkali as before.
And thus, it will be very beneficial and useful in many medical emergencies and other cauterization of different members.
For it performs the same action as fire, and if combined with other medications such as heat, poultices, honey, anacardium, and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Gallien tells us of a cure for a noble who suffered from the pain of sciatica and stiffness in the back, and he said that no other remedy was used, and that the patient was completely healed just once when this treatment was applied, and he recommended bathing as follows...
And prepare it in this manner: you press and grind the fresh and dry galen (a medicinal substance) with a little fat, and apply it to the pained area on the shoulder, thigh, or leg, and bind it.
and leave it for three hours, or until the patient no longer feels the burn.
And then make him take a bath or a drink as long as the body is slightly warm, and make him lie down, and the pain will entirely disappear and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use fire cautery with such remedies, unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's fur, it helps greatly.
and the cautery must be done in this manner. Take lint and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the fossa between the big toe and the one called the hallux.
After taking dry goat's fur, ignite it with fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the wool, leaving it until it is stained.
and do this again, and do not cease doing so until you think by sense that it reaches the hamstring and the pain ceases.
and these kinds of cauterization are called "fire cautery".
Of the great pain in the back
When great pain comes to the back, whether from striking or pressure, or from excessive evacuation, or from some similar cold, expanding substance, none of these signs warrants cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
It is necessary that after the patient is relieved of putrid pills or other similar substances, that one makes three signs on their back, neck, or wherever the pain persists, with five cauterizations or more, according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
and the cauterizations should be made according to the cautery called "point".
and if you see, make three or four cauterizations at the middle of the bone according to this form:
This illness often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight and painful almond-shaped eye when they open it, and sorrow. and you feel in the last, lower back spine and in its appearance that comes upon the other spines.
When you see this and observe it healing, cauterize it with the cautery iron according to this form. The cautery should mark each part of the spine equally.
And if you see, cauterize around the spine with the cautery iron, making two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another.
After treatment, keep the limb as healthy as possible according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply heat to numb any nerve pain.
joint pain
When the joint pain is caused by moisture that spreads to each part of the body, and when a sharp pain comes on, they call it "podagra" properly speaking; and when it is due to cold and cannot be cured by medicine, then cautery is the cure in this manner:
Make the wound of cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary to prick on the face with a needle, make the cauterization all around with a claim of "no point. And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then he should cauterize each knee with three cauteries or four from each part, making every cautery olive-shaped.
and if you need to do more, do so, but do not hold your hand too tightly until the depth of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, apply the cautery as we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wound with two lines.
and if there is no pain in the joints, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part and give good care to the patient and take medicines.
For if you give good care and purge the flu, it will be healed by God's help.
When a rupture occurs in the thigh and the tendons descend to the knees, it is new, so it is important that when you see this, he does not move that leg for the day. and that he uses things which ease the stomach, so that the bowels descend from his stomach.
after making him lie on his back between your hands, and commanding him to keep his breath until the boils are healed, arrange them at your will, and seal each rupture on the bone of the wrist, and mark it in every place with a sign resembling half a circle above the body.
then heat the cautery with which there is this form:
as long as it is white and exudes scent. Then reset the bones to their place; and the healers should place their hands upon it so that they do not return to the previous state.
and open well the thighs of the patient, and place beneath him cushions and supports on the thighs, and others upon the feet which hold his hands.
then place the cautery upon the sign across your entire hand, and hold it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch the bone the first time, repeat this another time until you do. and guard carefully that the boil does not burst when you perform the cautery. so that you do not burn it; and that the patient does not die or suffer other ill effects.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and for adults also as large according to their measure.
after three days, cure the vein with butter until the burn is healed.
After treating other wounds until they are healed, place the patient on his back for forty days while ensuring the wound is well sealed.
and it is necessary that his movements be restricted for a long time, so that the boils do not appear when he moves around in bed.
And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, apply a well-made bandage and wear it for another forty days.
and have good rest, work little, and guard against excessive drinking and eating, and from too much loud noise.
and when he gives this instruction, he does so entirely sanely.
And I will now describe the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
When ruptures occur in other organs and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow any more, it is necessary to perform cauterization with cautery according to its quantity, and burn one-third of the wound. after the treatment according to what we have said;
and no of the ancients have said that one should cauterize with three-angled cautery according to this form:
but first mark the place of the hernia with a sign, and make a line across the width of the rupture; then another from above, and hold your hand steady over the entire area where the hot iron will be applied.
But the first cautery is lighter and more manageable.
of ancient pain in any member When pain arises in any member, whether from a fall or an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the cure of medicine is ineffective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery known as "point," and the cautery must be applied according to the length of the member and its smallness, and its weakness, and its strength, and its twist, and its location, and its pain.
If he is healthy after the first cautery, that is good.
If this does not help, start another cautery on the nearest limb, as it is usual for it to move and heal in that way; therefore, you must perform cauteries until the patient is healthy.
These ailments are never helped by cautery alone, especially the illness that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Can you cauterize it? Be careful if the disease is in the beginning and treat it according to what we have said in the previous discussion, without delay or hesitation, and if you doubt that the corruption might spread throughout the patient, then perform cauterization on the head. I cut off the tip of the nose, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows. and then on the two horns, and behind on the scalp.
and I allow the fire to burn until it reaches the bone, and until the skin peels away so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape.
and apply the cautery to the mouse according to what is before it.
And if the disorder is scattered everywhere; and it is evident that you need to apply these cauterizations that we have mentioned above, and cauterize the first one near the wound, and the second on the spine of the neck, and the sixth on the spine of the back, and the first on the thigh, and another delicate one, and the second on both shoulders. and the second on the sides, and the second on the tendons of the hand, and the first on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the pits of the hands.
and guard the nerves that are on the lower side, stepping on them, so you do not burn them.
and never perform cauterization on the bones of the fingers, or any other bones, such as those of the stomach, or the liver.
And know that the more cauterization is performed, the greater the aid, and the greater the benefit it brings.
and know that the patient feels no pain from cauterization as a healthy person would, because the body is already corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterization be great or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the ways of iron.
After treatment, apply flour of grains with honey and other remedies until it is healthy.
When swelling appears in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and bandages, but it does not heal completely, then one should perform cautery on the affected member according to its size and the severity of the condition.
and the cautery should be performed slightly inside the heart's chamber. then attend to the wounds until they are healed.
And one should never perform cautery on the hand, foot, or back, at the end of the nerve that supplies the member, and thus if the swelling is removed.
and nevertheless, no one should interfere if they are not knowledgeable about the members and the passages of the moving nerves in the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is ignited, and the medical arts are powerless against it, then cauterize with a hot iron, according to the extent of the pain, until the blanching is removed, and the color returns.
then apply a cure of meal and lentils with rose oil, plantain leaves, collicon (a herb) and alder bark, each in a portion. and mix it with everything, tie it with a cloth, and keep it elevated until it is healed.
The treatment of a ulcer (chancre) by cauterization.
When a ulcer appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle around the entire edge of the ulcer.
Yet wise ones say that cautery should also be done in the middle of the cancer.
However, this does not seem good to me, as I am afraid it might ulcerate and corrupt, and I have never seen it work before.
And the more correct thing is that it should be cauterized around, in the cautery called "circle," as we have said in many cauteries.
When anyone has a disease called "adubelati," and it takes time to die, either because of the excess it produces or due to the old age of the patient when they are weak (i.e., too much), and there is little blood, or because of the time; and you see it hasten to die: then cauterize around it with small cauteries by pricking; afterward leave it thus. Because it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing through all the cauterization, make the cautery so hot that this is its shape:
And place your hand in the midst of this ill-named 'adubelati' disease until the cauterizer has perceived the heart, and it is arranged as the cauterizer wishes, so that the patient feels freed in such a way that the course of the decay is halted.
After the cure, until it is perfectly healed.
Another type of disease is called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than a corruption of the limbs, as it attacks the members just as fire does the dry wood.
If you see this disease in a limb that can be treated with fire cautery, then heat the cautery instruments slightly and greatly, according to what is suitable for the limb or the illness.
After cauterizing all parts until you eliminate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, everything that is corrupted must be removed.
Then leave it for three days, and apply oil to the cauterized limb suffering from broying until all the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the treatment of wounds that cause pain.
And if after three days you see no sign of healing, that is good.
and if that is not the case, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the limb that has been corrupted.
And this dislocation is sometimes cured with hot medicines instead of fire cautery;
But nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already spoken about the treatment with hot medicines in the previous section. take as much as you need.
from the vessels that come as pieces Many times it happens that a piece due to deficiency develops a disease called "close" according to our intention, and it is a great fault that damages the foot.
And the treatment for this illness is according to two methods. This refers to fire cautery and hot water cautery.
For fire cautery, if you are skilled in it, it is like sewing with a needle, also as thin as a feather, and made of good iron to fit the size so that it can pierce the skin from all sides and have subtle edges.
After applying all heat to the nail, and turning your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it like this for three days until it begins to fester; then make a poultice of sage leaves ground with string, and leave the poultice on all night; the nail will come off and be pulled out from its roots.
Then treat the shoulder with a healing ointment, making it clean and sound.
And if they are burned by fire and many times occur in hands and feet, then it is necessary to apply a hot water cautery to them. and it is in this way: take a cane of iron or wood, or a feather from a pigeon, and place the nail and the glue, that is to say, the wart-removing paste. and place the cane around it so that it envelops everything, then apply a little hot ash, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while twisting until the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and can find the hot water channel all the way to the root.
and make the patient suffer a little the bite of hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will pull out at the roots entirely.
First, make one after another, until you straighten all those that are in the body, then treat the wounds that cause harm.
When anyone shivers from cold or trembles with quartan fever or any other illness, it is necessary that you make four cauterizations or five along the spine, one cauterization between each spine; and make one cauterization on the foot, and another on the stomach with an olive cautery;
if he lets it shake, and hastens the health of the cold disease.
Never is the body's health apparent through external baths or pus-filled blisters, which come from deeply corrupt materials.
it is necessary at first to know when they appear that we make cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery with hot charcoal, so that the point is taken to the fire, or with a long root of aristologus, or with lenticular cautery.
And under no circumstances should cautery be performed at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse in front, but it breaks the excess from which they come, and heals;
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there occur great complications from the blood of an artery that is cut during a wound, or at the complete healing, or during cauterization of a member, and similar things. and it is a very serious matter to stink.
And nevertheless, if it happens to anyone, be quick to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the pain is completely relieved from beneath your finger, and no more blood flows.
then apply to the fire various olive oil cauterizing tools, both small and large, until they are entirely red.
then take, according to the size of the wound and the location where the artery flows, either a large or small cauterizing tool, and place it on the vein where you hold your finger, keeping the cauterizing tool there until the blood stops flowing.
And if a sudden leap occurs while you are lying with your arm over the vein, and the cauterization is complete, then quickly take another cautery from the fire.
and do not stop doing this one after another until the blood stops flowing.
and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and ensure no further harm comes to the patient.
and know that when there is no bleeding from the artery, one cannot properly feel it, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have mentioned. or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tightly wrapping it with thread, or by medications applied that have the power to stop blood flow. and it becomes stiff and constricted.
Whoever administers relief to a tight closure with cloths or places burning objects or similar things on it, will not be successful unless he does it carefully.
And if this happens to anyone and they have no suitable medication, they should place their two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly compress it until blood stops flowing from the wound and the vein. and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often as it becomes very cold until the flesh is frozen and swollen and numb.
and make inquiries about those who need cautery and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter all about the diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and we have explained the reasons, instruments, and forms of cautery.
and I have placed this chapter on the most common problems, and I will follow the same way in this chapter so that you may find what you seek more easily.
And so, before we begin, it is necessary for you to know that this chapter involves greater risk and fear than the first one on cautery, and therefore requires more careful attention.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many ways of people come for cure. if they come from those who have become so accustomed to their illness that they die gently due to the severity of their condition and the magnitude of their suffering. and from these one must fear.
And of these there are those who give you their trust, and say: Wait, I am tired. and the illness is spiteful.
You should not agree to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your greed, and do not act rashly but wisely regarding what is certain to you, and what you can safely take and let go of.
and use divination and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is restored.
and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and lasting fame.
Most precious child, Our Lords give you good understanding and rectitude, and if you desire the holy inspiration from His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter for you, reflecting on chapters of surgery, according to the one that is before or at the end of the chapter on cautery, which I have devised from head to foot, so that you may find it easier to understand what you will need.
Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the head is squeezed too tightly.
and never comes from a known cause, as we do not know.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and to all those that I have seen, death has come quickly. and for this reason, it seems to me that I should abandon the work in part, regarding certain treatments.
And I saw children with their joints filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer be borne.
and the moisture was so great that it became death, and this moisture is gathered beneath the skin over the bone in the region of the heart and the bone.
and if the work is such that moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you must make a wide cut with your knife through the skull.
and it should be as long as the moisture runs.
and see here the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the openings of the skull's crevices clearly, and there is a sharp, strong pain when you press your hand inside, and it does not return: If you wish to cut into the head, make three incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture completely. After making the incisions, close them with bandages and powders, and then apply wine and oil, leaving it for up to five days.
then open it, treat the wound with bandages and compresses, and further dislocate the head equally, allowing the patient to eat dry meat from a bag of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another method of incision is to observe the size of the abscess and the collection of pus.
for never is she before; not once behind; never once on the right; and never once on the left.
Then cut open the abscess, and drain the pus, and make an opening according to your ability.
and be sure not to cover the artery; and draw out the blood flow with a smooth motion, so that the patient does not die from the sudden influx of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When someone has a condition called "cataract" in one or both eyes, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization by sealing the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you see them cover their eyes, that the patient turns his head back. after rubbing the affected area with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then carefully extract the patient's collar with all the cloth. then look at where the vein is located, and the joints on both sides are behind the ears, and they are properly repositioned.
then mark the joints with signs, then cut one and both with a sharp spatula, reaching as far as the bone, and this should be done from the wide end upwards.
And if you see, remove the spatule beneath the artery and cut through the covering above, cutting as it should go through.
And when the vein is cut, it bleeds continuously from above.
and if the artery does not open upon stimulation, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space with three fingers, then mark it with a sign and cut through to the bone.
and that one should put the cautery over the blood if it is six parts deep, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery.
then examine the wound: if it remains on the bone with a hard lump, and no abscess forms, then strain the wound and bind it, and apply treatment until it is clean.
from migraine headache When an old migraine headache occurs, accompanied by catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes and sockets, and ancient fatigue and similar symptoms, it is treated with various medical cures, but often without success. Therefore, we drain the arteries of the eyes and apply cautery, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient pulls out the hairs from his temples, and finds the artery that opens in the temple, as it opens well with its beating, and is hardly closed outside that no other men who are too weak can do.
and if it is reduced, the patient should pull on the collar with some cloth, then rub the joint with a rough cloth and immerse it in hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. then take the spatula with its shape: then scrape the skin lightly until you feel the artery, then hold it with pliers and remove all the threads that adhere to each part.
and if the artery is thin, return it to the tip of the hook and cut off that part according to the number of joints. For if it is not cut, it does not heal at all without pain.
And extract the blood from six vessels, up to three times.
and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you bind it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, to prevent any leakage before the wound heals, and to avoid further bleeding.
then cut off the excess between the two threads at that very moment, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a cutting cautery instrument up to the bone, as long as the chips are removed.
and this is the mother work, if the patient has fever and is of hot complexion. For cautery is helpful in ending moisture: because it is of greater help with moisture.
Or, for the extraction of arteries, it is appropriate to fill the wound with fine cotton and cover it with well-made bandages.
and when they are unbound, take care with dry medicines that produce heat and bandages, until it is healed.
and without any delay of the artery as you do it, if you hurry to cover with cautery, or you use the fire of vitriol and press it in your hand so that the wound is cleansed; and if you do not have this at hand, place cold water on the wound until it is frozen, and then apply hot water until the wound is healed, and press it as needed.
And it should have between the two knives a space of good size, and then when you have marked with a sign both sides, and put the hot iron onto until it reaches the bone, cut the vein in two places. and be separated between the two sides, for this cautery is not firmly attached in every way.
and this is the form of cautery:
and the more mobile and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery from both sides, but the cuts should be well spaced to retain their heat for longer. For when the instruments are too tight, they do not hold their heat.
tears When the tears from the eyes flow into the veins that are on top of the head, and no benefit is gained from the medicines applied there, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and smell a foul odor emanating from his forehead as if from a wound. and his face is warm and moist so that the hairs of the skin fall out, and the skin is dried, and scorched by the heat of tears, then there is need for this remedy. And they called it the "old cure," and what you do for the patient who has this condition is to let the hairs on their forehead grow, then make three cuts on the forehead evenly according to its length.
And they called it the "old cure," and what you do for the patient who has this condition is to let the hairs on their forehead grow, then make three cuts on the forehead evenly according to its length. and one of the cuts is also as deep as two others across the forehead, extending down to the nose, and the other two are made along the temples, above the skin, but be careful not to incise the arteries that are located on either side, above the skin.
and move your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and make each wound the quantity of three parts across the joints.
and take out a piece of sponge and cloth its edges to wipe the blood, then shape the sharp spatula with two parts from which this form is:
from the incision that is made on the forehead, up to the second incision; and scrape off all the skin that is between the two slits to the entire extent of the wound on the bone, then make another incision from this midpoint to the other second, and then extract the spatula forcefully. if you insert the instrument called "cultellaire" (a type of scalpel) into the first cut, it should be very sharp on one side and soft on the other; this is its shape:
and place the sharp side of the instrument towards the opposite edge (of the bone) and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle cut.
And cut all the veins that descend from the neck to the ends, so that the incision is continuous until it opens the heart, and then make another narrow cut until it reaches the other extreme.
and then extract the blood equally, and press the vein to express the blood taken.
then place a strip of wet cotton in each cut, and cover it with moistened cloth soaked in wine, oil, and linseed, and ensure that no abscesses form.
and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a strong poultice of hot water, then administer the basic cure with rose oil and other remedies to heal wounds, as long as he is healthy.
When there is acute catarrh habitually, and you see the thin and small veins, weakening sight, and burnt papers; and the hair turns gray, and the head aches painfully, and the patient sneezes; So you know from these accidents that these matters and this cleansing come only from many veins, and the moving cure that is in it, so is this.
And instruct the patient to bend his forehead backward, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another one quite wide. And begin from the crack in the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone. and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at the touch.
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood out with a sponge, and then separate the two edges of the crack and insert old cotton and wrap it with linen. then place them on moist cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot pus.
When it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until it begins to heal, then apply things that promote healing, which help in the process.
In the same manner: take two parts of rye flower and three parts of cologne, and make a paste. and administer these remedies to promote healing throughout.
From ear trauma
Everything that matters to the ears is one of the four things: or seeds, or animals, or minerals from the earth or similar things as it were done; or seeds, such as beans, peas; or fluid things, as water and air, and similar things.
If anything, such as a stone or any other object that does not adjust to the ear or grow in the ear, is inserted into the ear, it should be removed and the ear exposed to sunlight.
If you see a stone, and it distills any little drop of purple oil or oil of cloves, then it is time for extraction. and the cold causes sneezing, and it numbs the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and puts pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear. and stretches the ear upwards.
Many times, this treatment causes fever.
and if it does not come out, apply extraction with fine pincers, from which comes this form:
if it jumps out through the pincers, that is good;
if it does not, apply extraction with a fine, small-toothed instrument;
and if it still does not come out, make a hook with iron and twist the hook deeply into the ear canal or ear hole, and stuff soft wax around the hook so that the wind cannot enter through the hook; then take him to a skilled surgeon, for many times it comes about as we have said;
and if it does not come about in this way, then grasp it firmly with your hands and use any sharp instrument to do so, and place a bit of cotton around. then press the lump against the stone or something else, and treat it.
And if none of the things we have said work, then quickly split the ear in such a way that the abscess hardens and stops moving.
and the method of the cut is that you first dress the patient with the disease in the head, extract the blood according to its quality, then place the patient between your hands and return the ear to its place, and make a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat or tissue is attached. and make the cut as thin as a moon, until you reach the bone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it gently with your mouth.
and treat it while it is healthy.
And if there are grains that are embedded and they swell, then administer extraction.
and if it cannot be extracted, then administer the delicate scraping according to this form: and make an incision of that grain.
But do not attempt this if you think the grains are moist from earwax, as long as you have made many attempts.
then extract them with delicate tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
In the case that something has entered the ear, have the patient use a gentle sneeze, and open the ear with old cotton. And lie down on that same ear, or the water is inside. If she jumps through the fire, it is good.
if indeed you take many needles according to the length of your thumb, and hold them slightly warm over fire. and then place the patient in a pit or hole on his side, and try from another direction, and strike with another stone on the stone that is inside the ear. and continue to strike one stone with another until the blood completely flows out, and thus it will completely come out.
and if you see, take a thin strip, and insert one of the openings into the ear, and burn the other end over fire until the thinner strip is completely charred.
Then make other preparations from different joints until the pain completely disappears, as we said before.
When extracting a small creature, such as a tiny pest or similar thing, treat it as we described in the previous section.
but if it is large and can be felt, extract it with tweezers. and it is the easiest thing to remove, which is in the ear.
During the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on dealing with distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight. If no worms open, using delicate pincers, and if they do not open, take the cane from which their shape is thus revealed.
And it should be tight from below and wide from above. And insert the most delicate instrument into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suction along the entire cane. Do this often until all the wounds are healed.
And if they do not obey in coming out, cut around the wound with a cotton thread as I have said before.
and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in treating worm infections, and you will find them discussed under distillations.
and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using all these instruments, it will take the form as you see: And whether it is of silver or gold, make thin plates from small openings to distill above.
and to press the distillation down with a well-made silver instrument for this purpose, and if you see that it sticks, take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip carefully. then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medications in the cauldron, and place the cauldron in the ear.
then put the razor completely into the cotton and press your tempered hand until the oil is distilled or slightly from the ear. and he feels the patient within, and let there be distillations from fire so that they are heated by the flame just as one distills in the ear; and ensure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
From ear trauma
No child is born with any holes in their ears.
and the same thing happens to adults due to a wound or a foreign object in the ear, and this blockage never completely blocks the ear unless one can see it.
and never does there come a time when the wound is too deep, and the sight is good.
When, therefore, it comes to perfection, if one cannot see it, it is a great misfortune for the patient, and requires various remedies. And in this case, you must put the ear of the patient towards the sun. and look inside: if you see the swelling is evident, and the work has all these contours, then this is the shape:
And make incisions and cuts all around, both front and back, so that the ear is not damaged.
if the operation is from within or at the base of the ear, and you have fine tweezers, hold it gently and pull it slightly until the whole pin is extracted.
If the infection is completely within the ear, take a fine, sharp razor, heat it slightly over fire, and insert it into the ear.
If you feel the operation causing great pain in the ear, make a slight incision and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear.
then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the width of the opening, and dampen it with Egyptian ointment. Make no movement until the wound is healed, or take a cloth and soak it in rosewater, and sprinkle it with powder made from crushed vitriol.
and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you dry the cloth and use another moistened cloth made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone. then treat it as long as it is clean.
And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding, which include using distillation remedies.
Consider all those that come in papers when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you extend them with tweezers and pincers, and cut off a piece of its root with a spatula. Then place a hot glass (or 'vitriole' in Old French) on it.
And if, after removing the skin, you cauterize with a delicate lenticular heat, and the cauterizer moves after incision;
and often they heal, but nothing stays rooted in its place; and when they are cauterized with fire, their roots are burned and do not return.
(without context it's difficult to provide an accurate translation, but based Many times come to paper some things that seem gravely in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail," and it is a gathering of great moisture on the paper above and below. The work is as follows:
The work is as follows: take care that the hail is silent on both sides, and this is a light thing to know;
then make the cut deep, then peel gently from each part, then take them with pincers and cut.
if you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, then it will not harm the patient.
and if the fracture is large, and the assembly has a seam, treat it until it is healed.
and if it is small, do not apply too much strength, because the bruises will quickly restore themselves and cause pain.
And if the pain radiates downwards inside the ear towards the top, turn the paper in that direction, and use pliers to hold the ice, cutting and pressing on both sides.
and if the paper is separated by the incision, it causes no harm.
and when the pain is severe, leave the oil of salt water, and heal the wound of the one who suffers until the patient is well.
from the fat of the eyes Xerophthalmia is a fat that is deposited on the surfaces of papers, and this happens more often in children than in adults, causing them great suffering, leading to cataracts in the morning, and they cannot bear the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes.
and for this reason, they lay their face down and sleep on it, and their eyes become moist under their eyelids, which inflames and changes the appearance of the skin due to the oil. And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the exit between them.
And the method of this work is that the patient places his head in a healthy position;
and then take the linen cloth, and make a tent in a circular manner according to the quantity of each part's extirpation, and place it over them. and press with your hands on both sides so that the bone is brought together within the circle.
then make a groove in the middle of the moisture with a sharp scalpel, not wider than the wound made on a vein.
and cut the skin completely until you reach the bone. and from the groove, with various arrangements, pull out in the shape of a white fat piece.
Take a whole piece of cloth dipped in hot water between your fingers and turn your hand to the right and left as long as it is warm.
and ensure that you do not pry open the gap, that you reach all the way to the bottom without pressing too hard, and do not cause it to bleed.
And if the gap does not open at the beginning, gently widen it a little until it opens.
then pull it out as we have said, then moisten cloth with oil and water, place it on the joint, and stretch it gently.
And if there are such people who grind and apply something to corrupt the moisture that is stuck.
Then treat it as long as it remains healthy.
And if it comes to the hot abscess, treat it with external plasters soothing as long as it remains healthy.
hairs of paper When papers (hairs) grow in an abnormal way and become tangled, they are just as harmful, causing conditions like normal tears and soft or flaky skin, due to the damage done to the hair itself.
and the treatment is according to four methods: or by cauterization with fire, or by using remedies according to the condition presented, or chapter on cauterization, and it is performed by incision and stitching, or by bindings, as I will explain.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your hands, then turn the paper from the oil to your left hand.
if it turns out well, that is good. if no, then push an needle through all the thread above it. and it should be smooth along the edge of the paper where the hairs grow, and pull the thread through all the paper, and turn it to the razor.
Then, peeling off the skin from the affected area, separate the hairs, gently pulling them from the base, all the way to the tip, from the great tear to the small.
Then, extract the thread and place a small piece of cotton and linen paper underneath it, then trace on the paper an enche shape (a type of hook), similar to a mirte leaf, and ensure that the shape is according to the quantity you see the paper rise to.
And if at that part where the skill is, much paper is needed according to how soft the paper is.
then make incisions across the entire split at the marked places on both lines, beginning with a large tear from above to below. and it should be one of the splits near the natural hairs, making it as thick as a root, then turn the hook in one of the two angles towards the heart, and then peel it entirely.
then join the two lips with a stitch using a thin needle and thread, wipe away the blood, and remove any excess thread from between the two edges without anything sticky, if you are able to do this.
and if this does not help, then after leaving the stitching and threads for three or four days, or even longer.
then treat the wound without stitching or restrictive bandages, for the paper (or dressing) renews itself with the healing of the wound and its gathering, but stitching is moved (as the ancients said), and this causes pain without benefit. and if in another way:
and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is similar to the shape of a mirror, as we have described, at three points according to the form that is here:
Then take those who are weak and equalize their small forces according to this form:
And if you cannot hold the pincers steady, and the task is not even, take a needle where there is thread, and wrap it around the object. and wrap another thread around the larger tear, and the second thread around the smaller one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers.
then gently hold your hand equally, and press all the skin where you have marked it, as we have said, then sew together both edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with wax and similar remedies that soothe.
and never does it happen that the paper's fibers are changed.
it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision;
but stitching on one side and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of dogs is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and make it inside according to what I have said, and then make two strips with skill, also as long and wide as the paper with a delicate tool. and cut as well the parts where you hold the threads;
then carefully join the two parts together over the paper from the oil, and strain the two strips from the two parts formed. and leave it thus for several days, and the skin that is strained will die and contract and heal, as long as it remains in place.
If it's delayed, if the patient has any strength, then treat it while he is healthy;
and if the wound is deep and fresh, and when it is opened, the papers (scab) are lifted, and the hairs do not grow back.
and this is the shape of the two lines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
the work involves piercing with a fine needle and threading it with soft and delicate silk thread; then gather the joints and gently join them together, so that the length of the bones is a palm's length.
then arrange in the wound another fine thread of silk briefly, and join the ends delicately with the main thread.
then place the patient's head in a healthy position.
and make the sun shine through so that the work is revealed, for it is a delicate and small task. Then insert the needle throughout the wound at the root of the hair gently, piercing the paper-thin skin until you reach the natural hair below.
then extract the hair right up to the root, and push the hair back into the root if there is one or two or three or more;
then extend your hand until the hairs come out completely from the root in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the root is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then pull on the root from inside out until the whole thread that you had ordered comes out, as long as the root comes out completely through the opening above and you see it with the eye's vision.
Then take the hook and thread, and close the wound with oil and leave it for two or three days until the hair grows back in its place and the scar heals.
and if the hairs are small, accompany them with the long hairs of natural growth, and raise it with that or leave it until it elongates and then remove it.
regarding the impurity of oil When this disease called "aleacrati" or putrefaction occurs in the oil, it has two manners:
One naturally, and the other unnaturally.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
And the method of working on it is that you split that suture, separate the lips, and place cloth inside, binding it until it is healed.
and it is not advisable that you use things that dry and constrict in the treatment of it. For if you do that, the illness will return worse than before;
but I work with softening substances, such as fennel. and the rosewater of water or linseed, cooked, and the diaquiled onions melted in either oil, and it envelops a bandage, and the treatment of this.
And the true treasure of your cure is that you take care not to let it harden according to its former shape.
and these works that we have spoken are not only remedies for this illness, but also to prevent it from returning in the same form as before.
This illness which is dislocation, truly called "axacrati," is both natural and accidental.
The accident arises from wounds, cuts, cautery, and similar things;
and the path to success in it is such that if you press an needle, having a double thread, and insert it into the skin, starting from the left tear (i.e., side), so that the thread comes out on the right side of the skin;
then the skin is pulled tight over the entire needle, and the flap at the incision site is wide. And if the shape of the paper returns to what is appropriate, it is good.
If this is not done, take a razor and place it in the split, turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side inside the paper.
and let the seeds of the two cuts be at the two corners of the incision you have made, and make them form an angle so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the letter 'I Greek'.
then cut this one, according to the thickness of its edges, from the paper, then adjust the two parts and sew them with a thread of wool.
then apply the treatment of those things we have spoken of regarding soft and gentle medicines, as long as he is healthy.
And if the illness comes from a wound or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a clean cut beneath the skin and paper-like hairs, following what has been said above. then separate between the two parts of a tent, as I have said;
then separate between the two parts of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters have devised various means by which they can restore the natural shape.
and instruct the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the operation and using various instruments in different positions.
When this suture is done by untrained hands in such a way that the paper (bandage) on top is smooth with oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it slightly.
and stretch it as if using pincers, while you carefully do what is necessary with a very thin spatula, not too sharp or too blunt, so that the patient does not suffer from the overly sharp spatula and it does not cut through the oil.
and let your cut, which you make on the affected part, be light, so that the skin regains its natural shape.
and it becomes healthy, and never form pus in the infected part, nor create an abscess of foul-smelling water, or a swell of clear water, or a collar.
then place a thin linen cloth between the paper and the oil, and put over the oil a generous amount of damp wool. and after the third day, apply hot compresses and suds until it is healed.
You know that the nail is according to two manners: it is nervous and appears hard and dry, and another that is not nervous at all, but appears like white, frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and treated with forceps, cannot be moved by anyone.
and both appearances begin towards the great lacrimal gland, growing smaller and smaller until they cover all vision and all light and the movements of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient places his head on the healthy side, then opens them (the eyes). and hold the paper in your hand, then bend the finger like a small pincers, and stretch it above. then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or a goose feather, or ox hair, and tie it tightly. and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it through the nail, pushing it all the way through the nail bed, and tie the nail with the thread, stretching it above. And scrape along the side of the nail close to the skin using a thin, sharp tool, removing only enough to prevent the nail from splitting or breaking as it grows back naturally, without causing the skin to bleed excessively.
and never extend the nails to the wound only, and with thread, as we have said; then the skin is peeled from the entire soft part, which takes the shape of:
and ensure that the soft part does not touch the tender flesh and damage it, and that the instrument is not pierced.
and after the incision, pour a little of this powder into the wound, and then apply a collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then attend to what is necessary until it is healthy.
And if the nail is not connected to a nerve and you cannot push the needle through it, the hooks cannot enter. Often, this appearance of a nail requires treatment with medicine.
and they grow as I have described in the dissection; and if you see it covering, open gently the wound of the afflicted person, and take a light spatula according to this form. And carefully remove the nail from above, and if you see that it becomes softer and the pain subsides, distill this mixture into a collar made of lithargyrum (a type of sulfur) and red dye, and apply the oil to the wound for the next day.
If nothing contradicts you about the oil, such as a hot abscess, then apply it, and treat first the hot abscess until it is healed, and then continue the work as before, until it is completely cured.
then begin the other task according to this same work, until it is entirely healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the wound causes great harm in the eye over time, if you suspend it at the point and cut off only a part, not all of it, then the watering (or irritation) will cease.
then distill into the eye a red collar made of litharge.
Some people's eyes never turn red, and they cover the pupil and rest on papers and turn them into ashes, resembling a rose of balsam.
and the work is such that the patient places his head on the healthy one, then opens them, and applies all the tools suitable to it, and holds it firmly with strength.
then take the first tool, and go all the way to the end with it, always being careful not to harm the patient during the procedure.
and let the incision be delicate, as we have said in the incision of a fingernail and with small forces, removing the nail gently, as the shape after this chapter demonstrates.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh cut away, apply oil from crushed silk or distil a red collaret and similar corrosive medicines, and place on top of it cotton soaked in hot water to ensure the abscess is hot.
and if it does not move and the fever rises, and you doubt a hot abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for a hot abscess.
then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make cuts aligned with this method in the oil by this appearance.
But nonetheless, it is necessary that you pay attention to each weak part of the natural path. and of the accidental path, in the work of doing.
and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb suffers from that work.
These are the red veins that are covered over the eye, and they steal from the sight their work and weaken the eye every day.
Skill is therefore given to the first that you look at, in which it is swollen, hard, and there is no other disease outside of the swelling. Then tie it in this manner:
instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position, then suspend the veins at every point according to their knowledge, and let the veins be thin and double according to this form.
And there should be two incisions according to degrees in the body following this form:
then tie these veins gently, and let the blood flow hour after hour, until you see the veins disappear from the flesh.
and be careful not to puncture the skin with the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you only remove the veins.
and once you have done this, distill the green and red collyrim oil to corrupt that which is delayed in the socket.
And if you cannot gather all of these in that hour, make a poultice over the oil with soothing things for the pain of the joints, and leave it for no days until the pain is soothed and assured from the hot abscess, then continue in this manner as before until it is healed.
and this is the form of the forces:
They call these "arrested" fistules:
As you treat it with cautery and medicine for the burning pain as I mentioned earlier, and it does not heal, there is a danger in cutting into the abscess where he must die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then take all the instruments mentioned here to shape it.
It is called an "aspire chisel", and it should be made of iron from the root to the tip, and pointed like a limet in the present shape.
And place the corrupt bone back into its original position, then twist it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you know that corruption is healed.
and do this once, then return the position with drying medicinal herbs.
if the bones are fused together, and it grows, and the bowel's opening is fused, and remains like this for forty days, and does not renew or become abscessed, and no bad accidents come, then know that it is healed.
If there is no other device to bring the fistula back to the opening of the wound according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone a second time by iron or by aggressive medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the cautery as follows, and let the tip of the iron be at a 30-degree angle, and make it thin up to the top as you see here:
then place it on the damaged bone above the artery, and move your hand away from the wound, then return to the whole cautery until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels the pain because of this if he holds his hand on his wound.
and then restore the joint with dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the pain subsides and hardens the joints, then see the matter in the fresh air. if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
When the joints open widely and cause no disturbance or reduction in respiration, it is necessary to keep the patient still.
then apply health-giving poultices or leeches without causing harm to suck the blood, then place oil made from fennel and aloe and incense and dragon's blood on it, and then strain the oil and apply it over bandages and cloth.
and the way of the bandages is such that you press on soft bandages, doubling them each three times, and then place one upon another according to the need of each.
then stretch from above with a firm bandage, and restart the suction cups to suck without hurting;
then remove the suction cups and leave the stretch for day and night, and if it becomes too tight, you must gently pull to adjust.
then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see that it has healed well, that is good.
If this is not; If the plaster, bandages, and bindings are re-applied and the suction cups are removed while the wound is healthy.
loss of fabric integrity When the wound cloth is removed, it opens up and there comes out something like grains of resin, which is hopeful to see.
then if you see it covered, the work is such that you pierce a needle into the root of the lower part just above this one, then pierce another needle where there is a double thread from the upper part of the wound. and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement;
then cut the skin with a thread of double thread and tie one part of the eyelid around it, tightening it well, then extract the needle and apply another oil, moistened in abundance;
and leave it until the thread disintegrates with the eyelid, then apply oil with comforting substances until the wound is healed;
and the wound should never be restrained by the eyelid in any way, as long as it is healed.
And if the joint appears to be well-formed, pierce it with a fine instrument that comes from oil, and drive out the white moisture of the joint, and immediately enter within.
then extract it as long as it is healthy.
This illness called "alcunnati" is only characterized by moisture collected in the oil, appearing like sharp descent, but it is not sharp.
and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit up straight, then take the head in both hands, and move it until you see the moisture rising towards your joints. Then it should be firmly fixed, and let no light descend or become dim, and the sick person will see things as they once were.
and if the light does not descend, know that it is acute, and if the bowel's descent is not equipped as we have said.
if you delay the sick person between your hands, then take the delicate spatula and make incisions on the cornea cloth in the form of a circle along the continuity of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, while the bowel is still present.
and when it is separated, it should be distilled in hot honey or a mixture of honey and mint, or boiled water with fennel, then treated with another remedy until it is cured.
The phrase "des aigues de loil" translates directly to "of the waters We have similar waters in the division, and what is necessary to pierce. if it is done according to health.
You should place the patient between your crossed hands away from direct light for the sun, and tie healthy oil firmly to them.
then place the paper from oil in your left hand if the joints are on the left, or in your right hand if the joints are on the right.
then, in your right hand if the joints are on the left, take the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand if the joints are on the right.
then, using the tip of the instrument, remove the crust along its thickness from the outermost part towards the inner corner of the eye, then press the instrument called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand until it pierces the membrane of the oil and you feel that "almagda" reaches the empty space.
and it is necessary that the measure of the magical path be exactly equal to the measure of the space from the tip of the plum to the end of the darkness. and this is the crown of the oil;
if you will see the bone on this paper due to the clarity of the corny fabric, then place the instrument nearby or where the water is, and then press it from one way to another.
If he lowers himself now, let him see the patient before him and the instrument in his hand.
After resting, let the small one, and then the water climbs up the second way, place the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly stuck and does not rise, gently extract the magical matter by turning your hand back and forth.
and then put back in place a little piece of silk string, and remove from these the oil inside. Then apply hot oil or any other moist oil (roses) and an abundance of heat, and wrap it with healthy oil.
We, and those of our time, place a fine, new bandage with abundance of egg.
And if the foreign body cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are many people with very hard eyelids, it is necessary that you press the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
And then pierce only the outer joint, and do not cut too deep, but make it subtle, then apply almagd, as we have said.
and upon completion of the work, prepare for the patient a comfortable bed, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark place.
and he should be restricted from all movements, and given light foods, and not move his head to the right or left, and be bound according to his condition for up to three days.
then loosen it in the same dark place, test its vision, and make it see nothing, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day.
and it is not advisable that you do this during the treatment or after the incision now, but rather you should lighten it, because the sharp pain has increased severely.
if abscesses occur, that you loosen the bandage before the seventh day and apply the remedies for the healed abscess.
and when it is calmed, loosen the vision and place a side on his face to cover any light, and be in that dark house again.
Then he goes out of the house little by little and returns to his usual self.
and knows that no disciple should intervene in this case. And one came to us from the East who told us that in their peaceful lands, they made an instrument which sucked out water, but I never saw one in our land, nor do I read about it in the books of the ancients. and by chance, this is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the shapes of magic, because whoever does not know them will see them differently.
and let them be of gold properly: And let the front of this same subtlety be sharp, and the rear in three acute angles.
No creature ever born or formed with diverse joints will have any that seem like scorpions in their multitude.
and if it has such as it has been charmed with bright colors, and if the hair is soft and of good color. In this case where the wound is sore and not yet healed, it is necessary that you make the patient rest between your hands facing the sun.
In this case where the wound is sore and not yet healed, it is necessary that you make the patient rest between your hands facing the sun. and open the patient's nostrils, and pour the liquid into those wounds, and treat them vigorously. then hold what you can sustain of the thin, sharp spatula on one side, as long as you know that the wound is entirely opened.
And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open it completely with all the delicate, light instruments, so that nothing remains. and without stirring or moving, you must clean the abscess as it should be;
and if these are malignant abscesses, act swiftly and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the channels are closed; then apply new, clean, and cool compresses with wine or vinegar. If the new wound opens and moisture reaches the palate, knowing it is healthy;
and if the moisture does not open as it should, knowing there is a channel in the bone above, preventing the tools from cutting.
Then you must insert a thread slightly thick, and be careful with your hands, and leave enough space between each one, either more or less. and place the patient's feet with the thread in their armpits, and rub them gently until the thread comes out through the armpit into the mouth.
and often children learn this practice, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to do so.
then hold the head that comes through the armpit in one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth in the other hand, and pass them back and forth as we are doing with thread.
Do as you know, corrupt the new wound, then treat the child, wipe away the blood, and moisten the wound with Egyptian ointment, and then put it back to its place as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is left from the wound.
and then put a bandage around the neck for no more than days until it is healed, and if it needs dry medicines, use them.
and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, from which the oils and medicines are distilled:
and it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a candlestick, and lead it thither.
and if you make a closed candlestick, then it is the instrument to purge the head;
and it should have many parts attached to the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
Of the pain near the nose
Many times a disease appears on the head due to a condition called "telul," it grows and becomes great over time, as long as it is visible to the eye.
and for this reason, it is necessary that you grasp it firmly at the beginning, completely remove it, and then apply the hot cautery or burning medicine.
and if it is not treated quickly while it is still small, take care if it becomes hard, of a dark color, or lacks sensation.
do not touch it with iron, as it is an abscess that has grown worse, for when you remove it, great harm comes to the patient.
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not filled with pus, and you can completely cover it, if the patient allows and treats it without fear, it heals the limb by drying and restraining.
Know that when the continuation of one of these powerful cartilages is broken, it benefits no one.
One should therefore pay attention so that this does not happen to anyone, if you consider whether the wound is fresh and filled with blood. and then adjust the two edges with a stitch, then treat it until it is healed.
and if the lips are loose on both sides, it is necessary that you burn all parts of their edges until they heal, then adjust the two edges with a stitch and tighten them, and apply powdered dragon's blood and incense dust. and place a piece of plaster, strong or otherwise, over it and leave it until the pain disappears, then apply a healing treatment until it is healed.
The method of stitching is such that you join the pieces together: or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
abscesses of the lips
At home, there often appear hard abscesses on the lips, resembling small stones, both large and small.
then you must turn the lips and make a cut on each one, and take them with tweezers and remove them from each part.
then apply the hot (vitriole, a type of sulfuric acid) to the wound until the sight is cleared.
and then the cold (air) from the silk, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healed.
Many times a swelling appears on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus".
It is necessary that you hold it with pincers, cut off the root, and let the pus or blood flow out.
then place on it vitriol powder, or other powders that constrict and dry up.
and if it returns after the incision, this happens many times, if the pus comes out a second time, and then cauterize. if it does not return after the cautery;
Never should they be assembled at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, those scars that are ugly and rough; and never should the tooth be black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption comes to the gums, and it smells bad;
If you want that you make the patient rest in your hands, and his limbs are at ease in yours, and remove any bones or scabs that are protruding, until nothing remains. and do the same for blackness and greenness, jaundice and other colors, as long as they are fresh.
and if what is at the root of the problem is removed, it is good. if not, then return to reading the second and third times, until everything is removed.
and know that the tooth requires different shapes of instruments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the plier used to pull out the teeth has a different shape than that used between the teeth. and these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
When treating a tooth causing pain, it is important to take your time and apply gentle pressure as much as possible, for no one should ever use excessive force. because it is a very sticky substance, so there should be no excuse for pulling.
Then, when the patient is constrained from drawing out the tooth, it is necessary that you be certain about which tooth is painful. Many times the patient suffers great pain, and believes it is from a tooth or gum issue, and has the good tooth pulled. but the pain does not cease for them until the evil is removed, as we have already tried this on our patients.
and when you are well certain of the painful tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to remove all the gums from all sides;
then move it with your fingers or subtle pliers bit by bit, as long as it is well dislocated, then firmly hold the pliers. and place the patient's dislocated joint in your holy hands between the knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take none of these instruments and press it gently from every side, and move it as you have done before.
If the bone is broken and fractured, it is necessary to fill the space with cloth, either in the wound or the gap. and if it is tightly grasped with pliers, do not force it so that it does not break.
and it is necessary to carefully cut around the gum to extract the tooth.
Take good care so as not to break it, and if a piece remains, return it to the patient; by the evil of its root, he will suffer greater pain than before.
And be wary that you do not act like the ignorant healers who, through their haste and boldness, break the healing process each time, and do not follow what we have described.
but they bring about this great disease through the moisture that lingers or through the damage they cause to the joints, just as we have often seen.
and when the swelling is severe, wash the affected area with wine or ash and silk.
and the inflammation of blood, which often occurs, can be alleviated by applying the juice of broken glass.
and if this does not help, then cauterize him.
The instruments should have long, sharp points and thick handles so that they do not bend when pulling the tooth.
and these are the shapes: And they should be large members so that they do not bend when pulled, and made of iron well-forged, and toothed for proper movement.
from the root of the teeth When the root persists during extraction, it is necessary to place a piece of moist cotton or butter on it for one or two days until the tooth becomes loosened. Then, use the pliers called "algefri," which resemble a care-full hook.
and they should be made as smooth as a lime and this is its shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out of these grips, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called "altali," that is, a plier, which has this form:
and it should be firm and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out, that is good.
if not, with all the instruments, whose forms come as follows:
And if one uses this instrument with two prongs, its form is: and other instruments that are used in the treatment of teeth, and this tool that resembles large pincers, whose form is as follows:
and this instrument should be strong so that it does not break, and remember that many instruments from within are. and also of other instruments, which are not mentioned;
and the most skilled surgeons cleverly create their own instruments, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are many diseases where the ancients did not teach any instruments due to their diversity; and if they break a bone or a fragment, or it splinters, and they seek the instruments that they need, as I have told you, and are aided by gestures, this is how the form is:
and they should be large and well-holding for holding the bone, that it does not escape, but can hold and remove;
and then restore the proper use of medicine suitable to it, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, even if it is small, remove it with all these instruments.
When the tooth does not appear according to the natural course of growth, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the other teeth, and is not in the proper place, and cannot be filed or polished.
then the extraction. and if it is stuck with a tooth, takes this instrument whose form is as follows, resembling a small beak, and made of sharp iron in all parts.
And the dentist should work slowly and carefully with his hands for the pain of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it from one side as the shape allows.
and it is also like the lime used to make needles;
and with the lime, gently tap the tooth with your finger several times, so that it does not move until it is ready to come out.
then in the end, it has no rasping edge, and its density cuts too deeply and damages the tongue; so you must smooth out the roughness until it is even, so that it does not damage or impair speech.
When the tooth aches, either by striking or pulling, and the patient cannot bite down without pain, he can be cured with restrictive medications, but that is of no use.
if they need to restrain it with a golden thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes.
and the thread should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the amount of space between the teeth.
and if you need to align the teeth, take the thread and wrap it around the two healthy teeth twice, then place the pieces between the loose teeth, as many as there are, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side firmly. then begin to cover again just up to the part where you apply pressure, and gently yet firmly hold your hand in place until it does not move.
and make sure your finger is at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Then cut the pieces of thread with pliers, assemble them, and insert them between the healthy tooth and the one with the cavity so it does not damage the tongue.
and then leave it as tight as it can be for as long as possible, and if it loosens, the threads will break, unless held by another thread.
if it could stay put and serve thus all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the correct placement of the two healthy teeth, and the two jaws, as you see:
And when the tooth is dislodged, it should be carefully reset in its place, fresh by fresh, as we have said.
and do not attempt this unless you are skilled and patient; never form it like a bone tooth, but place it in the missing spot, holding it as we have said, and letting it stay thus for a long time.
No such bonds come from beneath the tongue or nature, but thus we are born. or due to an accidental deep wound;
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient with pain, and hold his head in your hands, and gently extract the tongue;
then cut the large nerve tie, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or other, and it is a sudden wound, if it pulls the hook and cuts widely that tie.
and ensure that the cut is not too deep, for the artery below.
once you have done that, raise the limb with hot water and ash, or cold water, then apply a compress of linen below the tongue.
and every night, apply this mixture to the patient, so that the limb cannot heal.
and if a fever develops, apply a compress of crushed vitriol to the limb. and if it does not heal, if cauterized with a slow-acting cautery, which is good. then apply another treatment as long as it is healed.
and if you see it is red or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
and if it turns pale and there is moisture, cut the tumor with a sharp instrument, and free it from both sides. and if it does not leave your work, dip it in vinegar until it is stained, then return to your task while you treat everything thoroughly.
then lift the limb from rest and silence, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
from the abscesses of the throat Sometimes a condition enters the throat called "godath", which is properly known as the "two mandrels", and when you treat them, as we have said in the previous discussion, if they remain unhealthy, be careful.
If it is an abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the discharge of pus. but leave it until it is dry, and then you will remove it, or it would break on its own.
and if it is of white color with thin roots, then have the instrument ready to cover it, but first ensure that the abscess is calm and at ease.
Then make the patient wait before the sun, and his feet should be in good condition, and open the mouth, and press the tongue down with the instrument between his hands, pressing it against the whole tool, from which this form is derived.
and be of silver or subtle gold as well as our knives:
You cannot press the tongue against all of this tool, and you see the abscess, so take the awl and the file, and insert them into the flesh, pulling upwards more than you can.
and do not attempt to extract anything from the wounds with it, then cut with the instrument, which forms a shape that resembles strength. but nevertheless the instrument bends this way and that, and it is very sharp, made of iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if it is like pincers, thus is its form: and it has incisions on one side and no incisions on the other.
and when you have cut one of the tendons, cut the other in the same way, and after the incision, rinse the patient's wound with hot water and cold, clear water, and it is necessary to gargle the patient with these waters or with extracts from pomegranates cooked with cinnamon or mulberry leaves and similar things, until the blood stops. then apply the cure as long as he is healthy;
and never does any other abscess form in the throat than the two mandibles, so cut them as you would the two mandibles.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was formed inside her throat, namely a small abscess.
and had a lot of pus closed in the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could not eat or drink, and would have died if left that way for one or two days.
And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed two ribs through the two openings in the throat where it entered.
I have often hastened to do so, and inserted a point into one place, then drove it through, and pulled out a great portion of bowel.
then I did the same thing on the other side of the opening, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue.
after inserting the point into these abscesses, and taking out a portion, I did not pull out much blood. and thus the throat of the woman was opened, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting this abscess for a long time.
and it makes the abscess heal again, and fills the cavity that I had emptied, as long as it was very large.
then I designed and cauterized it inside the throat: so it delays feeling better;
and I left these parts behind, and only God becomes of them after me.
from the eye
When the eye returns to its socket, and it is swollen and distant, it is called "perpendicular".
and if it is detached, thick, and round, it is called "uve".
When it is treated as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess is calm, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to drain it.
and that is round and not long. and it is red or of a dark color, then it is necessary to be careful with the incision. For there is great danger for the sick person.
It is necessary, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, of cleansing and lengthening, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we spoke earlier. then insert the hook into the eye and remove it from the inside, and cut with the second instrument that I spoke of for incising the two mandras.
and it is necessary that you do not cut off more than the excess beyond the natural limit.
because if you do not take care, it will cause distress to the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use the same method we described for incising the two glands, and dress it as long as it is clean.
And if the patient suffers from great pain, it is necessary that you use an instrument for cauterization to alleviate the sensitive pain.
The method of cauterization must be sharp and quick. And it is that the patient places his head on a healthy surface, and then presses the tongue with the instrument described in the chapter on cautery (fire treatment), using a hot compress, not too thick or too thin. and using the care of this instrument, which forms thus:
And let there be a clever person with a beard, who puts on the medicine as if it were the handle of a spoon, and places the instrument over all the medicine on the eye.
and the patient should lie on their side, so that the saliva and mucus from their mouth flows out of the medicine into their throat, soothing it.
then take your hand and press the medicine onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it cease to sting and the pain from the medicine is soothed.
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, dampen the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument completely into the wound over the cotton until the cotton is saturated with blood.
and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and after three or four days, remove it.
And if you need to redo the cauterization with the medicine, when you redo it, after the cauterization, wipe around the wound with cotton soaked in butter and change anything that is around the medicine.
and it is raised from cold water, and it is cured with gargles as long as it is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision, rather than cauterization.
if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take plenty of salt and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and similar herbs, and combine them all in a pot or some of them, and put it on the fire and boil;
and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and attached to the pot is a handle according to this method: And whether it is of silver or gold, and if one of the joints is squeezed into the mouth of the patient with pain, until the vapour rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye becomes numb.
after the recurrence often, while the eye is dry, be sure not to do this at the beginning of the formation of the abscess, as many things may occur. and do not make any movements except during the decline of the hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a canal and insert a piece of cloth into the mouth of the patient, so that it is not too hot. Because the heat of fire does not allow moisture to collect in the mouth, and this is a good cure that brings overall health.
Often there is a burning sensation in the throat from bone or fish spine, or any other thing;
so it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing move.
and if it does not open and is withdrawn into the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit so that the food in the stomach is cooked. perhaps if the thing turns around by vomiting;
or the patients swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval (stringy part of an apple), or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and it swallows the sponge string, and then spits it out; and when it comes back to its place, if it swells up, then pull gently;
and if it does not come from what we have said, take a plunger tool according to this form:
and let the tool be curved at the end if it can more easily enter the throat, and hold the head slightly raised. and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so that it does not come out, and do not push the bone inside.
and it is necessary that the patient pushes the tool, because he should move it or the thing is open. if the bottle goes down, where it is pulled out with all tools equally, as long as it comes out completely.
of the throat
Never should medicine be applied without reason, as I said in the previous section, through the treatment of medicines; and if it does not benefit, then look in the throat of the patient suffering from disease in sunlight, and press their tongue with the tool I have told you;
And if you see the vein, draw it out with all its tiny hooks, or subtle pincers that are fit for this.
And if that does not work, take a horsehair rope and tie it around the throat of the patient, then slowly tighten or loosen the rope until the vein heats up and this is done often. And if the patient is filled with water all day.
then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in, moving the tongue with your hand often. and if at once he feels the cold water, then quiet.
And if it does not quiet down as we have said, then smoke the patient with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
do this many times, for it will loosen without target.
And the method of fumigation is that you light a pot with hot coals, and place it over an open dish in the middle, and through this opening, the instrument's thread will emerge.
then he applies the fumigation, and the patient puts the cane's end in his mouth, and closes it tightly, so that no smoke escapes but only reaches up to his nose.
and now the nose will bleed, and if it does not stop, the fumigation should be repeated several times.
and the patient suffers from thirst, eats salty and bitter things, but does not drink water.
and then he/she must be less concerned about speaking or moving under this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it is possible to see it, resembles curved pincers designed to enter the throat. and it resembles the beak of a curlew, and has the roughness of lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go.
Many appearances of abscesses are, according to the memory that comes to mind after reading this book, and they vary in piercing and sizing.
and this is in two ways; one is in its own image, and of those that hold moisture.
And the second method is for the joints where they are in the body.
For the abscess of the upper part is different from that of the lower, and the abscess of the fleshy part of the shoulder is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if an abscess is not to be pierced until the bowel is entirely dried up according to its completion.
and if they are such that it is necessary to pierce them when they are dried out and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses that are located in the joints.
For when abscesses come from damaged joints, and they are left as they are until the pus is drained, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, leading to contraction in that member.
Or the abscess is located in the main limb, and if you delay piercing until it is entirely dried up, it will harm the principal limb.
if it is possible to remove the source, so that it does not harm any further;
and it is not advisable that you pierce an abscess without first completing the healing process, lest, after removing the source, it becomes infected inside and develops a fistula. and will not heal completely.
And it is important that you know the appropriate time for piercing an abscess when it is completely healed, and this is when the pain has subsided, the fever has disappeared, there is a reduction in pain and swelling, and the abscess head becomes softer and smoother.
and it is necessary that you make the piercing sit more dependent on the abscess, where it opens movement.
and the piercing should be as long as the skin, and if the abscess is in the hand or foot, or in the joints and tendons and arteries, and everywhere it is even where there is no curvature. When these swellings occur, according to that member.
And when there are abscesses in soft flesh, it is better to let the incision heal completely before moving it, as we have said.
For if you pierce it in front of that, the skin will be stretched with the blood from it, and is filled with much filth. and by chance they harden the lips and deepen the wound within him.
And if an abscess is pierced according to the thickness of the flesh and the part that the member needs.
and it is necessary that you make small incisions, small openings; and in large incisions, large openings, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess;
and if at such abscesses it is necessary to press the heart, and cover; when it has become as dry as cloth, and is numb, then it needs to be treated like blisters.
and if they are split in three angles, and if there are such as one copes with also like the fleece of mint, as abscesses from arrows.
and if there are such as one makes a round incision of various sizes and shapes.
Those that have no head, like a soft, superficial abscess, it is necessary to pierce them deeply.
and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has a strong bow, and you pierce it, if you cannot draw out all the bow in that moment, but only part of it. then cauterize the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing from it. do this many times, gradually, until the bow completely draws out.
most often the patients are of weak constitution, or pregnant women, or very young children, or old and frail nobles. For often the patient will jump with the release of the pus, and by chance might die, and you will not notice.
Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if the wound has drained, and observe whether the wound of the abscess is small. and if it is a deep wound, then apply these attempts with linen or fresh cotton. and if it is a large abscess with many openings, then you must insert a tent in each so that they meet.
and if you have removed a portion of hard skin around the abscess and it remains open, then you should fill it with old cotton or dried linen rags without moisture, and bind it for three days.
then the bone, and the treatment of healing as long as it is healed.
And if the progression of blood occurs in your work, apply cold water and ice, wet the cloth, and repeatedly place it on the affected area.
And if the blood poisoning persists, with proper governance and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the veins or abscesses are very sensitive, then it is necessary to place several moistened cloths soaked in wine and hot oil on them.
and if it is in summer, and the vein is fleshy, then it is necessary to place moistened cloths in water and cold oil, or wine and hot oil, for three days, as we have said.
and then dislodge the abscess and dry it and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or as told to you, how one must proceed with the treatment of abscesses, read this chapter now.
Or consider how small boils come, which are like our skin's threads, just as the joiner of a woman's garment, and there are many of these appearances.
There are some large and such ones where there is moisture as well as pulsation;
and if it is of such that are hard and resistant to cutting, and there is no doubt, then the arteries do not act against it.
And the work of size is such that you must try all instruments called "entromissory", from which the form comes as follows, something it contains.
For if it contains moisture, and they open it from above down, it causes pain.
And when the moisture is drained, if it does not leave any trace of the skin containing the moisture, because it returns again when left alone.
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, with water and twine, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the other day; and they will correct those who are delayed from breathing.
And then begin the bandage again, as before, on the second day, and the third, as long as you know that it does not hinder breathing.
then dress the wound with suitable medicine as long as it is healthy.
And if the abscess persists and becomes large, following this form, then cut it deeply. and apply these ointments, and scrape all parts, and put all your care into drawing out the poison from the wound where it lies.
and if it causes the patient pain, do as I have told you.
And also do the same for an abscess that is deep, and cut and cure it as I have told you.
And cut into the deep and moist abscess, which is lighter because they have less blood. And if none of these abscesses or parts where there is no moisture, and among these deep abscesses that I extracted from the shoulder of an old woman;
and I found the abscess as hard as a sharp, white stone that cannot be broken. and if none of these helps, one would also make a wound as if from a stone.
In other cases of abscesses occurring in the head or neck area, those who come as leaders of the children and affect the roots of the ears, the opening should be kept entirely closed for as long as possible to allow the pus to drain.
and treat it as necessary.
Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and dissolves the adhesions, and engenders anger, and never comes elsewhere in the body, and is painful, and severely entangled with each other.
And each scrofula (scaly skin condition) is properly located within its own cavity, just as the neck and abscesses in the head, as we have said. and the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. Some of these contain moisture, and some are malicious and do not want to obey health.
in that one where you see a good disposition to the touch, and it resembles the color of healthy flesh, and it is quiet from every side and is not exposed to any coldness in the collar or to the artery or vessel, and is not too deep.
you must then lift it from above, and peel it from every part, and the two lips of the heart should be at once, if necessary, as we have said in the chapters of the head.
And then pull little by little, and be sure not to catch the nerve or vein, and do not use too much force or dig too deep, so that the hand does not slip, and look ahead too much, lest you catch something you should not.
And if you catch the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put in the wound vitriol ground, or any powder that stops blood, and close the wound. and leave it until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and begin to heal.
And when the wound is stained with blood, it returns to your work, as long as you complete it.
then seek your finger's clue if it persists no small scabs, if it scrapes and becomes dirty.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, it is not enough that you scrape this scab at its root, but tie it with a thick double thread and let it fall without harm.
then use the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
And if you clean the entire abscess, it is necessary that you close the two edges of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no unnecessary delay due to the size of the abscess. If it is necessary for you to understand how to treat the root of the dislocation, pull it firmly, and dress it as we have said.
If it is necessary for you to understand how to treat the root of the dislocation, pull it firmly, and dress it as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold an excess, cut them where they seem to be closing;
and make the cut as previously mentioned, depending on it, then he applies these remedies and similar things, so that it corrupts those who are delayed by corruption. and when the wound is well cleaned, if the healing remedy begins to work, as long as it is healed.
The ancients spoke and wrote about the treatment of the throat. but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their word's scripture.
For those with a narrow throat, it is necessary to avoid the fold in the throat called the "epiglottis"; and no help is done through this, because all the veins and the source of the disease are in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both jaws.
When the disease is in the channel of the tongue, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent the damage that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it in three circles or four a small slit through, between the two circles or according to the depth of the cut, not into the cartilage;
and if these muscles are suitable for cutting the epiglottis, so that there is no harm, and the vessels are long and thin.
And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary to stretch the throat skin all around the wound, and cut the heart until it reaches the bone. and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the swelling, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by cutting the flowing part of the bone that jumps due to the broken place, and through the loss of voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed and there is doubt about the strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound with care, and cut through them right up to the cartilage.
then administer medications that induce vomiting, as long as the patient is healthy.
Albuscasim (a surgical tool) should not be used unless the throat is completely sealed, and the patient is judged to be near death, as it lacks the necessary strength. Then pinch the epiglottis so that the patient cannot cough, and they will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
and for this, the ancients command the wound to remain open until the ill-will of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they command that the wound be stitched and treated, as long as it was cured.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took a knife, and pushed it into her throat, cutting through part of the channel of her tongue.
and I was called to cure her, but I found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and realized that it had no power to reach the veins or flow into the throat; the only outlet was through the wound.
I rushed, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healthy.
and since the damsel had no further need of it, she returned to her condition before.
because I say that in the construction of the epiglottis, there should be no fear.
A hernia of the throat is called a "neck hernia," and it is a large swelling in color of an arrow, and it occurs mostly in women.
and this is according to two manners: natural and accidental;
for nature has no power.
and the accidental is according to two manners, of which one resembles flesh, and the other manner resembles an abscess that arises from an artery. and it causes fear, and one should not attempt to make fire outside except in a small space, testing and carefully examining the entire opening. If you let it grow out as much as a new grass, and it does not give way to any force, if it is held tight, just as we hold our own limbs, and treat it with all its equipment, if there is none. and surround it carefully, and treat it as appropriate, as long as it is completely healed.
There are many ways of which I will describe all their similarities;
and it is necessary that I explain the entire difference between our and their origin.
I say that the cause is heat and fever as long as the ebullition has not passed and the putrefaction is complete. then rest the fever and the heat.
With the new heat, there is neither fever nor pain, and it retains satisfaction, which is its own sack and follows the colour of the body, and begins as a small seed, and grows large.
and they follow the same appearances, whether it is fat or moist, and have a similar colour as I have said in the division.
You should, when you come to treat someone with a new injury, test and inquire about all the tools called "instrument" according to their form, as described in the chapter that follows.
And the method of examining abscesses is that you press more or less moistly on the abscess, and move your fingers in and out little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the center, according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the instrument, and be careful that no part remains inside.
If the moisture running under the skin changes its color, as I have described for other abscesses;
and if no moisture comes out after inserting the instrument, you know it is a hard abscess. Then make a cross over it and grasp it with pincers, gently peeling it from each side to remove the skin where it lies, so that you treat it properly with new skin.
and if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if nothing remains, it will return to the body many times.
and if a small amount remains and does not cause you pain, apply some corrosive powders or hot compresses to the wound, close it up, and treat it with soothing remedies until it heals.
and if the wound becomes large, cut both edges of the wound and treat it with remedies to prevent infection.
and if the pain is strong or severe, use quick-acting vinegar and leave it for two to three days until the wound heals and the blood flow subsides. then return to covering what has been dislocated from the new.
See the shapes of the instruments used, which are of three types: large, medium, and small;
and take three quarters which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three ways of doing this: grasp, gentle, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistules;
and are also like needles with which the spells are cut, and they are of gold, or iron, or silver, and the ones that are yellow are more effective in encircling the abscesses of fistules.
and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the opening's size.
The shapes of the incisions are much alike, as you can see here:
and if the incisions have two curves of three kinds as well;
and if they are once that have three curves, and are also of three manners;
and if they are once that have two curves, and once only one curve, and are of three manners;
and all this is necessary for their place.
The head of these, which is made to cut, is sharp, and there are some that do not cut well from both sides, which scratch the skin, so that one does not sever the vein or nerve.
and from these intrusions, the threads are withdrawn in different ways, so that the patient does not lose them during the opening of abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see.
and do not use it on any other part than on fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places.
and never use any other small instrument, resembling the edges of fingers, according to this form, to stop the blood. and it should never be placed in a place that heals the cutting of veins, and arteries, and never according to this great form.
never inflame the breasts of any man when they begin to be corrupted, as long as they appear like a woman's.
and remain disfigured and swollen, and anyone who wants to cure them must act carefully according to this form of this line b until g. then remove the fat, and apply medicinal fire to the wound, then close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and heal it as long as it is clean.
and it holds the eyes steady, relaxing them due to their great size, as happens with women, if they pinch in two ribs above, through two similar openings; so that one holds the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to line .g. then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, as long as it is healthy.
and if it is not clean, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive dressing. and leave it until it absorbs the moisture and fat, then treat it when it is clean.
Abscesses under the armpits that present as hard scrofulous nodules or with scales, and if they contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G. And when all the pus in the abscess has been drained, apply clean cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and continue with appropriate treatment until it is healed.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, they should treat it as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound gapes, apply cautery as we have mentioned before.
When the artery is exposed and the skin above it is sewn shut, many abscesses often form, and this also happens in the vein with an infected and abscessed swelling.
and if you recognize it thus, as coming from an artery, then cut deep into the abscess; and when you feel it with your hands, if the feeling is strange;
and when it is about the vein, there will be bright red appearance;
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is deep within the flesh and filled with angers and other parts, and it is very great. It is necessary to avoid iron care, and he who has a main injury should also be careful, and for him who has an arteriolar injury, make a cut through the skin from above for a long time.
then open the flesh at certain intervals, and carefully remove the artery from the tissues while it is exposed.
then insert a needle from below and pierce it through to the other side, gripping the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you about the extraction of the two arteries in the temples.
then mark the place between the two links of an instrument until no blood comes out from it, and carefully open the abscess.
then apply the treatment gently, as long as the wound is open. then apply this treatment to the healing wound as long as it is healthy.
and if the abscess is as large as a vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can of the abscess across all the skin, then insert the needle through the place you are holding in your hand, and pierce it, and make a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side. then, as I have told you, take the abscess, where one of the parts of the bone meets the other through the flesh;
and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, insert another needle through all parts of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places.
then cut the abscess until the excess is removed, then cut away the excess from around it and leave what is attached.
then place a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then administer treatments with bandages and poultices until it is healed.
As abscesses come from arteries and veins, so too do they occur in the nail bed when it is injured or subjected to excessive strain, and similar conditions.
And this occurs more often with dislocations and joints in all limbs, which are painful abscesses, and their appearance resembles the color of the body, and they have many different arrangements causing pain.
and when they stretch it, the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely healed to the body's satisfaction but rather pulls away from the heart.
and it must remain still in all directions, neither going forward nor backward, neither above nor below; and the one with joints should not be covered with iron. Perhaps he might experience a contraction; and he who is the head or forehead, makes the skin contract with the spatula.
and he who is the head or forehead, makes the skin contract with the spatula. If the abscess is small, if you have pliers, cut it off at its base;
and if it is large, if you hang it with a hook, and peel it off, then remove the bone and close the wound with stitches, and apply the cure until it is healed.
No such thing happens in bellies or any other place, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its appearance, it has subtle roots, and big excrements.
and it has small and large parts.
and I have seen at home those who had these in their bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had a thin root, were deeply split, and constantly exuded moisture.
I collected them and found one weighing XVIII ounces and the other VI . The work in the incision is such that if you look at the patient, you will see they are moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with a subtle root; if it is scooped out with a wide spatula, then perform the fire cautery in your presence.
if it is scooped out with a wide spatula, then perform the fire cautery in your presence. For cutting often brings great risks of bleeding, and if blood does not cease, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient afraid and anxious about the incision, take a well-made thread of silk, and bind it as we have said, and leave it for a day.
then hold it in place, and do not stop pulling the thread of silk until it dislocates the joint, and feel for its release.
and if the roots are thick, be afraid to dislocate them especially in the abdomen, but you can still dislocate half of them, then cauterize it so that it does not come back.
then treat the wound, and ensure you do not cover the part that is of a bad colour, with poor sensation, and leaking milk.
For it is an enlarged abscess, and I will come to the treatment of this ulcer later.
When the wound is closed. If the appearance of the bulge is due to cautery or an incision on the bowel or bladder, and it is located in the abdomen and not in any of the bowels, as it occurs in other openings, or blood coming from veins or arteries according to what is above, or from flatulence;
and if it is through the opening of the bowel and through the discharge of the bladder, then the colour of the abscess resembles the colour of the skin, and it is a slight thing without pain, and opens up from various issues. And if it is due to the intestines, then it is more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers, it recovers and then returns, and perhaps it becomes squeezed, greatly constricting the entrance to the bath or through hard work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a slight thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain.
and if it is due to blood, it opens up with these signs: a swollen and hard abscess, and is fixed in quantity. and if it is due to wind (or gas), it is soft upon touching, and the work (or condition) is such that you look and see it appears due to blood from an artery, or vein, or wind (or gas).
and if it is due to wind (or gas), it is soft upon touching, and the work (or condition) is such that you look and see it appears due to blood from an artery, or vein, or wind (or gas). If it is necessary, you must leave the cure. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, both for the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to keep still, and lie flat, then tie a sign around the entire circumference of the belly. then command the patient to gently move it between your hands, then go around the place you marked with the whole edge of the bandage, and stretch half of the abscess above all the great needle. then tie it around with a strong thread or firm silk string, and make sure the wound is completely closed.
then open half of the abscess extended over the ligament, and stretch your finger index, and seek the intestine. if you feel it caught in the ligament, free it, and pull the intestine out through the opening in the abdomen.
and if you find the bowel, catch it at the narrowest point, and cut off the excess.
and if the artery or vein runs counter to your work, then return to your task and take two needles, and push them through firmly, and turn both needles in the direction you have made the piercing.
then stretch the abscess in four directions over the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and leave the joint to rot until it disintegrates on its own; when it is soft and pliable, then treat it as it should be treated, and cure the abscess as we have said;
when it is soft and pliable, then treat it as it should be treated, and cure the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the joint as it should be treated, and bind the joint.
A cancerous wound We have spoken in the previous section about the appearances of ulcers, and how they should be treated with medicine, and how one must avoid the iron cure.
and let us speak of the ulcer that erupts in the mouth, and take great care in its cure, and say to the ancients that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped, as with an ulcer on the breast, or on the thigh, or similar places, then all of it must be removed when it first appears.
no one has ever been cured of it before me.
And for the work, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, it is that you should at no time rid the patient of black blood;
then make it healthier if there is evident swelling, then cut the patient's pain in the good place to perform the work;
then pour your ointments or chancre, and the head from all parts, and the bone from all parts, leaving nothing behind;
and let the blood flow out completely, and carefully press the place in your hand or with any object, and if the bleeding continues from the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is stopped. then seek other treatment as long as he is healthy.
Of hydropsis We have previously discussed the similarities of hydrops, and in what way the accumulation of water occurs, as well as the signs of each condition, and the treatments using medications, and those cured with iron.
and one should not apply iron to these two conditions. This is to know, namely, tympanitis and yposchrodia, for it is a deadly thing;
Then, when you treat this appearance of edema called "ecrites" with medicine, and the cure does not benefit the patient, consider if they are weak or if they have another illness besides edema, such as stomach troubles, diarrhea, and similar conditions. If you do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt.
If you see the patient is very strong and has no other illness but edema alone, and they are neither too weak nor too strong, then thus should you act: Place the patient upright on your hands, and the attendant presses the belly while bringing water to the lowest part of the wound, then take the spiny spatula according to this form. And make incisions from both sides. with a point, but not so deep as to reach the intestines when inserted, and it cannot tear.
then check if there is any inflammation towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you open them from the anus, insert the knife three fingers deep directly below the knuckle. and if there is a drooping due to sick liver, it is on the left side of the buttock three fingers' breadth;
and if it is due to mucus, it should be on the right side, and it does not suit that the sick lie on the fracture so that excesses do not flow to that weak place.
then perforate all the skin with the instrument, and press, and hold your hand over all the space between the skin and the muscle as if scraping it to the quantity of a fingernail or around.
then pierce the wound until the sponge comes to the surface, and this is the blood, then pull out the tool, and take out this instrument which forms: and it resembles a thin silver chain, made of fine or light gold, and on the underside there is a small opening. and on one side, three openings; and two on the other side, and one on the other;
and it is the bone cut as if with a quill, and this is the form of the incision that the scribes make with the quill:
at the top of them is the inflammation, so that when the instrument comes into contact with water, it now descends onto the instrument.
empty it then half or a third, for if you remove more than is necessary at that moment, by chance the patient might die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he might lose his palm, or come close to death.
but according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue in the sick person mean, and their pulses.
then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held by the force that stops the gap on the affected part, of which I have spoken, so you pierce according to this manner.
then continue with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering, and take a small quantity of water;
Take no action, and keep yourself from straining as long as it doesn't cause any pain but a little bit of thirst.
And if you doubt about the patient and leave them with much thirst, treat them with a burial mound or hot sand, and by sweating or a bath and in the sun, and dyeing with wine; and treat them with drying medications as long as they are healthy, and apply cautery to the stomach and liver and spleen after draining the water, as I have said above.
No child is born without an opening in the penis, or if the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
If it is necessary to pierce through all the subtle spatules according to this form.
Then insert or open a subtle plug from below, and hold it and keep it thus for three days or four, and when he wishes to urinate, the plug will be removed, and he will urinate, and then have it replaced.
and if, by chance, he does not remember, since the hot urine will not allow the plug to be kept closed.
If the opening is small, it is a gentle closure of the bladder, as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Those who do not have a plug in their place are cursed, because no one is born with a plug at the top of their penis, so they cannot urinate until they lower their penis. and they cannot move because the material cannot reach the joint, and this is a serious illness.
And the method of the procedure is that the patient should lie on their back, then the upper arm and shoulder blade should be positioned as if it were a quill, so that the opening is in the middle, as it should be.
and be careful of the bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, apply pressure to stop the blood flow, and treat the wound until it heals.
from the pus of the penis Many times this illness comes to the tree (body), and it is an appearance of a ugly scar;
and it has both malignant (cancerous) and benign (non-cancerous) forms;
you should then make them (wounds) bleed gently, clean and dress them with moist cotton in an Egyptian manner; then continue the dressing (process) until it is healed.
And if the illness is malicious, with a putrid and foul appearance, it requires cautery treatment.
Once you have it, and if the splint is tight around the limb, part of it inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the splint that is inside. and if it is nailed, then pull it out.
Because when you bind it together, unless the position of the limb is assured, then there will be piercing, and blackening and decay in the bone and joint.
so it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupt, then bind it with a plaster of honey and flour made from red apple bark and wool, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if a blood flow occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cautery helps as the disposition of the limbs allows: that is to say, at the discharge of pus, and at the corruption,
and if the tip of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, it is necessary that you insert or drive a plug of wood into the rod, and let the patient urinate among them.
and when the hair is seen to be dry at the top of the rod, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it causes a wound or abscess, it is then necessary that you scrape it with a sharp instrument, until the bonds are freed and all parts of the rod's opening are healed.
and if it is a difficult thing to devise, then you should scrape it with the spatula at any point on the stick and the blade.
then separate the pieces gently, and place a thin, moistened linen cloth over it with cold water, so that it does not dry out immediately.
Circumcision is not a dislocation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will, especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest operation for their healing.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen most of the masters and elders who performed circumcision near the anus, and they had great strength, and used all kinds of new tools.
if they moved because there were two threads, and by chance one is cut above and the other below. or he reattaches it, and the pain is doubled, and the purification of the wound near the anus is not assured for the point of the member.
and to the purification of the nail, by chance the iron escapes and the wound heals, and often it happens that they do not need purification, and I have seen this happen.
From the washing done with force on all the links of thread, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut precisely from above and below.
For when you press your hand, if it is even in all parts, then you can feel the pulse. but the fingers should be well stretched around the skin.
and the first method should be gentle if you want to encourage the child to breathe, if it hears, that you are only tightly tying the thread around the umbilical cord and then releasing it in all ways, so as not to hurt.
then stretch it straight between your hands and regain the strength in your hands or feet so that the baby does not see any of the tools.
then place your hand on the staff and blow through your breath, holding it at the top until the end of the staff is together. then thoroughly clean it from the dirt that is gathered on it, then tie the joint with a double thread, and bind it to another string.
then thoroughly clean it from the dirt that is gathered on it, then tie the joint with a double thread, and bind it to another string. and hold it at the second tie with the little finger and thumb, and cut between the two strings, then gently lift the breath from above and hold the top of the staff. then let the blood flow drop by drop, for that is how it heals. and place powder on top and below the powder I mix with a half cup of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, confit with good rose oil and fresh, and leave it until the other day, and treat with another treatment as long as it is healed.
The method for purification is as follows:
both feet should be clean and cut, and the nails should also be long and even:
the error in purification is when the veins burst during incision:
Then you must extend your finger, so that the joint makes an abscess.
and hold it evenly, and if you cannot hold your finger, use pincers, and then apply the compress.
And if they remain for three days, and the skin under the arrow is swollen, leave it until the abscess has healed, and gently remove the skin.
if the compress is as you can make it, and it protects the part of the arrow, it will not harm anything.
Treat therefore the place of a sudden wound from gunpowder, which we have spoken about in our treatment of gunpowder, and if it is cauterized too much, and goes above, then it will not harm.
Treat it, as we have said, while it is whole and healthy.
retention of urine
The retention of urine is a sign of stone or frozen blood, or bowels, or a blocked passage, or similar conditions, as we have said in our divisions.
and if the urine cannot be released, and you see the retention due to a stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over on his knees. and place them incorrectly on their back, and stretch their belly from the upper part of their back, and hold the patient still as much as possible. and then they constrict the colic of the bladder at the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", which has this form:
and let them be delicate silver arrows, as if from a bird's feather; and let the knife be one palm long and half again, and sharp at the tip.
And the method of urination is that you take a double thread, tie one end with a wool or cotton ball at the urethral opening, and then wrap the other end tightly around your finger inside the syringe.
and cut off the excess thread and squeeze it tightly towards the top of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, place the patient in a comfortable position, and rise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and lukewarm water.
then gently insert the syringe into the shaft, until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the body.
then squeeze the syringe before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient's pain reaching the empty thing, and this is not done properly according to these orders because the direction it goes in is twisted.
then pull the thread through all the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the thread, then extract it forcefully, and stop the urine flow.
and begin the syringing as long as the bladder is empty and the patient is calm.
When ulcerations or abscesses come to the bladder, and putrefaction is gathered there, you should draw off water and medicines through a device called a "clepsydra", and it is made in this form:
It is closed, and if it opens again: from one side, and the other, as you can see;
and the hair roots by which the cure is made so sharp that it stops the pain without addition, if we can extract the moisture and drive out as much as necessary.
and when you see your drugs in the bladder, place the end of the probe in the moisture, and pull gently until it is out.
if you pull out the moisture with the probe, then quickly twist the handle firmly inwards; if the moisture goes inside completely and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
and this is the form of a gentle enema by which the bladder is enemeated;
And it is of silver or gold, and it is the most precious part;
and remove it from the skin where it adheres.
then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you intend to use for a warm enema; then bind it between the two breasts with a strong double thread, and heat the moisture over the fire.
then insert the tip of the enema bag into the rectum, and squeeze your hand over the bladder until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle of it, and pierce it evenly all around. then insert a strong thread into these openings, reassemble the circle as one does with a dal (a traditional dish), and inside place what you see fit of oil and moisture and water, and bind it with the instrument.
and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
from the stone
We have already discussed the methods of cutting and extraction, together with medicinal remedies.
and he explains the distinction between a stone that has grown within a person, its signs, and in which stone one must perform surgery. and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is inside the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and it is a sign of acute urinary tract infection, similar to water in its subtlety.
and open the wound wide, and greatly soothe the patient's pain, and probe it many times, and then it heals slowly. and at the mouth of these sores, we find their origins.
and the healing of children is light until they are four years old, and it is very difficult for the elderly, and it is in the middle for those between youth and old age.
and the cure is lighter for those who have great stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a enema, to draw out all the impurities from the bowels. For it often becomes trapped, seeking to pass the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and upright him, and move him from side to side, so that the stone descends to the very bottom of the bladder, and never stays in the high part.
then make him sit between your hands, with his hands resting on his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward.
then place your hand inside and touch it.
if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not yield to pressure from the fingers, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, and the patient is suffering from a chronic condition, or your middle finger for a younger patient; and press it firmly in its base, grasp the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, if there is pain in the groin area;
then press with your finger, and the stone will move away from where you feel it;
And instruct the patient to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to stretch their right hand above them, and with their left hand, remove the skin covering the stones in the area where the incision is made;
then I press the sponge tightly, which forms this shape: and make incisions between what is between the cheeks and the anus, not in the middle but along the left side of the opening.
and it should be straight on the stone, and your fingers should be either above or below it, and cut across so that it becomes wide enough to accommodate the stone's size, but narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
in case the fingers pressing on the one below (the stone) suddenly slip, so that it comes out without effort;
and knows that there is hard or sharp stone where it has corners or edges. if it is caught trying to escape;
and if it is like a thread, thin and round, whose exit is light.
At the place where it has corners and edges, make the size larger;
and if it does not yield, you need to use pincers that are also like a file on the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not escape. you must remove the sharp instrument from the shoulder;
and if you cannot do it thus, if the wound widens and the blood flows, and the sinew strains like vinegar;
and if there is more than one stone, first remove the largest one at the base of the bladder, then cut it out, and after that pull out the smaller ones if there are any others.
And if it is very large, they must cut it out carefully, making a larger wound. For two things often happen to the patient: if he dies, or the urine comes back again through the opening where the bones cannot join together;
but nevertheless make every effort to draw it out or clean it out with pincers, as long as you treat it piece by piece;
and when you have completed your work, apply to the wound incense and aloe and dragon's blood, tighten it, and place over it a moist cloth in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; Then resolve the patient's complaint on his collarbone, and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
And when you dislocate it, if a lot of oil and water arises from the place, then apply the treatment with ointment of dye and basil ointment until it is healed.
And if abscesses form in the wound and cause corrosion, and blood clots in the bladder, and by this means the urination is stopped, known in this manner as sudden with the urine. Then apply pressure to the wound, and extract the blood clot, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause putrefaction.
Then cleanse the wound with water and salt and vinegar, and assist it in every way you can, as long as it is healthy.
and it is necessary that all the herbs you use to cure him, tie his two legs, and apply remedies on top of the joint.
And if the stone is small, and it is located in the urethra, and it is stuck together, and urine cannot pass through. if you cure it as I say, cutting many times, then the size of the cut is an excuse for its size due to this cure. I have tested it this way.
Take the iron at the beginning according to this form, and place it at three angles into the fire:
then take a thread and tie it around the urethra behind the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder;
then gently turn the drill into the stick until it reaches the stone. and turn the drill back to your hand in the stone little by little, as you can pierce the stone from another side.
if the urine comes, then press your hand against that which is stuck from the stone inside the stick. if it is finally broken and bursts with the urine, causing the patient pain;
and if you cannot do this for any reason, then take a sharp stone and another from above, then make the stick into a hook on the stone between the two links, then pull it out forcefully, and loosen the ligament, and clean the frozen blood in the wound. and treat it while it is clean.
of the woman's stone" (referring to kidney stones)
It is rare for stones to become entangled in women, and if it does happen, the treatment is difficult, and it is hindered by three things:
One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
and the second reason is that one cannot find a woman well-versed in uncovering herself for men, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that, perhaps, one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of healing.
and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman's body is often harder than in men, so a deeper incision must be made, and great care should be taken. And if it becomes necessary, you must seek the help of a wife well-versed in this art, and with barely any time to spare, and if you do not find one, then do not hesitate to use a subtle, uncast method.
and it presents a wise dance in the life of women, where a woman who knows a part of the art, and instructs her to do what you command regarding the investigation of the stone; and carefully consider if this woman is a virgin:
and carefully consider if this woman is a virgin: then she must remove her hand or finger and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, despite the pain in her finger, she should remove her finger or hand from the stone, and advise her to withdraw her finger or hand with the patient, pressing her left hand on the swollen bladder.
If it is cut, it is necessary to move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder down to the thigh bone, until it reaches the root of the thigh.
then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh, where it is most painful, and feel the pain in that part. and do not move it from above or below the stone, but make the first cut small.
and do not move it from above or below the stone, but make the first cut small. then insert the blade into the cut, feeling the pain deeply in the wound as much as the stone can come out, and know that there are many ways of stones.
This is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have roots.
if you know these things to know the outcome.
And if the wound does not heal, take vitriol powder and apply it to the place, holding it for an hour until the pain is alleviated.
then return to your work, as long as the stone is hard, and have the tools I told you for extracting stones from people to assist you in your task.
and if the wound persists, and it is an artery that has been cut, apply powder to the place and press with bandages and bindings, and do not repeat this, leaving the stone and not pulling it, unless the patient dies. then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the eyes open, return to your work while the stone is still hard.
Raming water is nothing other than the combination of moisture or white starch, which is detached from the heart of the objects, containing the heat.
and it is called "starch", and it is never properly in the cloth of the egg, if one believes that it is another substance. and it is the skin of the object between the white starch that we have mentioned.
and this happens no more. And the generation of this rameous is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and this material expands.
And never does it come from a blow on the joints, and this moisture has many colors. or it turns to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or clear white, and this happens more.
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, then the abscesses are red, very long like an eye, and do not open the joints, because moisture surrounds them all.
And if there is moisture in the wound itself, so it appears as an abscess with part of the flesh, and because of this, one thinks it is another wound.
and if there is moisture between the skin of the coils and the white part, then it smells well.
then when you see to know the colour of the moisture, try to pull out all the foreign objects within it, which will show its form beforehand. According to what comes after, judge of what is inside.
And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to their strength and the replenishment of their body;
then lay him on his back, on one thing a little raised, and place beneath him several sheets of cloth.
then sit him on his left side, and command the attendant to sit on his right, and extend the staff towards one of the two ribs at the heart's edge.
then take the scalpel, and cut through the skin of the ribs from top to bottom, and make your cut completely straight by following the contour of the rib's skin until it turns white, and carefully strip away the flesh according to its natural tendency.
Then make a clean cut with a sharp instrument through the soft tissue filled with water, and extract all the water, then place your fingers, and the swelling will subside.
and do not touch the heart of the swelling, but only the affected area. cut it all or in pieces, carefully along the edge, for if you do not cut it cleanly and sharply, the water will return.
and if the bubble bursts out of your control, it is important to return it to its place once you have completed the work with the swelling.
Then join the two books of the heart with a stitch, then treat it as other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the heart corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you bind the veins that are suspended, in doubt of the flow of blood.
then cut the vein from all that is suspended, extract the heart, and treat it as we have said.
And if the vein is joined into two parts, knowing that these are two branches; if you treat the other part just as you did the first one evenly, then wipe away the blood, and put a clean moistened compress over the wound with rose oil.
if you treat the other part just as you did the first one evenly, then wipe away the blood, and put a clean moistened compress over the wound with rose oil. and place another moistened cloth with wine and oil, and put two cushions on top, and cover it with double-layered fabrics, and bind it tightly according to this form.
Then take two fabrics, make them of shredded wool according to this appearance and join them with stitching at the top of the leg opening, one covering the inside from the crotch to the back, and the other covering the outside from the wrist to the tip.
and the other two joints at the top of the two arms, and gather all the restrictions in the loop of the arm's bone;
and under no circumstances should this cautery branch be used on a limb the size of iron, but rather you should make a delicate cut with a scalpel, and strip the skin from the veins, and heat it as we have said before, so that the white part containing the blood is exposed.
if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white part at certain intervals, and peel it with this hot and delicate cautery.
And the doctor, in every way you can, as long as you stretch it all out;
and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is safer; and hold them steady, preventing blood from escaping, and move the tools carefully;
and if anything goes against you, whether an abscess or bleeding or any other complication, treat it as described above.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as I have told you, and make sure that when you are certain through the signs we have mentioned, that the dislocation is caused by moisture, then leave the patient in a raised position. then incise the abscess at the base of the entire spatule-shaped area deeply with the perforator.
and make the perforation wide enough for all the pus to flow out.
then place a cloth on it, bind it, and let it heal, then treat the wound until it is clean;
and if the white cloth does not allow the blood to flow out of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a needle or the instrument used to drain water from wounds, in such a way as to form (the desired effect) beforehand;
and carefully probe the wound, and know that if blood returns, it gathers after six months or so, and when it gathers as before, then the patient will recover his days.
You know that in the treatment of this branch there are more harmful dispositions, which is why it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
and I will tell you about the work and appearances of the abscess.
I therefore say that many abscesses come where there is inflammation, especially in the bowels. and this is through many cases.
This is to know by way of excessive acidity and aguity, which is spread through wounds or percussion.
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the flesh. and it causes no pain, but the abscess is painful.
and sometimes it is a grey and purple abscess, with a bright red color, and does not come from any new artery or vein swelling.
When it is from an artery, if it is known by the hot swelling of the abscess, when you press it with your hands; and it is not appropriate that you touch it.
What is made from vein inflammation is known by its arrangement in the gentle touch of the hands, and it can be carefully cut along this line, and on other similar parts. and it is that you cut the cord of the veins, then the heat goes up, and the white color becomes satisfying, and releases the suspending from all parts of the heat.
If the eye is already inflamed with these hot poultices, then it is necessary that you treat the eye and the socket.
and if it is swollen to the point of pain, or in those parts within the veins, then you must release all that pressure, and treat the socket accordingly.
And if the source of the pain is behind, it is necessary that you remove it entirely, and extract the foreign body, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, immediately apply a moist woolen compress with rose oil and wine to the wound, then use other remedies until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a similar covering to a boil, with the softening of the tissues, and it prevents the patient from moving much due to the pain.
and the treatment for this illness is also very painful, as I have mentioned before, and nonetheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient lie on a clean bed, then apply a suspension of herbs below the armpits on both sides, to all the vessels close to the limb, and wrap them tightly with bandages.
then cut with a sharp spatula along the vessels, as they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
then he inserts an needle with a double thread, and ties it to the first place where the bone came out, and then ties it again to the other side. Then place them correctly in the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture.
then treat the wound as with others, binding it tightly so that no one lags behind;
for if no harm comes from it, and all the vassals come together, then it is necessary to bring everyone together; so that the eyes do not lose their vision due to the incision of the vassals, and become dry and cannot help themselves.
The remedies of this branch are obtained through incision where it is needed, or by extending it on the belly in the region of the angles, so that the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the organs.
and this rupture is either from the incision or from the extension, and these two methods of movement have various causes:
or from percussion, or jumping, or screaming, or the lifting of heavy sorrow, and similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension, are that it happens little by little, over a long period of time, and does not come suddenly. and it makes the abscess even until it reaches the healthy part, because it pleases to straighten the intestine.
And the sign is when it is from the incision that a sudden pain arises at the beginning, and various abscesses appear under the skin close to it, due to the discharge of the intestine and the flow of blood from the syphilis.
And never remove the pus with the intestine, as it becomes stuck and causes great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these poor treatments with iron, for which one must be wary.
And the method of this work is that you instruct the patient to straighten the intestine with their fingers inside the wound if they are able. then remember over their collarbone. Between your hands, lift the cheeks.
then take the knife above, and shave all the hair from the legs down to the root. then insert into the books of the stomach with hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and be sure that it can no longer protrude.
then peel off the skin that is beneath the muscle tissue, exposing the white flesh on all sides until it is completely uncovered.
then insert your index finger between the muscle, between the white flesh that is beneath the skin of the thigh, and between the second flesh, starting from behind the bone, and between the second flesh.
and then move the hand on the right down towards the heart, and let it rest with its palm facing upwards on your left hand, easing the pain throughout all the affected areas towards the waist. and instruct the attendant to extend the pain-relieving agent upwards, and release that which is behind the bandage.
and cut between your fingers if any part of the intestine is wrapped up or has hardened, and if you feel anything, press it into the belly.
then take a needle with a thick thread made of X threads, and pass it through the posterior part where there is flesh, after the skin of the cheeks. after the cutting, then sever the parts that appear as threads, as long as there are four threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the skin, which we have said is beneath the flesh of the cheeks, with a strong thread from both sides. then wrap the parts with threads and bind them so that no foreign bodies can enter inside, preventing any abscesses from forming. and then take hold of the ligament according to the first long ligament, and after these two ligaments, leave it as it satisfies the depth of the tissues, half a digit from the heart of the matter. and after all the other according to the shape that the eye has;
then cut into the part that is beneath the skin of the tissues, as long as it is free from bones and muscles, as we have said before;
then apply moist wool in oil, and cover the wounds, and apply the ligament as we have said. And never cauterize the white flesh we have mentioned, after incision, out of fear of bloodletting. For this often happens, leaving the ligament intact until it chooses to heal on its own.
and if it takes time to heal, apply hot water and continue with what we have said until it chooses to heal.
then treat the wound with another remedy until it is completely healed.
of flesh herniation
In this case, never has anyone dared to treat it with iron.
And the elders say that it is made like a root that holds the joint together, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after trimming them lightly on both sides.
then cut me open, and treat the abscess of him who opens, until the veins bleed.
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
No fracture should occur suddenly, as we have said, and open the joints.
and do not allow any intestines to protrude like buttons, and if they do, it is a sign of great danger, and repair them every hour.
and nevertheless if it stays too long at this point, he believes there is a wound or ulcer, until the intestines descend.
and this happens due to the extension of the ulcer, which is aggressive, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and swells up, opening up.
and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before;
and it is never cured with iron in this manner: and make the patient lie on their back between your hands, then cut the ligament of the dislocation with a sharp knife according to the quantity of three fingers.
and then extract the beneficial substance that is beneath the skin, take a needle and place it on the apparent surface of the dislocation.
and press it fully on the belly, then cut the two apparent ligaments of the dislocation on the side of the needle, and cut each one.
then extract the side of the needle, and do not cover the dislocation with any substance or extend it, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal hernias. then treat with wound care.
then treat with wound care. And when you treat the wounds, if they are dirty and the injury is clean, then do so until it is healed.
The treatment is difficult, and it has no appearance in the rupture, but the cauterization moves in this place, and is closer to healing.
of the softening of the thick skin of the testicles
Often the walls of vessels in no man's land become softened, because the substances within them are mellowed, and it is visible.
and it requires skill, when one wishes to cure it, to lay the patient on his back and cut into the softened tissue on his natural skin.
then bring the two edges together with a stitch, and if you see that the excess of the softened tissue is too much, cut it away with three or four firm stitches.
Then cut between the seams, and treat it as other wounds, as long as they are clean, and pull out the thread.
1. This treatise, a guide for medical practices, offers
You know that chastity is esteemed in our law, and for this reason I would rather not speak of it in this book.
and it is not necessary, except in two ways:
one is that he should answer wisely when asked, and in a way that indicates the remedy.
and the other, because we often have need of cautery on certain animals to help us, as with a goat and sheep and cat and other creatures.
I say, therefore, that cautery is performed according to two manners: either by attraction or by incision.
In the method where we employ attraction, let us immerse the animal in hot water, so that the muscles relax and remain relaxed. then press it with your hand until it is healed and you no longer feel it.
From the castration of the body: It is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the hide of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each one separately, when you have well scorched them.
and do not leave any pain or discomfort, nor the subtle pleasure that is on the vessels.
and this method of castration is superior to that which is done by attraction, because with attraction, perhaps something from the testicles remains, causing the animal to desire lust.
then treat the wound as long as it is clean.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism exists in two manners among humans: one is when it is between the two sexes so similar to the form of a woman's nature, with hair and never cuts short.
And the other manner is in women, who have a penis on their hand, as if it were a phallus, and two vulvas.
And the treatment for both men and women is that you remove all the infected parts, and treat them as other wounds.
In a second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
Tendons are a tightly adjusted char on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see. and no woman has it as much as a hand, and that is the cure.
You should remove the excess of tendons from your hand or fingers, and cut them lightly.
and do not harm me too much, lest the blood flow bring about further complications, then apply another remedy until he is healed.
and there is another affliction that appears in the mouth of the mare, and spreads, and perhaps jumps, and resembles a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it the "cow disease. If it is necessary to take care of it, as we have said before, with the tweezers and cure as long as it is healthy.
Erroneous is the judgment when the nature of women is not properly perceived, or the opening (hernia) is small. and it is either by nature from birth, or accidentally from illness that it occurs.
and it is either by nature from birth, or accidentally from illness that it occurs. or it is through the adjustment of parts, or a subtle and specific cause, and is done in perfect harmony, whether in front, or on the side, or beneath, or in any way.
and one must be careful with conception, childbirth, and sometimes even the flow of flowers to have.
and the knowledge of these is through the observation of dance.
If the dislocation is recently apparent, whether by your own hand or by chance.
If it is a delicate pleasure, and close to the heart, if you are quick, and the tongue thus:
with your two index fingers together, and the woman on her back, spreading her legs;
then the two hands form a circle, as long as the delicate pleasure is round, and it covers the stoppings.
then take wool and soak it in oil, and place it on the wound, and lay the woman face down each day, so that she cannot move.
And if the dislocation is hard and deep, then you should use a spatula-like instrument resembling a myrtle leaf.
If the dislocation is of the shoulder, hold it still with bands and slings.
and use remedies to stop blood, such as licorice, dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of eggs.
then apply a wide poultice, so that the wound cannot heal.
and thus continue for a long time, applying a dry linen bandage.
Then treat other ailments as long as he is healed.
And when the swelling comes from heat, if it needs to be covered, do so according to this manner; if it is not an abscess, apply compresses. For an abscess swollen from heat, do not apply any treatment with the hand.
From hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without proper care, can become severe. When hemorrhoids have been present for a long time, they tend to worsen.
And we have discussed in the previous section the similarities and signs, and I will now describe those that receive treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and their complications, when they are completely in the rectum, and do not appear to be felt, can only be effectively treated with iron.
Those that are at the opening of the rectum can be felt, and these are those that can be treated.
It is therefore advisable to place the woman in a cold house, then apply the other treatments with tweezers, and cauterize her roots, then powder herbal remedies that stop blood flow, such as mullein and dragon's blood, and similar substances.
then immerse his feet in the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water;
and if the fever persists, prepare a decoction of sumac and bark from pomegranates and gallstones and similar things, then take flour from barley, mix it with honey and oil, and make an ointment to apply to his back.
And if it becomes moist, that is good. If that does not help, apply cupping glasses to his back without injuring the breasts;
then take flax, soak it in the juice of plantains or in the juice of hawthorn with old wine, and apply it to the joint.
And when the abscess rests, apply a clean dressing to the wound until it is healed.
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp point, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous text. and then apply the cure until it is healed.
Many different types of abscesses occur in the body, such as chancre, previous abscesses, herbs, boils, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
It is therefore necessary that I explain in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the gum, which is not a true abscess but one that is bow-shaped.
and if you want to know the work of fire, look to see if the abscesses are inflamed at the beginning of their appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red, then you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it die as long as the pain is soothed;
and then make the patient lie on his side, and have him take small sittings, leaning back and resting on his back, bringing his feet together to stretch out the leg;
and let his legs be spread apart, and place his arms beneath his knees, and bind them well with a strong ligature.
then push the tongue towards the right side, and use the instrument to open the mouth of the wound, from which comes the shape.
and it is necessary that when you use this instrument, you first insert the right side to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters with the instrument does not go further than it should, and it does not harm the patient. and if the instrument is larger, it should be covered with a deep layer of cloth so that the instrument does not hurt.
and it is necessary that he places the horn of the instrument above and turns on the instrument.
And when the abscess opens and it is punctured gently with the hand, if it is necessary to cover it, use a cloth over the top, leading the pus.
and when the bowel is emptied, it is necessary that you place moist gauze in the wound, either with rose oil or dried green oil.
and place the clean, moist cloth over the wound at the exact point of the fracture, and place it firmly over the fracture and the attached forearm, using hot herbs or lukewarm water.
then treat it after two days of healing have passed, as long as it is healthy;
and never raise the fracture or wound with a cleansing of water and honey, and then water or cooked roots of lys and long arista (herbs) then return to the dressing.
And if the wound is healed in the margin, it is necessary to be careful not to use fire, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
from childbirth Trade is first in birth that she knows the form of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman rushing below, and longing to smell the aroma.
then the child hastens to be born. then know that these children are according to the natural form, and their heads and shoulders are the first to emerge.
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press the belly, so that the child is born quickly.
because when it descends towards its head, it follows with him, and is freed from its excesses through good cleansing.
and this, which comes otherwise, does not come naturally.
For it never comes on its own feet, but rather invades the body or attacks a joint, and the hands, or it appears in the abdomen, or above, and turns by chance onto its neck, or takes other malicious forms;
if one must dance, they should be wise and subtle in these matters, washing away error and disappointment, and I will show you all the forms as to how one should assist.
If the fever comes upon his head by natural cause, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, making her stay on a saddle, or women hold her;
and if his nature is of oil or fenugreek cooked, then boil it between his two fingers using the small spatula whose shape is as follows: and split the second layer, and cut into his nail as much as the moisture that is deeply embedded;
and press the woman's belly as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to enema the woman with fennel seed mucilage mixed with sesame oil;
then make him breathe deeply and sneeze from the condition, and hold his mouth and nose for an hour. if the child is now born.
And if both hands come out, it is necessary that you reset them gently, little by little. and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a seat, and raise her feet high. then he should stand up from a seated position on the ground, and tie down the woman so that she does not try to get up.
if he cannot insert his hand, the fetus dies, if he cuts with a knife that is placed before him, extracts the child, and resets it just as before.
From the birth of the child on its feet When the child comes onto its feet, it should be pushed up. and then turn it back and forth, until it is even.
then press gently from the feet and extend little by little.
He can jump as high as his feet allow if he is commanded to press, and the action makes him sneeze due to the condition. if he jumps, God wills it.
And if it does not happen as we have said, if it returns little by little, according to the natural form. For then it becomes slightly easier.
And if it does not come out as we have said, take a small amount of musk and oil from the anus, and gum melted, and grind all in a mortar; and place it over the female nature within and outside this remedy, then make her lie in deep water up to the ribs.
and when she is soaked, make a collar of myrrh and place it over her, leaving it for an hour. then make her lie on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose tight, and gently press her belly, for the child is now ready to be born.
From the emergence of the child onto its knees When the child takes this form, it will move its hands little by little. then he should be mindful on his collarbone, and let the weight hang down below, and lie still on his side. and he should bend his hands little by little, and then grasp the hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from beneath, as far down as possible. and if he feels pain, he should take his feet and move them slightly, then move the belly upwards, and finally bring the hands together. and gently move the child. and instruct the woman to impregnate herself as long as the child is inside.
From the birth of the child who comes with a large hand during I understand it is my duty to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then lift the woman and let her go;
if she cannot go, then make her lie down on the bed and straighten her legs;
then administer the musk that I have mentioned;
and if she does not give birth, if you keep her still on one side, then try to bring back the hand. and deliver the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to push until the baby comes out.
From the birth of the child on its mother's womb, let it spread its hands and turn its face away from its mother's back. I know that the pain will grip her hand, then she slowly moves it back and forth, and gently presses it.
and when it is even, apply the warm, natural muscles and oil as we have said, then command her to move little by little.
and when you have done this, leave the fire on the seat, and command it to burn. and make it sneeze. in the same manner for all the rest
in the same manner for all the rest When it appears in this manner at regular intervals, if the second one catches on your fingernail, while the moisture is being drained.
and bind it tightly to its face and neck, if the piece from the wound is caught, don't let it be restrained, and the dying person will pass away.
then turn the child inside, as long as you have placed it correctly, and instruct the woman to breathe deeply at regular intervals.
from the issue of twins Know that many times twins are born, and never more than three or four. and this is not an unusual thing, and it happens often. These are strange things, and they do not live long, without name.
These are strange things, and they do not live long, without name. I know that they multiply, and are devoured by the pleasure that creates them, which is related to the mouth.
and never depart so naturally from all of us, as we have said.
And if they depart severely, as the cure is as we have said, and there are subtle pains, making them sharp and light in their actions. and do so as it is worth for salvation. of many children
No joint is ever formed in the margin I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and they are all shaped like a child according to the measurement of its glorious sagacity, and it is necessary that the wise healer knows all this, for sometimes a similar occurrence happens. it is done according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you cure a woman who has lost her child or is pregnant, as I have said in the previous section, and there is no sign of delivery, and you are forced to intervene by hand; If it is necessary for you to know if a woman is of sound health and does not have any fear of death.
It is necessary that the woman lies on her back, and that her legs are inclined downward, and raised.
and applies the ointment to both parts, so that she lies in bed and is not treated for the descent of the child.
then rub the mother's mouth with moist oil and fennel seed powder and flaxseed, then apply this ointment to her hands.
then press the joint gently, then seek the place where it should be, and take care that the ligature does not descend onto his head.
if the ligatures are in his own hands or on his neck or in his mouth or on his palate or under his beard or by force or near his sides, and if their descent is towards the feet, then tie them or pinch them to the middle ribs.
and it is necessary that he holds the ligature in his right hand, and places the forceps between his two fingers of his left hand, and presses it gently throughout his hand, and ties the ligature to none of the joints we have mentioned, until it reaches the hollow of the joint.
then find another bone, where you need it most, so that the extraction is even.
and then stretch it equally from one side to the other, to extract it, and let the bones grip tightly, as shown in this shape:
And if a part remains stuck, apply no oil to its joint, but press it in that direction, and pull the other part.
and if it persists, place this incision deeper or higher up, and do as much as possible until it comes out entirely.
and if one hand comes forward before the other and it cannot return due to tightness, then you should wrap it in a cloth until it recovers completely. then cut in the joint of the foot or leg, and thus you should also do with the other hand, and hold both feet.
And if the child's head is large and stuck in the birth canal, or it has a sharp, concentrated wound, then you should press the spinous spatula between your fingers, open the head, and extract the blood. You use the instrument called an "almidach" to shape it with the tools and chapter that follow this one.
and thus, I myself make it attach firmly with great natural strength;
and then pull the bones with pliers, and the joints jump out, and they are strained with force, as if broken, until all the moisture that is inside comes out.
and if it cannot come out, break it into pieces with the force that you have.
and if it is swelled in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture drains out.
And if the infant is on its feet, there is a slight attraction, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is gentle.
And if it is twisted in the stomach or at the breast, then you must stretch it until the enveloped drape around the hand is loosened. and making the stomach or breast hollow, until the moisture within it drains out.
and if another member (limb) is broken and the chip remains, press the hand firmly into the wound's opening and draw it towards the mouth of the wound. then I press the bone deeply, and pull;
and if the opening of the wound has narrowed due to the hot abscess that has formed there, it is not appropriate to work on it, but rather moist and greasy things should be applied. and apply it with moist poultices, using warm water to soften and moisten it.
And if the limb is on its side, and you can put it back in place, apply what we have said for the living child;
and if it cannot be joined together again, after being separated into pieces, it leaves no trace of dislocation.
And when this is done, apply what we have said about the incisions that come from the sea.
and if the flow of blood comes, it should be treated with immediate restraint, and other remedies should be applied.
And I saw a woman whose belly had been bitten by a child; then I examined another on that same spot, and removed the other bite. After a long time, a painful abscess formed in her cheek, swelling so much that it opened, and began to cause great pain.
I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
I applied strong plaster, and an egg came out, and after some days, others. I was very surprised because that stomach has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I examine the wound, and if there are broken bones, I treat them until the woman is in better condition. and examine the woman long tens thus, and then let go a little of the pain from the blue.
and I have never recorded this chapter except because, when the masters encounter a strange thing, they know how to provide aid.
After this comes the form of pressure, with which one binds the books.
and at the second turn, as the second joint of the limbs. However, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth should be wide enough to fit two fists, and the margin of the cut should be one palm and a half long; and also adjust the two limbs to be equal in length of this same fist, firmly joined together, half a palm's length or slightly longer;
and these two adjustments are fitted into the mouth of the joint to open it when turning the two horns.
Another form, with a more subtle and lighter appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of pliers. and it should have two adjustments, as you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers' width;
and when you see the vagina open fully with the instrument, have the woman lie on her back, with her legs apart and knees bent, then carefully adjust both adjustments into the vagina, holding the end of the instrument beneath her hips. then use your hand to grasp the entire instrument, just as you did with the pincers equally, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the wound, until the pain ceases to be what it was.
all these instruments are thoroughly constructed and have many similar counterparts; and when you have equipped them, the more quickly they operate, and the greater their effectiveness for their quantity.
Do not disregard the instrument even if you have not arranged it properly, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the second stage of childbirth is reached, it is important that you instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze forcefully, holding her hands firmly over her mouth and nose. and if it falls through this, it is fine.
If the bone does not come out, take I a tool, and make I an opening or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as fennel, rue, anis, chamomile, kasia, and centaury; all of these herbs, or none of them, should be cooked or put in water on the fire;
then put a tube or opening into the wound, and the other end in the mouth of the injury, and hold it until the vapor comes inside the wound;
then make him sneeze, as we have said. If the patient experiences a second complication.
And if after this treatment she remains weak, and is not fully recovered, she should be instructed to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or almond mucilage, then apply it to the affected area, and let it rest in that position. and when she feels it, she should gently press and stretch it little by little straightening, so that the pain does not hinder the extraction.
but it is necessary to move slightly to the right and left, then pull. if it comes and goes away.
And if the mouth of the mare is tightly closed, we have said the remedy of sneezing and inhalation of herbal fumes.
and if it is not from all that we have said, be careful not to follow the milking.
but it is necessary that one who is at the mouth of the mare, you bind it to the woman's thigh, and then wash it with a four-ingredient ointment. if it loosens and resets, it will return again;
but nevertheless, if it loosens and causes a foul smell in the stomach and head, and makes the patient pale. Therefore, suitable fumigations should be used:
No one among the ancients has tried fuming with arugula and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one cauterizes a woman to stop the flow of blood and milk is as follows:
And it is like a glass vessel, and one places the head gently in its natural state, and wide openings over the fire.
and let there be fumigations over coals, and scabs until they are completely healed, and start again with another one.
Many children are born who have not yet had their roots pierced, but they are quietly satisfied with a subtle remedy. so it is necessary at the bath to pierce this remedy in its proper place, and do not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and secure the bandage so that it does not touch it.
then place a moist linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, and continue the treatment with the ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it does not return, insert or open a plug of flesh, and leave it for a long time, and it becomes rigid when the child wants to move into its chambers.
And never does this stopping of the wound or abscess come suddenly; if it is necessary to stop that sudden flow: if it is cured, as we have said about the pain of drowning.
Fistulas that occur beneath the fundament are called "nodation," and those that come from above the fundament are larger, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more;
and when this node is old, if it opens again and moisture causes a white or subtle swelling, then these fistulas do not heal.
and they are known to those who observe its management or vent as the patient makes an effort, and by chance one jumps up.
And if the fistulas penetrate just below the bladder, and just halfway up the penis; and reach just below the knee joint, and just above the calf.
And thus recognize the present fistula in the fundament, and not middle: and if you insert your index finger or fundament, and push a fine needle of steel or iron into the fistula where there is no curvature.
And if there is curvature, if you push a thin point, or a horsehair, as far as you feel the point or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out with extraction or blowing, as we have said; says that he shouldn't pierce at all; if you rush the cure.
And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to the urethra, if it lets go of the urine, and cannot be healed by medications.
If it is pierced just before the joint of the thigh, then the blood tends to flow towards the joint; if there is no distortion and the pain around it is not severe, if it bows again later, and no sudden treatment with dressing is effective.
And regarding these persistent fistulas, there is no sure cure but through hard work, and the folly of those who interfere.
In the one that is neither persistent nor ancient, there is hope for healing through fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands.
and flexes their legs up to their thighs, and inclines their hips towards their belly. then wraps a bandage of cloth, or a sponge if there is curvature, as long as you know where the bandage begins.
If the patient feels pain deep within, it is necessary that you press your index finger upon it, and they will then feel the point piercing them.
and if you feel a hole between your thumb and forefinger where the satisfaction or pleasure is felt, then know that it is open. if it does not heal properly with any treatment, then it cannot be healed.
Nevertheless, there is nothing that we can do to fully heal them, but it happens rarely.
and with this aid, it is when one applies the heat of the cautery gently according to the extent of the fistula, as has been said before. and the entire heat is applied to the fistula until it removes the source of the problem. and do this twice or three times, as long as you know that these marks must be burned, which resemble the feathers of an eye.
and then apply warm, moist compresses until the inflammation subsides, and finally, use a soothing treatment that draws out and seals the wound.
If he/she is in such a state, it is good.
If this cannot be cured in any other way, then it must be treated thus:
and insert between them, and do not pierce through to the deep muscle that is at the base, and between your finger and the tent, place a thick covering of cloth or something similar, and you will see the fistula opening where the covering touches the heart. if you seal the beginning of the fistula and pull it back before the tent, then cauterize after, as long as it reaches the top of the tent. and he will be freed from pain and suffering.
then identify those marks that resemble a bird's feather, and do not remove anything without reason.
And if the pain attacks you and cuts between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
For fire cautery combines two good things: that is to say, the burning of these adjusted parts, and the stiffness of blood and the dryness of moisture;
then apply a moist cure or something crushed, while the bones are bowed, and push the burnt parts into the bow.
Then treat the wound with hot irons and hard charcoal, which are dry medications.
For when it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
And if a fistula appears all the way to the bottom of its origin, and it is distant from the body, if you press on its root or origin, it will hurt.
If you feel a tent, and within it is the web or the glue or the charcoal, or it is ready to pierce, and there is no other way out of danger or hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it all the way through, or if you can, you apply a tent and treat it as before.
and do not force me too much, so that you do not disrupt the attachment which holds the fundament, and the expulsion comes from the side without willingness. then apply the cure, as we have said;
then apply the cure, as we have said; in case it should heal, remove that covering and clean it, then as it is freed from the fundament, either with a needle or another instrument pointed; then remove the foreign body from the wound as much as possible; then study to restore the wound and hold the fistula in the part devoid of the base.
then study to restore the wound and hold the fistula in the part devoid of the base. if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And never are fistulas like this way: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side near the base from the leather above, then take a sharp knife at the top according to this form: And press the thread wrong in two, and press the tent along the entire thread into the fistula as far as it goes to the top.
If it is persistent on the edge near the foundation within, then extract the thread from that hole, just as you insert your finger into your foundation.
and take the thread from the head, and gather the two joints together, and tighten one to the other, and leave it for one or two days.
and do not loosen it, as long as the thread breaks these three threads that are between them, and tighten.
then dress the wound as long as it is sealed and healthy.
If you cannot puncture the fistula, no matter what method you use, it will not be too deep. For it is not appropriate to make the wound too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
He describes a form of painful, thorny spasms that cause the formation of a fistula if it is severe and persistent, one side cutting and penetrating. and on the other hand not, because one cannot catch what one should not catch, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: or they are inside the anus, as hard as a grain of resin, and there can be small or large ones, and sometimes they ooze blood, and sometimes they have one or more, protruding from the anus and extending into the anal canal.
but those that are burnt have little moisture, and still, even now, if there is a little of the citrus water or some blood, and they have the colour of fresh flesh;
and the treatment for those who have them deep within the fundament, so instruct the patient to stretch himself slowly to move into rooms, until the fundament is healed and the children appear. if you act quickly, and have a pair of pliers, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at the roots.
and if they cannot hold the eyes due to moisture, if they take them in a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois; and then extract them carefully, cut them, and sprinkle hot powders onto the wound that are suitable for cauterization; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, and treat other ailments until they are healed;
and if the roots cannot come out, if you give the patient a harsh and biting enema to wash what is in the fundament, so that it can come out firmly. Let the patient lie still, and if their legs are deeply embedded, it is a light cure.
Let the patient lie still, and if their legs are deeply embedded, it is a light cure. and if you pin them with your fingernail or pliers, cut them off, then treat them as we have said, while they are still healthy, and fear the incision with iron. It is necessary that you administer the stitch according to this manner:
It is necessary that you administer the stitch according to this manner: take a twisted thread, and wind it into a needle, then pass the thread over the top and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread back through the needle, making them wide.
and hold the thread tight, then twist the thread, and extract the needle, and do thus with all the others, and leave some for draining the excess blood.
then place on the base a moist cloth or a rose-colored oil-soaked cloth, and place it over the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then leave it until they heal, and when they have fallen off, apply treatment and other remedies until they are healed.
The phrase "dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement" translates roughly to "the careful handling of the Many times there is drying up of feces in the intestine, due to nature's constraints, and when the illness is old and no medicine helps. If it is necessary for you to remove the skin with the tip of a spatula or with your finger, which prevents it from becoming moist; then treat it as it should be,
and if it cannot be treated, then repeat the shaving more strongly than before, as long as it does not become infected and is cut. then treat it while it is healthy.
Douloure" is the Old French word Ants are small, hairy creatures that burrow deep within the body, and they continue to grow in strength.
and never does the treatment cool down, and it feels as if all life has left the body, spreading throughout the entire frame, and more intensely in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a thin strip of an ostrich or strong dove feather, and place this cane onto the frozen area, pressing until the red circles cover the entire affected spot. then turn your hand over the entire cane while pressing around the frost, making it completely dry, and extract the frost from its roots.
And if you see that it is a needle of steel or iron made according to this form, and it is sharp from below and cuts through from above: I do not understand, for I must hold the eye, and press it.
And if you see, if cauterizing the tremor, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
Never should one use an enema of silver or arsenic, or molten iron or mail.
And never should one use these small and large instruments, according to those to whom they are applied. Those are therefore small, used in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering.
Those are therefore small, used in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering. He must prepare a small and wide enema if it is too narrow above; thus, the abdomen is tied according to this manner.
and I say there is a desire or the belly should be tied, as you see, and the feces should be seen to pass through.
and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other.
and the belly should be filled with medicines from a bladder of a good animal or parchment, and it should be punctured all around with small openings, and there should be one space between each opening, then thread through these openings a strong thread made of twisted crimped wire in an X or spiral shape, and tighten the belly as if it were a bowstring. and when the medicine is applied, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then give a enema.
and it takes the form of a soft circle:
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply oil or egg yolk or similar to the head of the enema bag, then gently squeeze it. then the healer should grip the enema bag with both hands together, until it is completely full, then extract the enema and gently lower the patient's legs against the wall, allowing the medicine to exit as best as possible. and if he sleeps soundly through the night, it is greater help.
And if you use the compress for a stomach disorder and the medicine flows out quickly, have the patient rest until it is completely healed.
And if the hemorrhoid is either internal or external, it should be treated with as subtle a cleansing as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle cleansing with which the skin is tightened:
We have already discussed the treatment of wounds;
or we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the parts where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of stone, and the cutting of sword and knife, or of spear or staff or arrow, or of similar things;
or according to the laws of the body, as when a wound breaks out on the neck, or on the head, or on the side, or on the belly, or the liver, and similar parts.
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple wounds of the head, because the remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound appears on the head, and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it is caused by a sharp object or similar things, and the skin is nonetheless torn and the wound is great, and you doubt slightly of an abscess forming. if it soon becomes healthier on its own, especially if the wound oozes little blood, and it heals on the contrary from the affected part.
and patients should avoid drinking wine and eating fatty meats.
And if he does not want to heal, let his flesh be reduced, and he should not drink wine, nor eat meat.
and apply this to the wound; if an abscess forms and it comes out, then use cotton moistened only in rose oil or strict wine.
and if there is no hot abscess, then apply to the wound, if it is fresh and all its blood is not moved by air or powder, I will say a little later.
and if it moves again, after having applied any heating, as long as it is healthy.
And if the wound is large, like the size of a sword or similar, and the edges cannot come together, they should be brought together by stitching, as I will explain for wounds in the belly from the stitches.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it bleeds heavily, but only for a short time, then he should apply pressure. then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat substantial meats, such as beef, cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar foods.
And if you find putrefaction in the flesh or leather that does not reach the bone, apply pressure to stop the putrefaction and treat it.
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cutting, and you cut it, even if it's only by a thread, and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put this powder which hardens so that the fire consumes it.
And the method of the powder is thus: take a portion of incense dragon's blood in two parts take living chalk in three parts, and grind it finely, and apply it to the wound, and form it tightly, until it disperses well and joins with all its blood.
and then bind it well, and leave it to loosen if it does not swell. because one should not remove medicine as long as it is healthy.
And never should one use charcoal only, unless you have frankincense or dragon's blood, but the fire must have moved the wound.
and if the wound has changed or moved, especially in an infected state, unless someone puts this powder on it;
but apply no hot compresses or poultices made of ground barley flour with water and honey while it is still fresh. then apply other remedies until it is healthy.
And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with delicate pincers.
and I will tell you after these fractures of the head.
of the deep wound
If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple, then it has no distinction from that in the head, but if there is damage to the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy but to let them heal, and do not put anything constrictive, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retract. and do not apply any heat to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity extends to the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be prepared, as if to wash in sweet water and mix with rose oil, and also wash the bandage in sweet water and other herbs according to this method, and moist plasters.
And if the wound is great, if it cuts through the tendons and ligaments, then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and infected, and full of pus, pierce them or lower down.
and if the artery is cut, and pus flows, if left untreated, and the law (presumably referring to the natural process of healing) and cauterization are required.
and if the pain in the throat is cut, or the colors, and the passage is kept closed, so that the flesh does not move too much onto the cartilage of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape. and then the healing process continues, without any delay, and apply medicinal treatments to it until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then and if there are pieces of bone, if you can remove them all, then do so, but if you cannot, leave them until the wound rots and becomes gangrenous.
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I mentioned. And if there are bones or a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or a knife, and the wound is very deep, then consider its direction and how the patient feels: then know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not very deep and fresh with blood, do not apply the powder at once in the first hour, nor bind it to prevent the blood from clotting completely, or it may return to the body and cause the patient harm; but I found a more attractive remedy, and tie it twice a day.
and if you have no remedy, put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three or four days, or even longer. if there is no twitching or severe shaking of the body or any distress at all; and when you see the bones returning to their proper place, then know that the wound is healed. Cure the wounds with various remedies and others, as long as they are healed;
and if it cannot heal, keep working, until you know there is a fistula;
if the cure is as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is superficial or deep, on the front or back, the treatment for that one should be as follows; if it is large, of sewing;
and if it is small, of powder, and if it is tightly packed into the bone, and has caused fragments, perhaps the wound, and treats them fiercely if they are infected. and if they are not infected, then leave the wound to heal, and lighten the extraction.
and for other wounds in other members, the judgment is as we have said.
disruption of the belly
The ruptures in the belly are great, medium, and small;
from the great wound, never let the intestines spill, or the inner lining of the intestines, which allows foreign objects to enter;
and the stitching is more delicate, and never worth less for a small wound than for a great one, because we do not apply force to the intestines in it, unless we press them tightly from above and below;
for because the intestines swell soon after being pushed, causing pain, if they are not pressed tightly, and due to this, the smaller wound is easier to treat, for we must first reset the intestines to their proper place before treating the others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common stitches are used in stitching the belly, and the stitch for other wounds of the body, and there are two other specific stitches that are common to other wounds.
Nevertheless, they are more precise with the stitch of the belly, and I will explain each one.
I say, when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine exposed, and it is an easy matter to close it, then this is by one of the two manners: for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the injury.
And when it is cold, warm it in this way: soak a sponge or a soft cloth in hot water only slightly warmed with vinegar, salt, and pepper, and press the intestine gently until the swelling goes down.
and never make constricting wines, but rather, be ready to apply heat as needed to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestine is moistened with cold or hot and bad fluids, for this lightens the entry of a little thing.
and if it cannot enter, make a slight cut with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids.
and the first remedy is to move the limb, for we must not cut without great need.
and this is the instrument for splitting:
if it cuts deeply into the flesh and does not deflect, then see the shape: And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines burst forth, if you can return them to their natural place in their proper position, do so if you have the power, for it is beneficial.
When the wound is large and located in the lower abdomen, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back and elevate his legs higher than his head. and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then place the head and feet higher than the affected area, and also, when turning the patient from side to side, let the wounded part be higher than the other.
and thus we must administer what I say to great wounds and injuries.
For small wounds, make them as if you are equipped, then take in your hands a gentle remedy that heals every break and closes the lips.
and this is the common method of stitching: you should puncture a needle or more, according to the extent of the wound, then leave two spaces from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle where there is good strong thread. and pierce the two joints through the skin with the two joints of the syringe, which is beneath the skin, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two joints of the syringe in three groups.
then stretch a double thread around the needle from both parts, then bring together the two joints of the wound properly, and then leave two spaces, and insert another needle;
then tie the thread just as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to your need for needles, until all the wound is constrained.
and let the needles be of moderate size, between fine and thick, for the fine needles take all the blood, and the too thick ones cannot enter properly. because they need to be moderate in size;
and do not insert the needles too far beyond the depth of the flesh and dermis, as they will puncture and open the wound before healing.
and then cut off the ends of the needles, so they do not irritate the patient when sleeping, and place a cloth or blanket over the ends of the needles to keep them still, and leave them until the wound is healed.
and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles.
The second stitch is common, and it is that you join the two parts of the skin and the two parts of the tissue together with a needle using one strong medium thread.
and when you have joined these four parts together, return the needle to the beginning part, and stitch in the same way that you sew clothes.
and leave a space between each stitch, no thicker than the diameter of two needles.
This stitch opens the wound, and I sewed a wound that had a knife in the stomach, which was deeply cut, more than a palm wide, and it extended from the intestines two palms wide, and the wound was in the stomach.
I returned the intestine to its original position after it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed completely within fifteen days, and he was cured.
And they marveled that he was alive, and it was a miracle.
and I did not cure him with any treatment, as I was in a place where none could be found, neither any medicine. and apply a cold compress to the wound two times a day, and wash it with honey water until it is healed.
Now, I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
take the needle, and hold it against the affected part from inside to outside;
when it has pierced the center perfectly, if the tip is sharp or blunted or you have held the needle in a certain way, and it pierces from inside to outside again, do the same on the other side of the affected part.
and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as a tailor sews fur, and leave once the thread satisfied on one side, and take it up again on the other, until the stitch is entirely finished.
The second way of stitching, which Galens calls the proper way, is as follows: just as some join the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the main threads to the other main thread in this manner.
take a needle or a thread of magic nearby, and pierce only one side, leaving the two threads of the stitch; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the furthest part towards the inside, until it reaches the affected area.
then pierce both parts from the furthest towards the inside, in two other areas of the mirror-like surfaces on either side.
and this is the most effective method of stitching, and the most common one.
These words are from a medieval medical text, and no one can testify to their truthone must sew the belly with needle and thread.
and you should push one needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, it is the most difficult stitch compared to other stitches in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you discover the fresh wound filled with blood, and the flesh has moved, then press on the wound and the intestine, and stop the bleeding.
then apply the burning powder, and it will change the color, if you put on any dressing that is available, as long as the wound is open. and take the thread, make it strong, and secure the healing, and the mirror. then treat the wound as with others, as long as it is healed.
and if you have no medicine, then apply this, as soon as it begins to open again, cotton cloth, and move it two times a day until it is healed.
For you need no other medicine in various arrangements when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound affects the principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light bandage in warm olive oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected area, and under the armpits.
and if it causes pain or inflammation in the bowels, and this often happens, then they should enema with red wine, especially when the inflammation reaches the intestines.
and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestinal organ, called "young" (or perhaps "innard"), cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the frailty of its vessels, the subtlety of the entire body, and the similarity of its nature to nerves.
And if the cauterized wound jumps or moves, place it back as it was before, just like the intestine, while it is still fresh.
and if it becomes much and turns towards red or black, then you must hold the black part still, for there will be no further blood flow, as there are veins and arteries.
then cut away what is between the bones, and hang both parts from the outside of the wound until they fall off, to ease the extraction when the cauterized parts come out, and the wound heals.
from the rupture of the bowels
When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in no man, for I have seen that a noble man was wounded in his belly by a lance.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and formed a fistula, and from there issued evacuation and flatulence.
I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to bandage subtily as long as it was healthy, and the wound healed.
And when I saw him bound, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his stomach. and he did not have any pain, but rather improved conditions, foods, and drinks;
and they said no experiments should be done when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in such a way: take a large needle, then gather the edges of the wound, and when the needle has opened the mouth, place it between the two lips, so that it pulls the mouth together.
and then cut off the head of the shoulder, and this remains so that it cannot dislocate, then place another piece in its place in this manner as before, until the wound is completely healed. and examine the wound.
If the pain is sharp and penetrates into the intestines, and causes no harm to the patient, one can bind the intestines with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal in this manner:
take the end of this thread from the intestine, which is well cleaned, and then bind it to the end of this fine linen thread twisted, then thread it onto a needle, sew up the intestine, and rearrange it in its original position.
and this method of stitching with stitches is not stronger than according to the path of purpose and hope.
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it affects one of the vital organs, there is no treatment subtle enough.
of a fistula, whether it be Every wound or abscess, when it becomes infected, is generally called a "fistula", especially when it is covered with pus and feels warm.
And a fistula is according to the truth, hard and white, where no pain is felt, and it is also smooth like the feathers of a bird.
and it never becomes clear at any time, or dense at other times; not at all times, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of the division of wounds; that every wound which is not clean, and there is no fever, is only outside one of the nine causes. that is to say, due to the smallness of blood or pus; or because of its evil nature; or because there is a hard fever inside, and on the lips, which does not allow anything to grow; for there is too much bowing; for their bones are brittle, and the material is of poor quality; for their medicines are not good for treatment; for this is how corruption is a manner of pestilence; for the proprieties in the region are delayed digestion, and slow health, and oppressive by nature; There are veins or bones here.
and I have already described all these causes, signs, and treatments of medications in the previous section.
It is necessary that I tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
You know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; because there are fistulas that affect large veins, arteries, and nerves, as well as the bladder, intestines, or kidneys, or any of the ribs, or the spine in the back, or any joint in the hands or feet. and if it occurs at a point that belongs to the main member, and has similar joints.
And all the fistulas of this nature are difficult to heal, and there is no remedy but labor and ignorance.
and if there is no fistula that does not come to the place I mentioned, and you have faith in the remedy, and you see it take effect, take a piece of iron or steel, if the fistula is deep, then press it.
and if the fistula is crooked, try to insert a thin piece of something flexible, for the bend will conform to the curvature.
and if it is a fistula, wide open and you cannot examine it properly with your fingers, then close it by inserting a plug in one of the openings, for moisture flows from one opening to another and purifies it.
then grasp it firmly with your power, so that you know if there are bones or nerves, and pull it out completely, and ask the patient in pain where they feel the pain when you press your hand, and the place where they feel it.
and when you truly know the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or in none of the places I told you, then cut it according to what I told you, and remove the disorder and the corrupted flesh within.
and then the cure as long as it is clean, and if the fistula is deeply located in the right place, it is necessary that you remove it completely, as much as you can, then apply wet compresses with a medicinal herb, and keep them on top of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
and then apply warm compresses with healthy garlic, as long as it is clean;
and if it is not clean through this method, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, remove it.
If a vein or nerve does not affect your principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, remove it as soon as possible, then cure the wounded area thoroughly until it is healed.
and if it is not healed, and the bone still curves as before, know that you are not yet allowed to proceed.
if it becomes exposed and you want to proceed deeply, remove all the corruption, then reset the bone to its original position.
and if it is thus healed, so much the better. If that is not the case, know that the corruption is too extensive that you cannot overcome it; if there is no other force but to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can extract it with tweezers, using an appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, they should be extracted carefully, leaving none behind.
and if moisture makes it worse, there is no doubt or fear, for warmth and moisture, and freeing the bones.
And if you cannot remove them for an hour, then apply something to the wound that promotes putrefaction, and leave it until the bones are rotted around them, and then they will become lighter.
and if it is a large bone, like the leg or thigh, then apply so much pressure to the putrefaction until all blackness is removed from the bone, and then dress the wound.
and if there is a great amount of corruption within the heart, it extends almost to the bone; if it is necessary, cover and protect everything up to the point of corruption, then heal as long as it remains sealed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurs in a person's leg, so that you can take an example from it and receive help in your work.
It was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to something within the body that caused materials to reach the leg, resulting in a large abscess that could not be opened.
but because of their madness, they pricked too deeply into the abscesses, and burned many things, and it became a fistula, and there were many openings through which blood and moisture left the body.
and many others had no cure for over two years, and there was no wise man in the art of healing, until I was called to it, and I saw his leg and the remedies with which he was cured, and what was corrupted through the openings in the body. and the skin of the young man became red, and had the color of a citron.
I set up a tent in one of these openings, and then I examined all the openings, and found that some came against each other from every part of the leg.
I quickly prepared a tool, and inserted it into one of the openings until I discovered a piece of bone, which I found corrupted and pierced, and the corruption extended all the way to the bone.
I realized what I was seeing with the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except for the one I had left.
and I began to treat the wound with strong medications for a long time, but it could not heal.
and then I began to recognize and discover the bone as I have mentioned before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and treated it, and then tied it, and focused on fusing the joint. but I could not until I had completely wrapped the bone in cloth, then treated it with all kinds of medicine. and it became healthy and the joint was healed firmly, and it did not want to repeat the operation again unless because of the weakness of the patient who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had of him. For in the evacuation of blood, it often happens completely, and a hard callus is formed in its place on the bone, which is well arranged and causes no harm or damage to anything at all, neither coming nor going.
And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this way: take hold of the ligaments, and strain the end of the bone that is opened, and command anyone to extend it upwards; and attach another stronger thread to the first one, and bind it onto the part where the bone is separated, extending the end, so that you pull the corrupt flesh away from the bone, and uncover the flesh on the place where you want to treat it, so that the bone is not damaged.
and place I a table beneath the bone to keep the flesh from moving;
it is important to examine it carefully as one can see and smell the corruption, and sometimes in another way.
and if the bone is corrupted and will not open, and the corruption is in one place or another, it exposes the flesh completely.
then place I a table beneath, and then gently move from one part to another the corruption, and be sure that the pressure is just long enough on the corruption as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, cut out the corrupted joint, and the bone it contains from the other side.
and if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, cut out the affected part if there is no other option.
and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, and it is very strong, nonetheless you must inquire about that corruption how it opens. and purify it in every way that you can, but ensure the vein or nerve does not oppose your actions.
and knows that the saw and the threads to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this, it is necessary to match each type of operation with its appropriate instrument;
and knows that the work will show you the instrument of which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases; if you think of the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
The joints may become dislocated either internally or externally;
and when you have treated that corruption with medicinal cures but they are of no avail, it is necessary to immobilize that member until the corruption disappears, so that the patient may be saved from death or from the greater evil of a defective limb.
and the signs of this are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and then the corruption spreads from member to member, taking over the entire body.
If you hastily cover it, and if it's due to the penetration of some venomous creatures, such as a sea scorpion or snake, and the corruption is at the top of the two, if you hit it, and do not give it any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, if you hit the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm.
and if it comes up to the arm, if you hit the shoulder.
and if it passes through the cut, it is death, and there is no remedy outside of the quantity of its virtue.
and do the same when corrosion or rust occurs. if it occurs on the first joint, then chop after the other joint.
and if it occurs deeply, chop all of it. and if it ascends the leg, chop at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other cause but to bring the patient to death.
and the method of binding or wrapping the member: if you fasten it above and below, extend one minister from the lower link, and another minister from the upper link, and release the band that is between the two links with a wide spatula, until the bone is exposed.
then bind or wrap it, and place each drape of linen on either side so that the lint does not touch the healthy flesh, bringing about further injury and abscess to the patient.
And if the occurrence of blood comes when you open, if you cauterize the wound too harshly or place any restrictive powders on it;
then return to your treatment as long as it is complete, then bind the afflicted member with a strong ligament, and heal it until it is sane.
and I will tell you if it happens at home as if it were a dream:
it had a blackness that seemed burnt from fire, and that corruption first appeared on its second toe, spreading over the entire foot.
and when the bone feels the heat, it hardens itself against the pain, and becomes healthy.
and after a long time, the pain returns or the bone feels weak in the hand, and it comes to me, and I place it on things that resonate after the purification of the body, but it cannot stop the pains.
and it made me grasp the hand, but I did not want to hurt the matter. and I also doubted that if he cut off his hand, he would not die, for the strength of man was weak.
and he becomes desperate, returns to his land, and covers his hand, and is healed.
and I have no objection to this, unless it is done differently, as needed.
Abscesses never occur in fat tissue, and they stay for so long that they cause a great gathering of bowels. and then they rot and pierce, breaking the bowels and remaining in the body like a vassal. and the skin that is above is as delicate as fine cloth, and does not cut to the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called 'healthy', and is not called 'fistula'.
but if it is so extended that it reaches the bone in its progression, then it is called 'fistula'.
and the skin is such that you must cut through it completely, especially when it is delicate, just as if it were fine cloth. and does not cease because of its putrefaction.
And if you think that the skin is rotting but the putrefaction is not yet complete and the skin becomes very hard, treat it with a cleansing enema as follows:
check if the swelling is large and the bowels emitting a bad odor, then use an enema with Egyptian medicine prepared as follows: take as much honey, oil, and litharge, equally, and cook it in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey.
and then take according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and enema the breast, and tighten the opening. leave the medicine on for two hours, then extract it while squeezing.
do this several times, until the breast is healed and the pain is gone.
and never enema with water and ashes when this medicine is not present, but you press ashes from the bark of a vine tree, pour water over them, then strain it and use it for an enema, until you know that the breast is fully healed.
and if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water from ashes can help, if he is enemas with water and honey, or has a little litharge ground in it. or you give him an enema of honey and sweetened wine, since honey has purifying properties and washes away impurities, and the wine makes the body air and healthy.
and once you have done this and are confident that the seeds are well purified, give him an enema with what causes a certain pain in it, and press on with cauterization, and apply it with rosin oil and wine.
You should administer some medications and remedies to it, of which I have spoken about their properties in treating wounds.
and if the wound in the side is small and the cannula of the clister cannot enter, enlarge it a little with a hot iron and insert a plug of Egyptian or basilicon poultice, as long as it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too wide, so much that it causes a great suffering to the patient or prevents the cannula or clister from entering, and if the opening that leaks is above or below the level of the wound.
and if you cannot cover the stomach as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowel reaches its lowest position, for when the bowel is completely healthy, it does not allow anything to ferment inside, and if you cannot cover the stomach as you see appropriate, arrange it accordingly. so that the bowel moves slightly downwards, and does not leave any part of the bowel behind.
so that the bowel moves slightly downwards, and does not leave any part of the bowel behind. and take consolidant medications to put on the wound, and apply them under the linen cloth that covers all the wound. then cut with force around the hole in the side of the chest, making it larger than the first one, and apply gentle dressing on another cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound in the chest to align the muscles, and do not remove the large initial cloth until after several days.
and the one who is over the chest wound often removes it to release pressure on the muscles, and knows that whatever comes from the muscles, whether it's poison or blood or not enough, or digestion or indigestion.
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or no, and when the medicine has extended in this way and you see the nature that springs from the wound, then know that healing has already begun, and approach health.
and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change to another bandage, and renew the dressing.
And if subtle poisons manifest after a long time, do not despair of your health, for health approaches.
For there are people who tardily begin to care for their wounds, and others who do the opposite.
and if the patient has an indigestive stomach ache for many days, knowing that the pain does not subside.
and if the pain persists for a long time, then use remedies that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as a final treatment, since there is a great part of vitriol in them, which is the last medicine.
take the final treatment, and make it with rose oil, and mix it with old wine of equal substance;
then bind it and use it;
and itself makes the honey thick and rich, when garlic is not present, take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it over the honey while it's still warm from the fire;
and then I wrap it, and extend it over the breast, and never administer aromatics or long roots of celestial herbs, which is also like flour of grain and lint; and use of simples or compounds; Break them, and make a powder, and add the honey I mentioned, and use it;
and if the cure is prolonged, and this cure does not heal it, then know that the corruption is deep, and it leaves an impression on the bone, or makes the members hard, or the limbs stiff. if the cure for the fistula, as we have said above.
A pustule is an abscess that forms under the nail of the hand, or foot, or occasionally in other areas.
and when they become old and care is not taken, if an abscess forms, they run and throw themselves down until the root of the nail runs out, and perhaps they will cut it off entirely.
and the inflammation comes right up to the bone, causing such intense pain that it smells bad, and the swelling becomes very large, and the color turns red.
When treating it as we have described in the previous section, if the treatment is not effective, then you must remove all the dead tissue from around the nail, and after that, cauterize the wound. Cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy and the nail is uninfected.
and if the nail becomes infected and begins to hurt, and a blister forms, you must insert a knife under the nail that is causing the pain, and lift it up, and then cut the infected part gently and slowly, and apply hot and corrosive medications to remove everything. then attend to the treatment of wounds as long as they are clean.
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it off and remove it, for as soon as the bone decays, it cannot heal.
and if you see both bones corrupted, cut them off as mentioned above, then treat them while they are clean.
and if it is injured, swollen, and causes great pain, then you must first heal it.
then cut the nail with a sharp instrument diagonally from above, and be sure that the cut does not go all the way to the quick of the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, apply something that soothes.
He who is born into the hands of no one, perhaps quite fleshy, and by chance has a part with bones, but never a nail, and none are born in the root of the joint, where birth is against nature.
He who is born without any new pain should not be mute, and he who is born with a joint pain may remain mute.
the cut on the fat person should be light, in this way: Cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if it holds you down tightly.
In those who are born with or develop a deformity, it is necessary that you first hold the round shape of the joint firmly towards the bone, then dislocate the bone to a suitable position, and finally cure it as long as it is healthy.
The deformities that come together in a joint may be due to birth, or the healing of a wound, or burns from fire, or similar conditions.
You must ensure that you heal the tightly closed one according to its natural forms. then place between two moistened oil-soaked cloths so that they do not adhere. You should insert between two thin pieces of cloth, as long as the wound is closed, as it should be.
If dislocation occurs in any of its fingers with the palm, secure that joint as appropriate.
Their veins are thickly wrapped, filled with melancholic excesses that affect various parts of the body.
And it is more pronounced in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry things, compared to others.
It is necessary for you to administer purgative once and then cleanse the bowels.
The treatment for this is according to two manners: One is with a knife, and they scrape out the black blood. and the other method is that you open the vein, and scrape it out completely.
The size is according to this manner: first, the leg with the hot water becomes very strong, so that the flesh remains tender, then stretch the sick leg from above the ankle to the part below the knee.
then open the vein in its place, either in I or II or III, with a wide cut, then gently and carefully squeeze out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's strength allows;
and then apply it, and command him to eat foods that produce dark, black urine;
and resume the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, and harmful to the patient.
The remedies for this are as follows: Lift the leg of the ailing patient, if there is hair on it, then immerse it in hot water and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell.
and if you have no bath, then warm it over fire, and then apply it to the vein with long heat at the top of the knee or in the area below the ankle.
then open the skin at the joint, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears as if one can feel it.
and it appears red and black, and when it enters or pierces the skin, it seems like a white cord;
then pull the right of the socket, as long as it is lifted from the skin, and then bend it slightly to the oncine, then cut across in another place on the other side above the third joint.
then strip the skin from the vein while it is open, then lift the flesh slightly, as you did before, and bend it to another oncine, as you did first.
then take another size, or as many as you need, then gently, and cut it with the right foot, then treat and move it until it reaches the second size.
then extract it gradually, as it becomes stronger, then cut it.
and if you cannot pull and lift it, take a needle with a very strong thread, tie it, pull and move it from side to side until it comes out. and be careful that it does not cut, for if it cuts, you cannot pull or lift it, and it brings harm to the patient.
and when you have finished treating it, immediately place a warm compress of wine and rose oil on the moistened wound. and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vision is contracted, twisted, and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it in an unconventional way but do not cover it. and treat it as we have said before.
The form does not allow for extracting the eye if it is stuck, without cutting the vein.
and it is very difficult, because if it were delicate, it would cut the vein, but since it is thick as we have said, this is its form:
This vein is located in the legs, in warm regions where no plants or trees grow, and on land that is not moist.
and by chance it may appear in other places than the legs, and this results from a putridity that arises from beneath the skin, as if it comes from within the body, winding and writhing, nestled between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to emerge forcefully, just like a root of a plant.
When the joint is open, you should wrap it tightly with a piece of cloth from one and a half to two fingers wide, and compress it, leaving the cloth on the leg, and every time there is no movement, you should rewrap the cloth around the affected area.
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining portion, but do not cover its root until all the blood has stopped flowing. because if you cut it, it will return to the root, causing an abscess and putrefaction or gangrene there, leading to a severe illness.
For every small thing, it is necessary to treat it quickly and carefully from its root, leaving nothing in the body.
and there is no time when this vein should be treated with anything other than the palm of your hand, or with a needle, and often a patient comes to me whose vein is as long as ten palms, and when you cut it, if it bursts open or closes up, and pierces through to the bottom, then everything flows out.
and it should be emptied of the matter that is inside, and then apply medicated poultices for several days, and then treat it as with abscesses.
And never should this vein be cut again, especially when it opens at the ankle or knee joint, and much injury occurs, and from which it bleeds a lot.
Treat it as we have said before.
vers that are born between skin and bone. This illness is called the "beef disease" in our land because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that appears between the skin and muscle, spreading throughout the body, ascending and descending, and causing great pain from limb to limb, until the skin is broken where it has spread.
and it is caused by putrefaction of some humours, as they come and wind and worms and parasites in the belly.
and doubt arises about the nature of his illness, for when it spreads throughout the body, it ascends to the head, and reaches the brain, perhaps returning and destroying the brain. and this often happens.
When you see it healing and draining, it cannot be done again until it has passed.
If it is necessary, then you must place the limb firmly and tightly above and below with a strong bond, then cut and pull it until it moves freely in the socket, and if you cauterize it with fire, let it heal.
and the greatest harm it does is when it bleeds, as we have said.
and if you see it coming close to the wound, tighten the muscle below forming a bump, then cut and pull.
and it is necessary for the patient to purify his body with solvent medicines to remove harmful humors, and to eat foods that prevent putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from flatulence This disease is called "vakerir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in no particular member, but can move from one member to another.
and I have shown what I told you. I was called to see a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and noticed a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and then I saw, the spirit rising in the shoulder, more so than anything else, as bright as living silver when it cuts through flesh to another.
the pain departs from the affected limb and fixes itself in the shoulder, then after a short while, it spreads throughout the body, until it reaches the other breast.
then it told me that it returned again around the body, as I saw it.
I marveled much at how it moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a way. Nevertheless, I wanted to know why the pain moved from one place to another, but I did not understand it, as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, her veins were exposed, and this constraint of breath was apparent.
and did not appear according to this reason to those who are delighted, and have moist skin and veins covered.
And when you see this illness healed, and the patient feels this pain, if it opens as we have said, press it from above and below vigorously, and then continue until this constrained breath at the place leaves. and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it to your own, if the treatment of these winds, like foul pills, and pills of serpentary, and similar others.
The arrows vary, according to their appearance and the parts of the body they pierce.
Their diversity is such that there are those with great points, and small, and curved, and solid; and those with sharp angles, and some with tongues, and others where there are pieces;
and those that break in any limb break in two ways: or in the main limb, as the head, body, liver, kidney, bowels, bladder, and similar members. When it breaks in any part of these members, then the signs of death that I will tell you below will appear: you must be wary of extracting this arrow, as death comes after in various ways; and when this evil sign does not appear at all, and the arrow is not entirely extracted, if you pull it, treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow breaks and pierces the bone, and swelling appears on the head, it is a sign of concussion and stupor and drowsiness and red eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without feeling in the nostrils or ears; and by chance he loses his speech and voice; and there springs from the moist wound a white discharge resembling pus, and also as if from a bruise of a horse;
and if this sign appears, if you hold to the cure, and pull the arrow if it is not fully out.
The sign of the arrow when it breaks or withdraws is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in hard, non-empty matter. and by chance, he may become mute as if he were a bird, and there appears black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: so he knows with certainty that death descends.
And the sign of an arrow that the patient never sweats is that no foam comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and he breathes heavily and stops moving.
And if the arrow comes out under the skin, it is necessary to clean the small costs; and it gives great pain and causes great sorrow and sighing; and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if an arrow pierces through the stomach, perhaps something from the undigested meat will jump out of the wound.
And if an arrow pierces through the belly, and there is no sign of healing through the intestines, then there is little hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow pierces the bladder, the urine jumps and flows out, and the patient feels great pain. you know that the wound is mortal.
The other limbs, as they are formed and their joints and neck and shoulder and helper (muscles) and the sharp pain in the back and the forceful and stiffening (of muscles), and the foot and legs, and the appearance of the limb, differ according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you must do the same.
It happened to a man that an arrow struck him or pierced his side. I tried it, and I pulled from the other side under the ear's fat, and it healed without scar.
And take a needle in hand, insert it into the fat under the paper skin, and the needle is withdrawn with only its point towards the wood, and the needle is large as an arrowhead, very light without ears.
it became healthy, and no bad accidents befall it.
And take a needle from the throat to a Christian, and it is an Arabic needle with ears:
I opened the jaws, and as I gently withdrew it, the Christian became healthy.
And take an arrow from the body, which was stuck in its stomach, and thought it was dying.
and then it passed XXX days, and its condition did not improve; I cut the arrow, and opened it up, and pulled it out, and there was no bad outcome.
And if you see a person with an arrow stuck in their back, and the wound is deep;
and hold the arrow within it, and do not change its natural positions, nor find harm in any of its natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow has fallen into his face, and the wound was deeply seated; and held it thus without suffering great pain;
and many others of similar kind.
And pulled out an arrow from the body of a prince, the king, which had been struck in the neck and was slightly inclined to the right side; and it was the arrow completely withdrawn.
I was called to treat her after she had been bedridden for three days. I found the wound very tight.
I probed her with utmost care, and found no sensation. and she felt sharp pain and discomfort behind her right ear.
I thought it was from the arrow's point. I applied a soothing poultice to the wound, as the swelling had not subsided. and I saw the arrowhead appear.
and I saw the arrowhead appear. I applied the hot hand to it for several days, and then sutured the wound accordingly, holding the patient for a long time until he felt the arrow inside his flesh.
and it came out. I applied strong, corrosive medication to the wound for several days until it opened up, and after testing it, I felt the tip of the arrow still stuck in the flesh.
then adjust the opening of the wound with this medicine until the head of the arrow becomes visibly apparent.
and after three months, the wound healing process should be well underway, and then it widens, so I inserted pincers, pulling from both sides, but it cannot heal.
so I did not cease to try and invent new tools, until I found a set of well-made pincers, according to the shape that would be described at the end of this chapter, as I continued to pull and turn the wound.
And the greatest experts believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I then restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or, I have told you about the quality of extracting arrows, so that you place your cure on what I do not mention, for books cannot encompass everything.
but the most skilled physicians consider even the smallest thing and what is present and lacking, a true new work, and new tools, at the decline of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not leave the limbs where they are embedded, but in two ways: or through the place where they enter, or from another side;
and that which comes out from the other side where it enters, is an arrow entering into flesh, and never comes out again.
And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh around it decays, and then free the issue.
and also if it is stuck in the bone, it cannot come out, unless left like that for several days, and moves each day.
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, it pierces around everywhere inside, narrowing the joints around until they are wide enough, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is embedded deeply in the body and cannot be seen, then try to extract it with all your might. and if you feel it, use a suitable instrument;
and if you cannot reach the wound due to its depth or the arrow's position, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein to be seen, then cauterize it until the wound heals.
and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, carefully remove the charred part from both sides as much as you can, then break or bend the barbs of the arrow until you can pull it out.
and gently, without breaking the arrow, draw it out more forcefully.
And if you cannot do it at once, so that the limb is entirely relaxed around the joint, then continue to treat it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the bloodletting causes adverse effects, then apply the treatments as described in that chapter.
and beware of cutting into nerves and veins, and use any means you can to draw out the arrow safely, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
and place the patient as he was when the arrow entered, for that is the greatest aid, and if you cannot do it, then follow the signs shown to you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, where it opens something within, or the skin is swollen in a noticeable way:
then cut it, as the pliers can grip it, and then extract it: if it jumps now.
If it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then try to extract it again until it comes out.
and if the arrowhead is in the flesh, it presses against the entire flesh.
and if the arrowhead is extracted, you must apply pressure, if you administer an instrument, ensure that the tip of the arrowhead enters the channel of the instrument.
and then press firmly, and if the arrowhead is embedded, insert an instrument with a pointed end to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you clean all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrowhead has come out in the stomach, or bladder, or ribcage, and it is accessible, then you may cover it;
and guard to not cover the vein and nerve, then extract it, and then stitch the wound, it is a skill. and the treatment as long as it is healthy.
The instrument used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak; here is its shape:
And there are many ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the arrowhead is like a feather, to point the tip of the arrow, just as if it were the form:
There are 31 veins from which one derives health, of which there are 16 principal ones, namely: II beatens that are after the ears, which are called the soft "herbesh"; and the two arteries that are in the temples, appearing; and the veins that are in the arms of the limbs, called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is on the head, near the eyes; and the two glands which are at the collarbone; and the two veins that are on the upper lip near the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich". and the two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins that one commonly knows are 'V' shaped in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, which is on the left side of the body, and people commonly call it 'vein of the head'. and the middle part is called "fast" (tight), and it is composed of the head and body parts, and common people call it "vein of the heart". and the basilic is on the right side, and common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is beneath the skin, and it is the one that heals, which opens clearly on the wrist.
And the saving vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it rains (i.e., swells).
and in the leg and where the foot has three veins: one is detached from the ribcage on the left side of the body, and the second is at the ankle on the right side. and the vein called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg, there are three veins detached from those.
The healthy purification of veins located after the ears is beneficial for old catarrh and migraine.
and the qualities of the healthy substance, as I have said, and it is that you apply the head of the patient, and rub the affected area or veins with a rough cloth. then tie the patient's collar with a string, so that both veins behind the ears, dependent from the head, become visible. place your two fingers there, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, it is certain.
then take the lancet, and cut through the vein just beneath the bone, then gently place your hand over the entire vein upstream, and press and hold the skin and the vein well, so that blood can flow out as you see.
then stretch and hold it, as long as it remains healthy;
and I have already spoken of incision and cauterization in the first book.
The health of the two arteries in the temple, which is worth an old and steady migraine, and a habit of sudden blindness, and the heat of acute tears in the eyes.
and the quality of a good healer is such as I say: and it is that the patient holds his breath, as long as both veins are widely open; and feel the intense pain from both sides, and then seal with a bandage.
then gently apply pressure on the vein at the top of your thumb index, insert the lance from below, and draw out the blood, first from the vein above and then the sap, just as you did with the other veins, allowing the blood to flow according to your need.
then free the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton. and then the wound forms, and leave it until it is healthy;
and we have spoken much of their treatment and extraction, as the beginning of this book.
The healing of the vein on the forehead is just as valuable as the healing of the skull in ancient facial diseases, and for migraine and redness.
and its quality is such that the patient tightens their neck by twisting, until a vein opens. then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this form:
and place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, allowing blood to escape according to the quantity you see. then gently release the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is healed and never open a wide wound with a flame.
Nevertheless, one must not let the flames be too fierce; and do not let the healthy part be crossed, for the bone is hard, and perhaps break the flames when they are subtle.
The health of the two veins that are in the arms is especially helpful for abscesses, and for itching, and redness, and inflammation in the eye, and facial diseases;
and the quality of their health is such that the patient feels no pain from any twisting of the veins, as before;
then bring the healthy flesh, and make it heal across, slightly narrow than the length of the flame, for there is no need for excess. and if the flames are subtle, they might break.
then make the blood flow, as much as needed, and then tie it up on cotton, securing it well.
The flesh around the nose is most valuable for healing quickly, and for severe wounds, and for facial diseases, such as migraines and redness that appears on the face, especially when it's old.
and the quality of the wound is such that the patient squeezes his throat, then pulls his nose towards your left hand, and takes the thin flame with long tips, and inserts it between the space of the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well enough, and blood will now begin to flow.
and do not be too hasty in its application, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for a night, for it is often quickly restored.
The holy water of the two eyes helps in the narrowing of the pupil, and at the onset of illness, and in many diseases, and in ulceration, and corrosion, and herpes, and swellings.
and the quality of the water is such that the patient draws their breath from both within and without, as we have said.
and if the master is standing over the patient's head, and the patient sits in a certain place, then open the vein with a long and slightly wide cut, then treat the blood with warmth as much as necessary.
then repeat the process on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and tighten the veins gently so the patient is not strangled. and leave it until morning so the wound is healed.
from the health of the veins The health of the veins in the mouth helps to prevent colds, and the corruption of gums, splits in the lips, and pain and swelling.
And the quality of the healing is such that you should have the patient sit before you, and tighten their collar as I have said. then turn the patient's face, and look at both veins, one on the right side of the mouth and the other on the left, and you can recognize them by their black color and the small, black lines around them.
So deal with each separately, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, take the largest one from each part, and also make the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
From the cleansing of the tongue The treatment of the veins below the tongue is most helpful after treating the neck, and it is for conditions of the throat, eye, and mouth.
And the quality of the treatment is such that if the patient feels a sharp pain in your hands under the sun, lift their tongue and look below each side for a black vein.
Then heal both of them, but do not cut too deeply, for they are the arteries.
The veins through which blood flows, which are commonly healed, are treated according to two methods:
or cutting through all the inflamed tissue with either a broad knife or a thin blade, as you would cut through flesh, and it is called "anezyl". and they are broad and thin according to the width and constriction of the veins. The shape of the fevered area turns red and is very renowned, and it is large as you see.
And it is necessary to open the veins with a sharp knife on the smooth, broad sides where there is much blood visible, which contains much blood and pus. and this is the form of olive oil flame:
and it is more delicately pointed, and is for healing the delicate veins where there is subtle citrus-colored blood.
The vein from the basil (one of these veins) is very helpful for illnesses that are beneath the throat, and the collarbone, and the chest, and the stomach.
and it is necessary for the doctor to draw blood wisely and wash away the vein that lies beneath. And if it affects the artery, and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped, as I have said. and the flame must not be pricked, but cut as if with a gentle tool.
And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and change to another one. or if you want none of this, you heal it above the vein in the arm. she opens clearly; and apply the flame gently, as we have said.
And if you recognize the place of the wound, it is necessary that you extract the arm, touching the place until you feel the pulse. then mark the place with a sign, and then tie the arm, and apply the flame gently. and be sure not to injure the artery when you see the bone enter (the joint), for it is the artery. then avoid it.
And if you see it protrude at the top as well, like the urine of a child, and the skin is red and tender, know that it is an artery. then act quickly, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the skin becomes numb, which often happens. he lies with his arm relaxed, leaving it thus, and does not move the patient;
and he should be afraid, and does not move until he is healed.
And if the wound is not healed, it will worsen, and no remedy is present, especially if an artery opens, as with the root of the problem. and heal the wound.
And take a piece of fig bark, and cut it, and take one half of it and bind it tightly to the other side;
if it does not become numb, that is good; if it does not, apply as we have said, powders that numb the blood;
and the numbing should not be too strong in various preparations due to the small size of the wound and the power of the limb.
The surgeon of the vein should clean it with care so that he treats the blood from the top and bottom of the wound, for it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins as we have said.
and the surgeon should wash for the nerve that is exposed, and if he does not cut it thoroughly, he may damage the nerve, causing swelling and infection, and perhaps it cannot heal.
this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any place due to its subtlety, then you should use a gentle instrument to heal it. and avoid using your strength.
And if a vein is between the two bones, it makes it long.
The healer of the head should draw out the blood from the head and aid the joints.
and it is necessary for the healer to prick with olive or myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, as it does not damage any nerve or artery. However, it is necessary to seek the lightest limb, and do not be grieved if it hurts the first time, and repeat. and by chance the swelling may appear on any man, as it does the first time, but it causes no pain.
The quality of the wound healing depends on your thought.
The first thing you must know about healing is that health care is not merely a cure for illness, but also a means of preserving health and preventing future diseases.
and let the health be established in one of the three veins, namely: that is to say, the cephalic, the femoral, and the basilic; and one should heal in the beginning of prayers at dawn, and in autumn and winter afterward, when the sign of fullness appears.
and one should heal the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the second day.
The healer who is assigned to diseases has no set hour, but whenever it is needed, at any time of day or night.
and it is not advisable to heal children under twelve or women who have not been pregnant for less than seven months. One should not treat the old who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone wishes to be healed, in any way, it is necessary that he cleanses the bowels with a light enema if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not attract the excess waste from the intestines, harmful to the main members.
One cannot heal himself who is too soaked in the juices of meat, or who has excessive or weak humors.
and he should wash himself after colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent defecation, multiple pregnancies, childbirth, watching and fasting, and this due to the weakness or condition of either the weapon or the body.
then gently draw out the humours, if they are thick, through food and drinks and medicine, if you have such means.
then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to draw out the blood, and cleanse the vein deeply from within and around it, as we have said.
and guard yourself from work, and worry, and lust, and similar things that day.
and be calm and joyful, and make the healing better than that of others, and rub the arm twice or three times, then gently squeeze the ligament from above, for if it is too tight or loose, it will not heal well.
and then rub the limb with both hands until the veins swell and feel hot.
then moisten the wound with a little bit of old oil, then place your left-hand finger on the vein below the limb where you want to heal, so that the vein does not open and cause harm.
For there are veins that flow like strings when healing, and if they are filled with pus, so much that when the fire is applied, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one suffers from this condition. and if it opens a vein, if the wound is too tight, then it is necessary that the healers be aware of these things.
And if the vein opens for the first time, that is good. if not, it is necessary to repeat this a little further down the affected limb, otherwise the limbs will not heal.
And if the limb is swollen, and the patient is frightened, let it be for one or two days, and do not tie up the arm. Perhaps there come abscesses suddenly.
He should not bathe immediately, then renew the dressing if it seems suitable.
and if it is a small opening, pierce gently and doubt not that there will be little blood as you see, pressing firmly on the same piercing to draw out all the heat.
and open it slightly gently, so that the joints may be inflamed. Because this often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the vein swollen, do not immediately reopen the wound, but apply a little oil, because it lightens the body of blood, and the sticky substance that is attached to this vein is dissolved by the oil.
and thus administer the oil in each wound that you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and it also acts as a cure and draws out the evil, when it is applied to the vein; if subtly the bone moves and separates when it is too thick.
And if there develops a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the patient is not in good health and the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and place a moist sponge soaked in wine and silk on it, and hold it for an hour.
and it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from the vein stops, and if it remains in place for several days without any black or green discoloration, then it does not harm him. and if you see, place on anything cold or mirror, soaked in an ointment of calamine, show, or similar.
And often abscesses and swelling appear at the wound of the sanctuary.
then place your hand on it, and if you feel the place soft at the pressure of your hand, then this is the appearance of evil. So be careful not to put anything that we have said, for suddenly it might cut off the flow without an artery.
but he makes an embrocation of dry plaster to harden the joint, then applies other remedies until it is healed.
And treat each case of pain according to the quantity of its strength and the color of the pain.
For if the skin is pale, let it continue to turn red. and if you see it swelling, let it continue until it becomes subtle. and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is bloated and strong, and requires the extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, with wider flames.
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should be treated healthier and more often, and it is best to heal them by cutting across, not piercing.
and this method of healing is free from the corruption of blood and the loss of nerves, and it should be done in a way that extends from long to wide.
and for those whose body requires healing, it is necessary to apply a moist dressing with pomegranate juice. if it is overheated, then apply cold three or four times a day, and if it has a cold complexion, before the healing, moisten the wound with syrup made from fresh pomegranates, or honey syrup infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and anise, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he faints during cleansing, after the release of much blood, it is necessary that he inhale a brew of charcoal and subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things as we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope for vein evacuation.
And if he wishes to straighten his arm and heal it later, if it is weakened by much blood loss, he should pull it little by little, according to the amount of its strength continues.
And whoever wants to straighten his arm after the first dressing and has a strong contraction, he should heal it seven hours after the first dressing, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to heal from another side, he should be healed on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body, which is already heated, and it causes fever. if it is necessary to draw out a large amount, and expand the wound as wide as possible, until it completely heals. then you should consider all the signs of healing, and place your hand on the pulse when it is whole, so that death does not come in its place, which often happens when the healer is negligent.
and it is not good when you see the arm dislocated and blood coming out again, and the wound is closed, that you press on it forcefully. If he is bent, he should stretch the arm slowly, for it would be harmful.
but he should let it heal completely the second time; or you should apply the tip of the flame to the frozen vein until it bursts, then immediately wrap it in cold water and gently press.
And if the vein is inflated, leave it alone and do not squeeze it until the abscess is calmed.
And if it is necessary to drain blood a second time due to the abscess recurring in the same place or in another vein or arm.
The vein in the arm is healthier in place of the vein from the head because it is composed differently.
And the method of healing is that the patient should immerse their hand in hot water until the veins are red.
then tie it gently, so that the vein opens well, then apply the medicine across, not too wide or too long.
and if the opening is wide, and the wound is close to the joint of the hand, and the pain prevents it from leaving, then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow out into the water until enough has been drawn.
and if this does not help, do not push the hand back into hot water, as more harm than good may result.
and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are neither arteries nor nerves in it.
The health of the vein in the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
strain the hand, and immerse it in hot water, as long as the vein is inflamed, if you see that; and hold the hand across, and if it hurts in any way at all, do not worry;
and do not hurt the patient too much, for the nerves are entirely exposed without any flesh, and then apply the hand to hot water again, so that the blood is frozen in the wound, and it cannot flow out.
And when you have treated the blood as best you can, then apply oil and string to seal the wound tightly, and do so for every person.
The healthy person holds the eye with their left hand to cure the disease of the mouse, and does everything as I have told you towards the right.
The healer of the soul holds itself to all diseases that afflict the body, such as illnesses of the heart, and retention of flowers (possibly referring to a condition related to flora or a metaphorical 'blooming' issue), and diseases of rain (potentially meteor-related or a metaphor for humidity-linked ailments), and old joints and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his health is such that the patient should immerse himself in hot water and rub the vein until it bursts, and tie over the joint with cloth. and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot it flows with much blood.
Heal then the wound, whether it is deeper or wider, at the shoulder, or ankle, as it was before.
And if you heal it on the foot, be careful with the bands that are underneath, and also heal across it as if you were sewing.
and so the flames will subside.
If the pain cannot be relieved, immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to drain completely.
And if you heal it the first time, be careful to start again from above a little, because the ligaments are salty.
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the wisdom of the other foot equally.
The vein's lion is at the foot's ankle, and its health corresponds to the pain of the back when it is hot blood.
And the quality of his health is such that if the patient is in the bath, he should pull three times on the ankle, otherwise the vein will not open.
and if it opens, take the health in all ways that you can, and crossing. and it is worth that you hold it, for the veins are safe, and it is much relieved by many hands.
and it is worth that you hold it, for the veins are safe, and it is much relieved by many hands. And if you do not release it, so that no healthy ray of light enters through the opening or hole in the back or foot, and turn towards the little toe, and guard against constriction.
and apply pressure with your hand to the blood as you see it, then unbind the ligature and place cotton on it and tighten it. it is now healthy.
Vacuum cups are made of horns, or iron, or glass;
and ventilation is done according to two manners: or by perforating and drawing out pus, or without piercing.
And this ventilation without piercing is according to two manners: or it is with all fire, or without fire;
and ventilation done through piercing and extraction of pus is performed in twelve to fourteen parts of the body, so that one part remains entirely still at the top. and the others are at the neck. and the others on both sides of the neck. and the suction from below the jaw. and the suction from both shoulders. and the suction on the knees. and the suction on both arms. and the cups on both legs; and the cups on both ankles;
and the ventilation does not remove blood, because of the small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken anyone, as is done with healthy veins; and it is not advisable to allow it in any case without fire or sensation of fire, in any disease that arises from overindulgence, as long as the whole body is emptied.
And if, by necessity or due to habit, it is required to expel air, we must do so each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in every season.
for there are such people who, when they need to expel air, have a heavy head.
and if such people experience relief from pressing and redness on their face, head, neck, and darkness around the eyes.
and such people who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, have an inflamed tongue, and feel pain. and if there are any who think, and see through blood and pain and fear and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order it to be ventosed after three hours of the day.
The surgeon of the wound uses pressure on the neck ... to bring relief, and it is not appropriate that this be done after the evacuation of all the blood.
and this compression should be done on the neck of the surgical patient, and it is not appropriate for those of a cold temperament or who have catarrh, as it does them much harm.
and for this reason, it is not appropriate for the elderly or those with cold diseases of the head to use it.
And those who recover from it often become obstructed, and for this reason a suction cup should be placed slightly lower in doubt of obstruction.
The ventilation of the chest is beneficial for the health of the heart and basil (organs), and therefore it tightens the pains in the chest, opens the channel of the windpipe, and helps digestion and replenishment.
and it is necessary to know when to release pressure, because if it is held too tightly, it can cause forgetfulness or stomach and body pain.
The wind flows between the ribs of the chest if it causes head, eye, and temple pain, and strangulation, and tooth root pain, and is detrimental to the health of the heart and basil (organs).
and it is necessary that you instruct the patient to extend his hand when placing it, so as not to damage the artery and prevent bleeding complications.
The removal of the tooth is beneficial for mouth disease, gum corruption, and similar ailments in the mouth. and it is located in the gums between the two lips.
The inflammation of the shoulders is associated with disease that arises from heat and swelling.
The extraction of the roots is just as important as opening three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins.
and instruct the healthy not to cut too deeply, for the flesh is bare of fat, and knows veins and arteries.
The leech placed on the rump is worth much, for it draws blood from the depths and treats internal ailments, and it must be large, made of iron, and have a good suction to draw effectively. and if, by chance, it were too delicate, it would break. and it causes great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs are tightly sealed, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and they are as painful as ancient rains, and inflammation, and bladder issues, and they cause paralysis.
and they are attached to the inner and outer ankles, yet they weaken the body after long use and cause pain in various ways.
The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you apply it first while it is empty and suck thoroughly, then place it firmly, and move it equally, without ceasing to do so, until you see red and inflamed skin, and open the blood-letting wound.
Then apply heat, and remove the suction cups, and take care in the placement of the leeches, for there are some with strong blood flow and clear pores. if it is necessary to strike only once, then wide wounds should be made, and deep cuts. and suck gently.
And if the pain is intense, it is necessary to strike twice: The first time to gently uncover the way of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to pierce for the third time;
and when we want to draw out blood little by little, it is enough to do so only once. And if we want a lot of blood, we should not recommence often;
and if the blood is thick, piercing it successfully will complete the process, so that the veins are suddenly perceivably filled, and it is necessary for those with thick, hard skin and calloused pores to apply oil to the suction cup before and after use. if it is of a purple oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of oil from pumpkin seeds;
and if it is of olive oil, or of watercress oil, or of lily oil, or chamomile oil, or any similar one.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balm of Gilead, or donkey oil, and similar things.
And if anyone has a skin that is too sensitive and has narrow pores, it is not advisable to apply oil, but instead, after cleansing with rosewater, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of calabash, or water of porcelain, or any similar thing, they should wash it.
And for those with excessive moisture, they should rise from it using myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have abundant secretions should rise from old wine, or elderberry water, or chamomile or anise decoction, or any similar thing;
and should not attempt to use a vacuum (for medical purposes) before or during a bath, but rather after the bath, one or two hours later.
and do not sleep after the bleeding, and it is necessary that he washes himself, when he must be bled and when he is bled.
and beware of those who have a hot temper, and if someone is too aggressive and inflamed; it is necessary that he apply cold things, such as grapes, endive and lettuce in the shade, and similar things; and eat figs, and grapes, and moist meats.
and eat figs, and grapes, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, should sip syrup made from honey, and drink fragrant wine mixed with herbs, which is between old and new, and eat small portions, and enjoy raisins and small birds.
and on the day when he feels hungry, he should drink more than eat.
and it is necessary not to give any hot drinks or spices to anyone, either before or after the treatment, to comfort the main limbs. and let the treatment be subtle, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink such things.
The suction cups that are used to harm are those placed on the liver, and the skin, and podagra, and the stomach and the bowels and the kidneys and the spine, for this member cannot be harmed except to attract blood from one member to another, as we do with mammary glands when nursing.
to reduce the viscosity in the member, as we apply suction cups to the stomach and bowels to ease the pain.
and alleviate the pain when there is oppression or stone, if by its attractive power it removes the oppression, or deserts the stone from its place.
and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and stomach where there is retention of wind, and these suction cups are left empty to suck only for a time. and never should they be used together with fire, and never should they be filled with cold water, as in the case of diseases that cause excessive tearing, and in such a way one fills the cup with hot water, or with water he has boiled with medicinal herbs.
The shape of the suction cup administered by fire is as follows:
And it should be two and a half palm widths in length, and on one side near the middle there is a small opening, as wide as to push an needle through, and it should be made of iron or any other suitable material so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb.
and tell him to place a stick diagonally across it, either of iron or wood, to hold a bandage in place, according to the size and age of those who suffer from them.
for the suction cups of children are different from those of adults, thinner than fat ones.
And one must thus place this suction cup over the member:
take the cloth of wax or linen and place it between the suction cup and the stick that holds the suction cup, so that the light goes to the bottom of the suction cup, preventing it from burning the patient.
and then place it over the member, and your fingers should be on the opening that we have mentioned, so that when you want, the vapour goes there, and we remove the suction cup.
and take up the bandage as before, and repeat often, if you have need.
In the case of the suction cup, which is applied to treat pleurisy, and any acute condition, it has no opening or gap, and is only effectively applied when it is filled with water, and placed over the member accordingly.
and this is the form:
According to the context of the text, this line translates to: "Without being able to apply suction for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts. and in parts without hair, such as the face, hands, or feet, and similar areas.
and the quality of the user is such that when you find veins that are smooth, clear, and free from any impurity, then take them.
and place a needle in hot, sharp water, as long as they are familiar to her, and have nothing in their bellies. and then make the vein and cupping glass clean, and rub the limb until it is red, and apply the compresses.
and when they stop crying and whining, if it is a place where a cupping glass can be applied, apply it, for this helps greatly afterwards.
If that is not possible, then raise the limb gently, and wash it well with water, and then dry it.
and hold the eyes steady too after the body of the wound, if a damp linen cloth in cold water is placed on it and left until the pain subsides.
and if the pain increases, add vinegar or gall, or similar things, until it subsides.
or you can place half-peeled beans on the joint and leave them until they adhere to the bone, which will now soothe it.
and if this method is more suitable for you, then take other wounds.
And if the veins do not want to be captured, so strongly rub the fresh vein with blood, or you insert an needle until the vein bursts, and then place them back on, and soon as they feel the blood, they will move.
and when you see that they are moving, sprinkle a little aloe and silk powder, or ash, and they will now stop.
We begin the book of fractures. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Know this, dear reader, that the folly of this chapter flows from it, for never did they see or read of such things in any ancient books.
and for this reason, the art is strange in our land, for I never found any good about it.
and I know nothing of it, except through the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have acquired knowledge of it, both through experience and through the habits of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and at the end I have summarized it, and clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we explain in this prologue of this book the essence of the words and the chapters where the wise apply their understanding, focusing on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, twist, or sprain occurs in any part of the body, it is necessary to quickly attend to the patient from both sides, if nothing else prevents you, such as weakness of the body, illness, or old age. or if it is very tight or too cold;
and warm things, such as hot poultices, and cloth from pigeon's blood and horse chestnut, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, or consume too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess or the spreading of material in the member;
if the patient returns to sleep after having been under stress.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be relieved of the foods that cause heavy digestion, or have a viscous quality, like cooked flour in water, and rice, and vegetables, and wine, and fresh fish, and similar things. For heavy digestion often returns and makes the injury worse.
And know that the bones broken from old age or decay cannot heal properly and mend according to their nature due to the stiffness of the members, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children.
but there is no cure, instead, hold the broken bone with strong fingers that separate and join the member together, as it was before. and do not restrict it entirely from its movement, and because of this, one must avoid heavy foods, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, and in this chapter, I will tell you all manner of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, just like the edge of a quill for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, just like the edge of a quill for writing. And if the fracture is with a wound, and there is a small crack.
And each condition has its own mechanism, and its specific instrument for restoration, according to the memory that comes to it naturally.
and the fracture of the bone is recognized because the joint is twisted, and it opens well when pulled away from the body, and responds to pressure with the hand.
and when there is no twisting or pressure, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
but it can still have twisting, or splitting, or a small fracture. You should not move it with the hand, but apply medications that come here later, and then tighten it very subtly now.
And know that the fracture that goes up in the air, and the two parts are disjoined, now you must put them back together evenly so that an abscess does not form from it.
and if an abscess forms, leave it without moving for as long as the abscess is healed.
then align it evenly with gentle and firm touch, and know that the healing of it is easier than the healing of one where it has been broken.
then tighten it, as it should be after this.
And if in the broken bone there is dislocation from two parts, whether it's of the hand or foot, or one small member, or both tendons, or a tendon and your hand.
and place the member according to its natural position, so that when the parts of the broken member are out of alignment, by all means reset them to their original positions, and ensure through your care that no further injury or pain comes to the patient.
and adjust both parts of the bone according to the best shapes.
And feel the pulse well with your hand if it seems not to be well.
if the dressing is done well and not pulled too tightly, nor pressed as those who, by their own will, cause hot abscesses and contractions in the member, as we have seen many times.
And when the member is at its worst, gently encourage the patient not to move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor in any other way. and ensure that the member is so secured that it feels no pain. Because when he feels no pain, except perhaps at a specific point, it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain.
and ensure that the member is so secured that it feels no pain. Because when he feels no pain, except perhaps at a specific point, it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain. and ensure that it is set correctly, preventing any curvature when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken limb should be as I tell you.
You know that broken members are diverse in size and shape and strength.
Because it has small members, like arms and legs and similar ones: if it is necessary to cover with soft and delicate cloth; and those that are thick, like the foot and leg;
it is necessary to cover with a wide and firm bandage, as the wide bandage embraces the entire limb, holding it tightly from all sides equally, so that there is no movement.
then wrap lighter strips around it three or four times, depending on the limb, tightening your hand slightly across the entire bandage, then move up over the dislocation and tighten less, allowing the dislocation to gradually separate a little.
and soften the skin little by little, as you press deeply into the healthy flesh, then take another hold and return directly over the broken bone.
then go back to the part of the fracture, and hold it gently, neither too tight nor too loose, as we said in the first chapter above.
then place thick linen or cloth between the bones until it is entirely even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is an inflammation or abscess, apply a hot soothing agent to it, which reduces the swelling, and leave it thus for several days.
then strain yourself on your stars, and use half of a narrow cane cut sharply, or of wood from which scythes are made, or palm fronds, and follow this form:
but it is necessary that the star which one places on the fracture be somewhat thicker and broader than the others;
and be as long as necessary for the size of the member, whether small or large; then hold it steady on the stars just as you did with the first fracture, then tie it with a thread as in the first chapter when dealing with the break. the tighter it is bound, the less movement there is.
and it is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax.
for if the thread is too thick, as I have seen fools make their ligatures from twisted flaxen cords, it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and it is not appropriate that there should be less space between each star.
And if the patient is angry because of the pain from the stars after dislocating them in their joints, he should put compresses of linen or other soft cloth over them to avoid bleeding.
When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the bones are broken, I will then describe the treatment below.
And know that it is not appropriate to dislocate all the stars of a member broken in the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not advisable to apply heat immediately, but rather wait a few days, either five or seven or more according to your judgment of the hot swelling coming on.
and here, the ancient method of splints for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions:
and take flour that clings to the walls of a mill, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and make this mixture, not too liquid or too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of splints for restoring fractures in various positions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hard nor too cold.
Another method of plastering restores breakage, dislocation, and twisting: Take bark, gall, and gum from the plant and mix them with water, as directed by Doctor X. Mix mirror and aloe, as instructed by Doctor V. Take aloes VIIII (a specific amount or dose) as directed by Doctor VIIII. and make it into powder, then mix it with egg white. If the patient's skin is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it gently restores broken bones, and benefits many men.
Another method of plastering that is beneficial for twists: Take moss and wolfsbane, and mix them with three parts of something else (unclear due to lack of context or specific term). Mix mirror and aloe, with nine parts of something else (again, unclear due to lack of context or specific term). Behold six (parts); mix Armenian (herbal) X parts, grind well, and mix with ample egg or honey, and administer.
Another method of splinting joints and securing bones to their proper places, soothing the pain that arises, and using saws on the bone, and fractures. take another new cloth, dampen it with water and oil, and place over the bone.
Cyst splints do not restore, but they are good for easing hot abscesses and properly extracting bones that cause pain.
Another method of splinting to restore broken bones: Take dry fig leaves and terrestrial pawpal leaves, grind them together, and make a splint.
Another method of mending the broken bone and thereby alleviating the pain from the abscess's return. Take the root of alder, chamomile, violets' flowers, and wheat flour, each in equal parts.
Grind and mix with wine, and if the member is hot, mix with fresh coriander water or water, and apply as needed.
Another stronger method of mending the member when a hard abscess arises during restoration. Take roots of vismalve, and flaxseed, and balm, and melilot, and fennel, and violet and chamomile flowers, from all these plants a part. and grind it, and conserve it with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Hippocrates writes in his book that to restore a broken member, one should not use anything but a mixture of wax and oil, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen suggests applying warm, dry substances to a broken member to restore it, such as myrrh and aloe and incense, as we have mentioned.
Another method of treatment for injuries and pain: take mice and cats from humans who have been cut, or feathers from an eye, and vismalve, and string of equal length, grind them together, and make a plaster and bind it.
And then dislocate it a little later, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved out of its place. if it does not dislocate by strong hands. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling no rest, or swelling, act quickly, dislocate it, and remove the splint now.
take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and gently raise the limb until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed. then let the member rest for an hour, then place it on a dry cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and tie it up with a bandage, as long as you are certain of the hot abscess.
and rest the inflamed member, and if the pain subsides, then resume the bandaging with a gentle touch and some plaster, and do not strain it as strongly as before. and gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is closed, red, painful and swollen, you have successfully treated it; but if it reappears, as you did at first, then you need to use plaster and binding.
And if the member shows no improvement from what we have said, then do not dislocate it until after three, four, five, or seven days. and never leave it for more than a few days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and draws closer to the adjustment of the limb on its bed.
then the compression must be stronger than first, and it thickens its flesh, as I have said before;
and if the limb seems healthier than necessary, know that improvement cannot come from it. soak it in hot water every time you dislocate it, each day for three days, and slightly loosen the ligament.
Through this work, then, we cut the nerve passages in the limb, and prudently perform what the ignorant do, which is to straighten a deformed member:
This is harmful, and if the work is perilous, I see no other option but to leave it alone or do it correctly.
There are many ways of fractures, various shapes, and the causes are diverse.
Because there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the bone splinters completely through to the other side, as if cut with a hatchet or club. and for this reason, this method of dislocation is called "hachure.
He then uses the sword to cut through the bone without piercing it, and this method of dislocation is called "absolute.
and this injury from these two dislocations is either great or small.
And if there is a pulsation or swelling, or cutting from stones or from blows against stone, or from other similar things.
And if there is a recent fracture, which approaches the bone tissue underneath or on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound that is closed over the bone is as subtle as a hair, and the fracture is small, then it is called this dislocation "capillary.
and if the wound is made by a blow from stone or arrow or similar thing, and the bone fragment enters deeper, and the joints are stiffened as when a blacksmith works on the hearth; if the stone enters inside.
And this happens more frequently to those with soft, moist bones, like a child's head.
and it occurs in all these ways of breakage, leaving small fragments dislocated as if they were. and I will speak to him in his place.
And we know all the ways of dislocations by pulling on them, and questioning at each point, and by corrupt flesh above it.
The hair appearance is recognized when, after uncovering the bone and rubbing it thoroughly, the dislocation gap opens up.
In the treatment of fractures, be wary of accidents with the patient, and if you notice any harmful accident, such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, dilation, numbness, fever, sudden heat or redness, or other similar symptoms in various combinations, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any dangerous accidents and hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
And when the frost comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon, if you can.
And if it happens that you hasten to remove the bone on the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone is corrupted, then come the complications that we have mentioned.
And if the fracture of the bone extends to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must cut through the fractured part thusly:
and you should pierce the patient's head with great pain, and expose the bone in every way that you can, and carefully clean the wound, gently removing any pus or abscess that appears, if it drains when you uncover the bone, or a fistula forms, then you must use whatever aid is appropriate, and fill the cavity with moistened, rosin-soaked cloth. and make the wound rest until the abscess is completely healed, and be assured of the stop of blood flow. then begin around the bone to open it, and this is done according to two methods of operation:
one method is that you make a narrow cut at the front, and it takes this form:
And then I use another treatment even greater than the first one.
and the second method is that you have numerous cuts of different widths, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron indelibly.
and when working lightly, do not knock the head.
And if the bone is hard and dense, it is necessary that you bore into it carefully, so as to administer the treatment accurately, without going beyond the bone's thickness, and there should be a margin or curve on top of the point to prevent it from penetrating beyond the bone.
and you will need several of them, so that each one comes in its proper place according to the bone's thickness, giving you the necessary accuracy.
and this is the form of the three types of treatments:
The quality to understand around the broken bone is that you apply the treatment to the bone, and return to your normal activities as long as you know that the bone is healed.
then apply the treatment to another area a little later, and do so all around, then carefully incise the space between the fragments of the bone, and make it as subtle and gentle as possible, while still holding the bone in your hand or with any tools you have, such as pliers or tweezers.
and ensure you do not touch the brain nor the eye.
And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you remove the stiffness that is delayed from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incision tool, but it should be more flexible and more subtle than the other incision tools.
and if it delays nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, gently remove them with the instrument. then treat the wound with care, as we have said.
And another method of treatment is as Galen says, which is safer. and speak very loudly, for that is his word. It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone, either where the fracture is open, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place the tip of this curved scalpel beneath it, whose shape is as follows:
And do not deviate from this method in any way, for the sharp side is on the second coast, so the incision should be towards the bone.
then strike with a small hammer from above, so that you gently compress the bone all around, and be careful to protect yourself from the sharp edges below.
If it is detached from the bone, if the bone is gently pulled, for it is removed with great pain and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the skin, and the bone is only cut from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and shave off the scales with a delicate razor, having various quantities of it at hand, in order to make each one suitable for its place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you encounter great difficulties and then even more subtle ones, do not cease from this task until it is well done.
For each of the other haircuts and subtle injuries, it is necessary that you treat them according to their location.
and this is something that is not fully answered for those who have dedicated their study to this art.
And if it brings satisfaction, it is necessary that you apply a linen bandage according to the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. then take another cloth doubled over in two or three, moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. and make it lighter than you can, without straining the wound, then apply another bandage on top and do not tighten it too much so that it only touches the wound.
and leave it thus for a day or two until the abscess is calmed, then remove it and apply medications such as fennel roots, flour of vetch, incense powder, aromatic herbs, and similar things.
and from these things make a powder, apply it to the wound, and administer world-renowned remedies without biting;
and ensure that the wound remains clean, do not leave any treatment, and do not allow it to gather pus, for when pus accumulates in the tissue of the brain, it will corrupt and harm the patient greatly.
for when you apply sharp, biting things to it, they do not heal properly. Take care therefore, if no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is uncertain without doubt.
And if blackness does not appear due to the medicine that has been applied, then it is necessary that you mix a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and add a cloth, and apply it to the sore. then apply remedies in a manner appropriate to healing, as long as he is healthy.
Knowing that the two parts of the upper arm bones are never broken at the same time, either one by itself or both, because they are two bones.
and the inner part is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it bends or twists excessively, then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you insert your little finger or a pin in the joint, and place the same fracture in your index finger, and by force, until the joint returns to its natural shape. and make it gentle, and ensure that the patient feels no pain through your actions.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the joint, and the fingers cannot return to their place, then it is necessary that you place it equally at the head of a slightly thicker thread.
And if the fracture is of the second degree, repeat the process, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
if this is not possible, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then apply to the joint two or three linen bandages, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you apply another from another side, if the fracture persists. and let them (bandages) be so thick that they fill the gaps of the wound.
And they say that no restoration is complete unless the splints are soaked in butter and changed each day. I do not think that this is good enough, but it is necessary that they (bandages) be moistened in the preparation of egg albumen and mill powder. then remove the bandage, as long as the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
And never should feathers of a goose be used in place of bandages, and if a wound is wrapped with silk, and the break holds, and the patient breathes among them. or make sure you see well.
And if abscesses appear at the new wound while you are treating it, apply a plaster or moist cotton in rose oil, or in a poultice of eagle's fat.
And if an abscess does not come out, apply a poultice from outside with flour of wheat bran and powder of incense, preserved with egg yolk, then place light bandages on it and do not tie the nose.
and if the nose is broken and in small pieces, extract it with suitable instruments, then cut the fracture and treat the bleeding with charcoal and other appropriate bandages.
and if there is no internal wound, he should rest for a while and apply poultices until he is healed.
When the jawbone is ruptured and there is no external wound, and the fracture is not severe enough to cause two pieces to be separated, but it is slightly displaced, then if you gently know how to recognize it, it can be realigned.
If the fracture is in the right side, insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient with the injury. and if the fracture is in the left lower jaw, insert your index finger of your right hand, gently push the fracture back into place, and use your left hand to pull it out, equally.
And if the fracture of the jaw is severe in two places, it is necessary that you administer an extension to both parts, as long as they are even.
And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or the fracture, if it is strained with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then apply cera to the broken jaw and place a double cloth on top. And place it on a cloth, a large star-shaped pad, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and fix it with bandages as best you can, and order the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the shape changes, after three days loosen it again and then reset it when it has changed. and apply a poultice of finely ground powder with plenty of egg or sesame flour after you have removed the plaster.
and place on it a light plaster, and if the plaster hardens, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until it is completely healed. often it is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess forms, it is necessary to treat it as we have often said.
And if there is both a fracture and a wound together, treat none of the bone that has been broken. if it is possible to remove the bone with delicate tools.
And if the wound is narrow, expand it with fire according to your need.
And after you have extracted all these pieces and it does not delay, clean the wound if it is wide, and cover it with suitable bandages to promote healing.
It forces breaks several times towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners:
or it is broken and displaced in two parts, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore;
or there is fracture with a wound.
And the work is when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the aid that feels the forced break. and the others extend the collar towards the affected area;
then make the fracture even on both sides, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no bulge or depression.
And if you need to further extend it, place a round, thick cloth or woolen spear beneath the shoulder of the patient, as large as needed. and gently extend the force, stretch the spear with your hand, ensuring an even fracture as required.
And if you cannot pull the head of the arm out due to its attachment, since it comes off completely, then the patient should lie on their side with the injured arm under their body, and have someone press down on the shoulder above, until the bone of the arm is raised.
And then address the fracture with your hands, and if you feel the bone is broken, it is necessary that you cut through it.
and gently try to move the pieces, and if the bone cannot join together despite your efforts, then the fracture is in one of the incisions you have. but that you apply the strength of this instrument beneath, to ensure success.
and it should resemble a spoon, and not be thin, and also as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
and say to him, as you see, one should be wide and the other narrow, just like the opening of the wound that you made when you treated the bone;
and when you are certain of the hot abscess, if you cut the wound, and if its opening is small, then you doubt the hot abscess, if you use a drape or tent on the wound, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses occur, then moisten the cloth with rose oil and wool and wine, and apply it.
The straining of the bone, when it is sensitive to touch and has no incision, is that you place on the bone the plaster of fine-milled powder and egg albumen, and put light stoppers above, and insert a spear from below the joint, if necessary. then take a very wide bandage of one palm's length, then place the cloth doubled over the stumps, and apply the plaster. then take a very thin and long stick of three fingers' width and wrap it around the bandage, so that the top of the bandage is exposed. and place the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the collarbone, and remove the healthy armpit, and remove the affected armpit. and reset each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the stick does not move on the broken bone, tighten it each day, and when the ligaments loosen, release the constraint.
and make the patient lie down on his side, and place a small pillow under his armpit to raise the affected limb; if the fracture is light, secure the shoulder with a splint, fasten the arm to the collarbone, and do not unlock it for no ill accidents come, for up to 20 days;
then recommence the splinting if you see that it needs to be done again, tighten it and leave it thus, until it is restored;
and it is restored within 28 days, or even less for no one.
from the dislocation of the shoulder
It is often the case that the shoulder breaks or becomes severely dislocated and cannot be moved, except by touch.
if the apparatus is adjusted according to the shape of the fracture and reset according to its natural form in every way that you can.
then place a light pouder of finely ground chalk and egg whites, and soft bandages, and cover with a double cloth. then place a wide and delicate blade, slightly wider than the shoulder, and dislocate the blade from any part of the shoulder, using the sharp edge of linen cloth, so that the blade cuts evenly.
and then tighten it with a great tight band firmly, so that the blade does not move from its place, and observe it each day.
and whenever it loosens, relax the band and put the blade back in its place if it has moved, and lay the patient on his side.
and the shoulder is reset within 10 to 25 days.
And when this number of days is completed, if it becomes loose, and be sure, for it is not bone that will immediately settle firmly.
And if a fragment of bone sticks out and does not go inside the wound, it is necessary to do as we have said in the calming of the hot abscess.
from the rupture of the worst
The skin is never completely broken, but it happens rarely. but it often breaks under heat.
And when it is broken in the middle, it recedes inside and causes the patient great pain, and weakness, and sometimes bleeds, and opens up the wound in the broken bone, and it feels much better.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on their back, and places a cushion between the shoulders, then compresses them, and aligns the ribs to each other with both hands, subtilly making them even in all ways possible, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be.
Then place on it plaster and poultices over the delicate salt or other light bandage, wrap it in a cloth, and bind it to the broken bone so that it does not move. and return the ligament to its original shape on the back, tighten it carefully, and check the patient's freedom of movement every hour, relaxing it if it becomes tight.
if it needs to be released due to erosion or itching that develops in the area, or pain or abscess, act quickly, release it, remove the plaster, and treat what has come up with appropriate remedies.
Then reset the splint, and hold it until it is healed.
from the fracture of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in the upper back and at the top, and they do not bend unless they are clearly broken. and the patient feels well at the examination.
And the restoration is such that you put it back in place as it should be. And then apply the plaster, tightening it with a splint if necessary.
And if the breaking of ribs is declining inward, the patient feels very great pain, stabbing, as well as crying, because the bone pierces through. and so with fingers, touch and press deeply the blood, which is great pain, and they have put much art into it by the ancients.
And for those who say it is appropriate to administer foods that cause bloating in the stomach to expel the fracture from within.
We do not pretend that hot poultices will not come if they have not already arrived. And if it comes back, as healthy.
and they say among themselves that one should not use cupping glasses on the shoulder to draw blood, as it is akin to madness. however, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw out excess blood from the shoulder for its own sake due to weakness.
And they say that none of you should cover the limb with moist wool and hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to even out the space around, then apply treatment for pleurisy, flesh, and medicine.
and if the patients feel great pain that they cannot bear even to the bone where the flesh is torn, then doubt creeps in for the patient, and it is necessary to cut through the skin of the broken rib and put beneath a tool to relieve the suffering.
and then one must cut the bone, pull gently, and stitch together both edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with bandages, until it heals.
And if abscesses form, place moist, oil-soaked rags on them and cover with a warm compress.
and treat while the compress is on the abscess, and place soft pillows under the affected area, as needed, until it heals.
and also to the pain of the back.
And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, be on the lookout for their hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and unable to move or stretch them; if you can push an needle through without pain, then there is little hope.
You know that it is deadly in many ways; if the limbs remain motionless and there is no pain when they are moved slightly, then know that the joint of the bone is intact and the patient will recover, if proper treatment is given.
And if similar symptoms occur in the pain of the back, you should know if it is healthy or not, take care to see if the feet are weak, and if there are any accidents that affect the hands, and on the back, sudden weakness and expulsion without will.
and when it is remembered on the stomach, sudden expulsion without will. And when it is recalled to its back and wants to move, it cannot. Knowing that it is deadly: if he does not work hard in his cure.
And if this accident does not occur, then the thing is lighter.
And the treatment is that you apply rose oil or egg yolk oil to the hot abscess, as long as it is soothed.
then place a comfortable and drying bandage on it, tie it with a band, and instruct the patient to rest. and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, as long as he is healed.
And if any bone becomes detached, then it needs to be covered with a bandage over the heart. and take the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and then apply a healing dressing made of clean cloth, until it is healed.
and if the bone fragment is broken, which is called the "fragment of the wound," take your pouchet (a small instrument) with your left hand and place it equally in your right hand to hold the fragment, then apply plaster and a splint, as needed.
then hold it tight, and if there is a bone out of place, push it back into position, and treat the wound until it heals completely.
From the fracture of the bone of the shoulder blade
Often, the first thing to happen is that the hip bone is broken, and if so, there should be no significant loss of blood from the head. and causing it to stretch long and thin, bending towards the patient's body, bringing pain, swelling, and bruising to the broken area.
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above, as long as you are on the broken spot; and such are the fracture and form of it;
and if the fracture is only in the head, then make all such fractures even, as long as they are in their natural form.
And if the fracture is very long, it bends inward, so make the patient lie on his belly until the restoration of that fracture becomes visible. And when you have made it even, then place a splint over it, and then a wooden or iron bar, and hold the fracture still so that it does not move.
and apply pressure from the inside of the ribs along the sides until the limb is even. Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if an abscess appears and it is not touched, as long as the abscess remains calm, apply what we have mentioned above. and then return to reducing it, and hold it as appropriate if there is no adverse event.
of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
The aider is the space between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two ways:
Don't take one that is neither too hard nor too soft, according to this form.
And bind the two parts together, twist them upwards, and place the patient in a sitting position.
then pour the patient's broken arm over the foot, until it is relaxed, and place a splint of wood across it, then twist it upwards to any heavy object or have the attendants pull it downwards.
then place the splint against the break so that it is even with both hands together, until the break returns to its proper position.
And another way is to lay the patient on his back and tie one hand to his neck, then instruct the assistants to have one apply pressure over the fracture at the level of the hands, while the other stretches all the ligaments, extending them as far as possible.
And if you see that extraction is too painful, hold the broken piece firmly, and on the break, stretch each of the assistants to their side.
And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, it is necessary that you apply a moderate tie beneath the joint, and another towards the neck, beneath the fracture.
and also if the fracture is towards the neck, it is necessary to apply a light tie without strain, as long as the fracture is level on both sides of the shoulder and neck.
then make the fracture even, as it should be, and hold it tight, if abscesses do not appear.
And if an abscess appears, it should not be squeezed for seven days, and a moist cloth soaked in rose oil should be applied to it until the abscess at the base is calmed.
then squeeze it, and the manner of squeezing is that you place the plaster on the break, then reassemble the arm above the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or the breast.
and apply the bandage, squeeze above the shoulder and the arm, so that the arm is in a straight position, unless something prevents it or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place a wider and stronger stick across the break, leaving two spaces between each stick, and let each stick extend beyond the break by three parts.
then strain the sticks, as I said at the beginning of this chapter regarding the break, making them stronger and less distant.
And if you observe the position of the sticks and their strain, as we said, when you return the broken limb, and you doubt whether the abscess is hot, leave it bound for seven days, as we have said.
Then each day for three days, look at the wound to ensure it does not swell or become infected, or any redness cannot reach the limb because it is too tight. If it is appropriate, as we have said.
And if no such accident occurs, the dislocation should only be corrected after three days or more, and the patient should sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach.
and place the dislocated joint in a soft cushion made of equal parts wool, and every hour during the day or night, check to ensure the limb's shape is not changing, or the bonds are becoming weak.
if it is cured by the virtue of medicine, and gives him food that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is first subtle. and when it begins to recover, it will be significant.
And it is customary that the aid and leg should be recovered over forty days in all. and then one must free it and administer baths and medicines of ointments to direct the limb.
And if the tightness is severe and compressed, it may take up to several months or two months to release.
of the dislocation of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "forearm," where one is smaller and follows the direction of the hand.
and the other is larger, which is located below the smaller bone towards the hand.
should the larger forearm bone break by chance, or the smaller one, they may be joined back together.
When the smaller bones are broken, their restoration is easier, and healing follows quickly.
and when the bones are broken and healing is poor, it becomes more painful than when they were initially broken altogether.
If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is sufficient to extend them slightly and make them even.
And if it is a large fracture, then the tension must be increased.
and extend it on the cushion, placing the palm higher than the other hand, with the small fingers lower, and cross the patient over it, with the cushion in front, higher than the patient's discomfort allows.
then extend the minister's right arm to the side of his hand, or to the joint, and another minister extends his left hand above it.
And then set it back even, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture each piece is set back in its place, and if there is no misplaced bone that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place by manipulating it above and below, as we have said before.
And if there is a break in the wound, I have spoken of it in detail to the specific chapter. if takes the treatment.
And in the beginning of restoration, when abscesses occur, I wrap them with a mixture of rose oil and white wax, not too hard or too soft. and lay it gently over, until the abscesses close.
And then remove the bandage, and apply the plaster of the soft powder with plenty of egg, then place the needles, and let the needle of the dislocation be stronger, a little more forceful, and slightly wider than the others.
and know that he must have 6 needles or arms in various positions: so that the dislocation is in one of the bones, or both;
and hold tighter over the dislocation than anywhere else, and all the while moving less as I said at the beginning of this chapter. and let the cloths that are on the gentle and moist wound not be hard or rough.
and let the cloths that are on the gentle and moist wound not be hard or rough. and let the thread, from which it is drawn, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the member and the ligament after no days. And if any bad accident comes to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you wash the member with hot water until the itching is soothed.
and let the member not be squeezed too tightly at rest.
And then repeat the straining, and if the ligaments become slack and the bones disarrayed, or any similar thing, address it accordingly.
And if any tightening prevents the member from healing, because it is too tight, then you must soften it slightly and leave it for a few days until the tightening subsides, and then strain it again.
And if none of these things we have said comes to the patient, then he shall be dislocated for twenty days.
You shall gently inquire, then make him rest his hands on his chest, and ensure his collars are even, and guard against movements and gestures, and have him sleep on his back.
and know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or forty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
You know that at the back of the hand and on each finger there are often small fractures, and it brings only pain many times over.
And when the hand's bone is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient make a cross cut, and hold it straight before him equally.
then place his hand on the extended board, extend the broken bones of the minister, and align them evenly, until they are properly joined.
and apply the plaster and hot compresses, if an abscess forms, then place a stick according to the size of the wound. and it should be wrapped in a linen drape.
And if the rupture is near the abdomen around the plant, make a ball of cloth and instruct the patient to press it against their ruptured part. and then apply a long strip of cloth, and make the heat as intense as the palm of the hand, and tighten it, as necessary.
And if the fracture is in the open air, it is necessary that you place a stick above and another below on the limb, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
And if a fracture occurs in any of our joints, it is the dislocation that causes it, so it must be set correctly. and tighten with the palm, and if you see that a small, straight heat correctly aligns the fracture, it will not move.
and if the fracture is in other joints, as in the example or any other, set it correctly and bind it with the healthy joint that follows. you should hold them all in place with a bandage, or put a splint on them as you see fit;
and be careful in the restoration and arrangement of the hot abscess, and support those who come to it, as I have said.
The bones of the foot are often broken, and one can clearly see them when they return to their place in front and behind.
and the restoration is when they bind them together above the break and from below. And the patient lies on his face, then each limb extends its own joint equally.
and this is when the fracture is through the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the hipbone, one of the ligaments should be bound towards the knee, and the others should be bound over and around the break.
And also if it is close to the knee, then the joints around the knee are relaxed and the extension is downward.
then aligns the broken bone with both hands, according to its natural shape, and then applies the splint and binds it, so that the fracture does not move.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down, then return to your work and treatment; The bandage is made in this manner.
You should wrap around the fracture a hard bandage doubled in two or three layers, and remove the excess, then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the calf and the leg, passing through the knee from below, and bring the end up above.
Then turn the bandage around the leg and thigh, then place a splint across it, and put a stick on the bone of the leg.
Then use the eighth part of a cloth soft between the leg and thigh to apply even pressure, then begin to tie three turns or four around the splint. and as you go further up the splint, loosen the tension.
then take the two threads you have woven between the leg and thigh, and tie three stitches on top of them, then go back to the other side towards the ankle with the thread until you are done.
and hold it still, if it does not move from its place, then leave it as such, so that no abscess or swelling or anything similar appears. And if it happens that it becomes dislocated again and you address what comes, as we have said many times before;
and if there are pieces of bone that cling, it is advisable to extract them, if possible. and if one cannot extract it, then it is advisable to break the joint and draw it out forcefully. and the treatment is as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
And never should the ankle be broken in this way with staples, as is done in the case of the leg or arm.
However, this restoration, so done, does not benefit the patients.
And know that the foot is restored in 7 days, or less or more, depending on the diversity of complexes.
You know that in the alley of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, even if it is only a crack or an opening, it affects every wound, and without a wound, and this feels good for everyone.
And the restoration is when everything is placed evenly that it can be moved again with strength.
then apply the plaster, and place a round stick, if necessary, and hold it as appropriate, then follow all the arrangements that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as hot abscesses or similar. if, for each of these accidents, it is necessary, as long as it is healthy.
from the fracture of the leg
You know that the leg has two bones, of which one is called "right" and not "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile".
And it continues to break as it comes to the arm, and for this reason, restoration is similar to that of an equal arm, and all work is involved. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg returns from every side.
And if the thin bones are broken, they return to their original position.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it clearly. and it turns inside out.
Then apply extension, and set it equal, and bind the stars equally.
but nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter. and lighter according to your ability.
And when you have completed your task, take two strips of strong cloth that are suitable for binding the leg on both sides and are sufficiently long to cover the leg from the knee to the sole.
then wrap around both legs from above and below, and tie them together in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is good.
and no one should administer any medicine to the long bones of the leg, especially if it is broken, and the leg is placed to prevent movement, and it is properly done at the fracture where there is an injury.
and each day move the leg to see if there is an abscess or any other complication; if the treatment continues until it is healed.
From the fracture of bones in the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones in the foot can be fractured and the toes, and they do not always break in a single place, but in various positions.
And if there is a severe fracture of the foot bones, and you see these bones stacked on top of each other, causing the patient to lie with their foot flat on the ground as if they wanted to walk, then place your foot on theirs, holding where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their proper position.
Then apply the plaster and stop it up, and place under the belly with a small board across both shoulders, then tighten at the foot's end, after you have wrapped it with drape and other things that you need.
And after three days or four have passed, if you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones either even, either broken, or discolored.
And if neither of the bones is broken, if it is restored, as we have said about the bones of the hand; then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, then under the foot place the board I mentioned, and tighten at the end.
and if there are two or three (or more), break them, then place on each finger a piece of salt according to its quantity, wrapped in a cloth of linen, and tighten the table under the foot. and make sure it is firmly on the top of the table, against the stomach of the foot.
And it is important that you do not forget the other things I have said about other breaks, once we have discussed them. and secure each case as it requires.
On the fracture of the bone in the hand.
When the bone of a woman's natural structure is broken, if it causes swelling, then incline her to the side with the affected part towards the back and hold her there.
then fill the wound with cotton, and also put in as much as necessary.
then stand up the woman, gently pressing her back bit by bit, and pull out the cotton until it reaches the opening of the bone, allowing the bone to return to its place with the cushion.
and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or so. if it is possible to repair the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of a goat, and tie a cane to the wound, and pour all the bladder into its natural state; then blow into the cane until the bladder is fully inflated inside: its natural state will repair the fracture;
then fill it with cotton and leave it thus for several days until it is healed.
And when a bone of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone;
and these fractures are not hidden from him who applies his study and skill, and heeds this book.
For this fracture indicates various dispositions for the right way of restoration: understand deeply.
On a broken arrow, take a goose throat and insert it into the arrow; then wrap rags around it and leave it for three days or until it heals completely.
from fracture with wound
For one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bones of the leg or shoulder or similar, it is important to seek immediate care, so that the healing which we have mentioned serves as testimony.
And if the wound heals, but there is lingering vitriol, and you have no other remedy, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, before abscesses form.
And if the abscess appears again, it is best to let it heal for a new day or two, until the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it even on the third or fourth day, as you might cause a worse complication.
And if the broken bone is visible upon uncovering the heart, it is necessary that you place it gently with your hands, at a slight extension.
If the extension does not appear to be of equal length in both hands, reset this instrument which is made of iron, with seven or eight inches in length, and the width should be according to the size of the wound. and because it is a delicate operation, it should be soaked for three or four days, depending on the need for each fracture treatment.
and it should be neither too thin nor too thick, so that it does not bend to pressure on the limb at your command, and is firm in front and thick in the middle towards the front, thus:
and it is called "palainche," therefore the crooked bones should be placed on top of the visible bone's head; and twist it once, as it returns, and let them be even on each side. And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, it is necessary that you hold the head of the bone, until the instrument has a good grip.
and if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then use a suitable tool, such as a knife or scissors, within your power;
then remove whoever is delayed in the bone due to stiffness and small cuts.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
if you do as much as possible to have it in its place, then wet the cloth with a black, astringent wine, and wrap it carefully around it; and do not place any ointment or other substance on the wound that would cause putrefaction and decay;
then administer bandages after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, removing any debris, according to the size of the wound, and be sure not to stretch the wound with the bandage.
and often they have done this foolishly, and brought upon the patient either death or corruption many times. and so the tightness and pain from other fractures should be more gentle and softer.
And if the wound is deep or great, and you doubt that a bad accident might come, as we have said, and you feel pain instead of relief, if it's not appropriate to put pressure on it. but wrap it around, instead of pressure, with hard cloth, and bind it.
And when you see after one or two days that the wound is bowing or sinking, then remove what you have put on it and apply a healing dressing for wounds, such as a four-part ointment or similar.
And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is healed and cured.
And it is necessary that the limb be dislocated in such a way that the bowstring corrals the bone slightly.
And if it persists for a long time and cannot heal completely, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, then you must open the wound with a knife and remove all these misplaced pieces to stop the pain.
And if a fistula or other form of corruption occurs, it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in this chapter above.
And when a bone is broken and exposed in the member, such as the bone of the shin or the shoulder, or other large limbs, do not pull it immediately, for many times death results, but leave it until it decays.
if, by chance, it heals after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if possible.
and if you cannot, leave it be.
Many times we encounter after the healing of the break, especially when it is near a joint, and the sight of the misaligned limb is an unpleasant one. and by chance cannot perform the natural movements of its limbs.
Beware then, if it is fresh in us: if you administer astringent medicines such as aloe, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, bayberry, and similar others, by immersing any of these things, or all together, in astringent wine or abundant egg yolk or honey. and place them on the wound in compresses, drawing it tight, and do not loosen them for several days.
and place them on the wound in compresses, drawing it tight, and do not loosen them for several days. and then dislocate it, and begin again with another, until the nodosities are removed;
or hold it tight on a well-made plug; for the property of this plug is such that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
and if the nodosity has become hardened like stone, it must be removed, cutting off the top and draining the excess. You must remove it with any razor while it is fresh (or raw), and treat it as long as it is clean.
The weak member after treatment.
When the fracture of the bone is healed and the limb remains weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons: due to the fact that it was tied too tightly and not properly adjusted as it should have been; or because it had too many constraints, and cannot follow the natural movement of the limb; because of the abundance of inflammation; or due to too great movements, not staying in its hour (i.e., not settling properly); or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body firm, until the blood increases within it; and administer baths, and give joy and comfort;
then place lead on the member, so that the lead attracts great pain, and raise it often with cold water, until the pain subsides in the member. and it returns to its natural shape.
Both members twisted after health. When the member is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural strength.
do not believe the fools who say one must break the member from the very beginning, and many foolish things have been done in our land.
and this work is blamed, causing great harm, and perhaps even death.
However, if the nodulations and tortures are fresh, then they should be treated with hot water or cooked herbs that soften them, such as fennel leaves, roots, melilot, and similar things.
and prepare a mollifying plaster, as is well-known, using fennel seeds, and preserve them in gelin grease or sesame oil, and apply the plaster.
You take greasy figures (fat deposits), and crush them with fine collic (a tool or process) and similar medications that reduce inflammation.
And never is the bone dislocated by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands. And allow the limb to move every hour.
And if the swelling and hardness (edema and fibrosis) is like stone, and requires opening with iron, it is necessary to cut gently with a fine instrument up to the bone. and apply compression and study in the treatment.
Dislocations occur from a joint moving out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs due to no apparent cause, it is necessary to try to bring the limb back towards its normal position urgently.
For if treatment is delayed, the limbs swell, and perhaps they return to their original position, but it tightens at the joint.
Because it is not necessary to move it, as long as it is inflamed. often causes inflammation and other pains;
nevertheless, when this occurs, if it makes the patient healthier, then let it be, until the abscess is completely healed.
then raise the affected limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as the cure comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint up to the foot.
Soon, it happens that the jaws are dislocated, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: or they are slightly out of their place, and softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated, hanging down towards the worst, and cutting the saliva from the mouth that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and he wraps his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns to its proper position through various dispositions.
And if it is whole and complete, then it is necessary that you reset it hastily, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the physician places his finger on the patient's head, and presses it deeply into the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw within the mouth, thus dislocating it by half. and the other two hands should be prepared, equal to each other;
and instructs the patient to soften his jaws and move them from all sides. And balance them equally until they return to their proper place.
And if they return to their place, especially when both lower jaws are together, then apply hot water and oil, gently dislocating them again.
We must not delay any longer, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth is closed well without softening, place moistened lint wrapped in a cloth made of rose oil and wax, then gently bind it with soft bands.
and make the patient sleep on their back, with their legs between two pillows, so that they do not move to either side, and do not strive to move more, but gently press the flesh until the pain is gone and the jaws are relaxed.
and then massage it gently, and do not strain to open the mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is well closed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their original position within an hour and do not return to their normal place, this causes fever and frequent sweating, and perhaps intestinal problems, and sometimes pure colic vomiting.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of harm; and often causes the death of him who has it, within nine days.
The fork cannot be removed from the inside of the continuation of the bone, and the more it is pulled, the worse it feels. It is never right when taken out towards the outside, and one can feel this clearly.
And the recovery is that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the joint firmly in your palm, and it will return.
then apply the splint and bandage it tightly.
and the joint that is towards the neck cannot be dislocated. if it does not dislocate, and if it does not return to its place, as we have said, then you must reset it.
then apply the splint and bandage it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
and thus, itself is brought back to the shoulder joint when it deviates from its place.
**Shoulder Dislocation**
Know that the shoulder is misaligned through three manners:
one of which is that it deviates at the part of the shoulder blade towards the back; and the second is at the part where it joins the arm; and occasionally it deviates at the upper part, and this is rare;
and do not dislocate it behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate it inside for the nerves;
and repeatedly dislocate towards the armpit, especially those with little flesh, for at these joints it pulls sharply.
at these joints with enough flesh, it pulls sharply, and returns slowly.
And sometimes it happens to no one that there is a bruise or fracture, and a hot abscess forms in the shoulder, and he thinks it is dislocated because of that.
You must therefore test it, as long as you are certain. and then begin treatment.
And dislocation is recognized when it deviates towards the joint, and makes a distinction between the injured shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their differences manifest. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a socket, and by pressing on the joint, you will feel the top of the shoulder as if it were one. and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its normal position, nor move it in any way.
and also, if it is dislocated at the top and not properly hidden, for you can feel it clearly with your touch.
and this method of dislocation is not to be used unless it is fresh, or if the patient is suffering from great pain.
The method is that the healer places his hand on top of the patient's dislocated joint, then puts his palms beneath the joint, and pulls the joint upwards towards its proper place. and the healer lifts his hand, extending it upwards, then places it beneath. if sickness comes.
And if sickness does not come as we have said, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water. and apply it gently and soothingly, such as with a decoction of althae, fennel, and melilot in water, and let it be applied.
then the patient should be placed on his back, and a soft cloth of equal thickness should be put under him, neither too soft nor too hard. Then the foot of the sore leg should be placed on the cloth, and gently lift the head of the affected shoulder, and draw the hand of the sick person.
and other assistants tie the patient's head so that it does not move below. the shoulder now returns, and if it is dislocated, reset it according to this manner:
and make sure that this is done at home, which should be larger than the patient. and be straight towards the side of the cost, and turn the patient's shoulder away from the dislocation, and lift the joint above, so that the patient hangs on the other side. and other ministers take hold of the patient's hand below the belly. And if the patient is too light, and any heavy thing causes no pain, then the dislocation returns now.
And it is also adjusted in another way:
and it is fixed with a long stick in the ground, so that the joint is also firm like a pistle, and not too thick or too thin. then it is placed beneath the patient, but with soft cloth above, and the patient should be stretched out long on the bed.
then his hand should be stretched out on the other side, forming a new shape, and the joint will return to its original place safely.
and if she does not want to return due to all the things we have said, then do this treatment: take a knife of great size and three fingers in width, which has its blade rounded off so that it can enter completely beneath the skin along this shape.
then lay on the patient's head two cloth strips below, so that they do not hurt the sick person, and insert them beneath the skin of the affected area.
and extends one arm over the thigh lengthwise, and binds the shoulder to the thigh, and raises the arm from the elbow of the hand, then places the arm on the broad edge of a chisel, and lowers the hand downward, and lets the body hang from the other side. the joint moves back now.
And when it is dislocated, in any way, it is necessary that you put beneath the joint a thread of equal wool, then apply the plaster with the apparatus, consisting of fine powder, incense, and egg yolk, over the entire shoulder and around, then pull the joint gently, and tie the bandage to the plaster, and press the hand against the collarbone, and let the hands remain in this position.
And it is necessary that he moves slightly, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal more quickly.
and then move more after two or three days, and continue to move it. and if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is stuck due to moisture or another cause, it is necessary that you administer cauterization at three points, as is described in the chapter on cauterization.
And if you do all this, and after seven days the joint still does not hold, and the patient cannot raise their arm above their head, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either compressed, extended, or softened. and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the worst, and the joints, either in front or behind, are caused by a sudden movement, extension of the arms, and other similar actions; then another treatment is required.
and heal as long as he is healthy.
And after healing, cracks may appear in the member, and delayed movement; if the patient uses it many times, as long as these cracks are light, they will be eased and return to their original state.
regarding the dislocation cost
You know that the joint that is dislocated is damaged and moves in an incorrect way;
and is damaged from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not completely healed, because it is clearly visible and feels obvious. and is damaged according to each shape. And when you join the diseased part with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. Because the joint is stiff, preventing the arm from bending and touching the shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the abscess closes and does not reappear, because if the abscess reappears, it would be painful to reset it.
and by chance it cannot be reduced to its original state, especially when it is at the back. it is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and there is a chance it could be fatal.
And the reduction, when it is possible to return it to its original state, you should place your two hands on it. and the arms should be spread out, and the hands turned towards the sides according to the direction of the joint, pulling them together at the elbows or the base of the palm, until it returns to its original position.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his palm, and turning the root of the palm, which is out of place, according to the joint.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer a strong extension;
and this is the method to extend the arm: the healer should hold it tightly so that it does not move during the extension.
then turn the arm in each direction, having wrapped it with a long and wide cloth.
and when you see the joint connecting to the hand, if it is not lubricated with oil to soften the joint, then press on the formed joint until it returns to its original state.
and when it is in place, apply dry plaster with heat, and stretch the arm towards the collarbone of the afflicted person, and do not leave it for any days, then release it.
and if the joint is firmly in place, release the tension, and leave it.
and if you see that the joint is not tightly held, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for no days until it is firmly set. then release it.
And if it feels painful after resetting the joint, and it becomes silent, then bathe and gently rub it, and press until it is soothed. Place a grease-soaked sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make the patient take a bath. And when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put on the fat again, and then take a bath. And do this process twice or three times until it is healed.
and if you see, place it on a hot stone with butter and stretch it.
it will return to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is misaligned, and its return to position is slight, more so than other joints. However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place gently, at the same time that it is misaligned, so that the limb does not swell or an abscess forms hot.
And the reset is such that you place the patient's hand on a table, extend their limbs, and ensure they are equal, so that they place their palm over the joint's appearance, and bend it until it returns.
Nevertheless, it is important that you check if it is correctly positioned. then place the patient's hand, palm down, on a table and extend it, then bend it back. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on a table, and look to see the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If, however, the strain of soothing plasters on abscesses is not eased, it will leave him thus without relief.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place for any number of days, then the joint will remain dislocated.
and do not harm the patient further, as long as his hand is swollen, and he cannot move any part of it. so then know that the nerves or arteries are cut.
If there is no other cure than to extract the condition by gentle cautery, then perhaps there is nothing else worth trying.
And when the hand is dislocated, if you place the splint as we have said, then stretch it and leave it for a day, then release it and do so again.
If he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, then apply hot water moistened cloth, and rub it until it is healed.
on the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Never should the palm's two sides be disrespected, neither the back of the hand nor the palm's belly.
then they are dislocated, and the dislocation should be held at the patient's own pace until it returns, then support the head with both hands, and pull it towards the part where it is joined.
and leave it for two days, then set it equal to the other side that day.
and hold it still as we have said, and loosen it from its socket, and make it move, and reset it in the nut.
and do this often, while it is still tight, and also do the following if it becomes distorted in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
and do the same when it is distorted from another side.
dislocation of the spine
When the spine or the neck is dislocated, and there is no cure, the patient often dies quickly.
And the signs of this are that the patient's legs jump involuntarily and he cannot hold them, and often the limbs become weak, both the two knees or the two arms or one.
And often times the shoulder becomes silent from the third part.
The one that becomes silent at the back is called "gypsiness
The cure is that you warm the place if the gypsiness has come from childhood: If there is no cure nor healing from it at all.
And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, they speak of ancient cure methods with great words, but they do not bring any true benefit.
but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.
I say that in the weakness that comes to the feet first, no one has ever been healthy.
and also those that come directly to the second side, and one cannot cure outside unless the one properly coming to the back is treated first, as I say.
and it is that the patient should be extended on their side with both legs equal, and have pressure from below so they do not move.
then insert I push the splint into the flesh on the head in a curved shape, and another as pressure, and tie a loose band around the afflicted parts, and another across the hips, and knees, and ankles.
and both ministers know the bands, one on the head and others on the feet, among the two splints;
and they should be well secured, the splint as we have said, and the skilled person places their palms on the curved spine until it returns to its place.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table three feet long, cut through the wall from the inside, place the patient on their side, and turn the head of the table away from the wall, then place the middle of the table over the spine. and place the mirror on the other side of the table's head and press firmly until it returns to its place.
and if you see, do it with the turn of the hand that returns to its original position. And you should insert two splints into the head of the patient with a severe arm injury, and towards the feet, two others, and between each splint, from inside and outside, a palm-width of length.
and each splint should have an opening, or you turn them correctly, and the splints are firmly fixed in place so they do not move.
and between each pair of splints, there should be a turning splint, so they can twist, and at each twist, two small splints one palm-width long, to turn the twisted one.
and then take the ligament that is among the attachments at the twist towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other twist, and each of the attendants twists their twist to the whole ligament, and the master makes the spike equal as we have said.
And when it is equal, apply a drying plaster with much heat, then the stoppers, and then the steel of a tablet three fingers long, which preserves the joint from the stiffness and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a ligament as we have said, and use the patient's gentle rest until it is healed.
and if any thing comes to an end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications, with the intention that we have said before. and never should a piece of bone be administered, and never should the appearance come in the rear spine of the back, and it is thought that this is dislocation. and it is the bone that opens, therefore one must not have any presumptions about it. for fear it might bring death.
You know that the joints of the spine and the joints of the shoulder only cause dislocations, not like the other joints.
and the spine joint is misaligned according to three parts. inside and outside, and front and back.
and deeper inside, then less misaligned front and back.
And the knowledge of his dislocation is such that when you join the injured leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the patient's knee opens wider than the healthy one, and he cannot bend his knee fully. and it is the inflamed abscess that causes the joint to be destroyed because the bone of the thigh comes close.
And the sign of him who experiences this at death, it is that this event is contrary to what has been said before.
And the signs of someone experiencing this in front, it is that his leg is weak according to its strength. however, do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot do so before, and he retains his urine, and the ankle swells, and when he tries to stand, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of him who experiences this afterward, it is that he cannot spread or bend his knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the pain is in the thigh instead of below the ribs.
They reset this appearance of dislocation if it is such that you reward it when the dislocation is ancient, and it lingers according to its disposition, otherwise there is no cure. and there should be no presumption that it will not happen again.
And in the case of a fresh dislocation, which is one of three types, if you hurry to reset the joint, it becomes stuck both inside and outside, and moves to the right or left. so that it may not recur, and there is no need for other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong ointment, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or bind it tightly to the knee. and other assistants extend their hand over it in such a way that they press their hands down on the sore spot, then tightly bind it with a soft ligature on the calf. and another ties the head with a ligature.
and they extend it upwards and downwards several times, until the patient is completely lifted off the ground once, and remains still.
This method of extension is common to all four limbs, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If this is not the case, then it is necessary to apply a remedy to his appearance.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, it is necessary to have the patient lie on his healthy side, then place a ligature on the root of the thigh, and the limb that is below the injury, then extend the ligature upwards towards the injury and downwards towards the stronger part.
then have other assistants place their hands on the patient's arms, embrace the larger limb of the injured thigh, and extend it to a wider opening. if it returns to its place now;
and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have described, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligament on the heels and knees, and let the injured leg be extended two more degrees than the others.
then it should be suspended from a post, and two arms' length above the ground.
then instruct the assistant to embrace the top of the foot, and have other assistants with the patient who gently embrace the foot, for the joint will now move more easily.
And when the dislocation is external, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of a dislocated hip, then gently extract the ligament from the affected leg and also from the opposite side.
then place two sticks, one at the top and another at the bottom, then insert a stick between the patient's thighs, in the middle, in the shape of an arc. and he should surround it with moist cloths, so that the patient does not feel pain, then stretch each limb towards him and arrange them equally in his hand to reset the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good.
If it does not return, place it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous section, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is present, it is necessary to stretch the diseased leg forcibly, as I have said above; and place the mirrors to his pain on the diseased artery, then press with the other hand and stretch it downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is on the outside, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downwards or lift him up, but rather he should remain as his hip was dislocated downwards, just as we have said gently on both hips. and place it on his face, and stretch the ligament as we have said before, and he must press on the joint on the table; and will be at the point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even. then fasten the hips, and apply the plaster, and wrap a bandage tightly so that the hip does not move. and rest for three or four days, then untie it, and apply the plaster again.
and if you see that they are even, hold them as they were before, and leave it for three days.
then release it, and make it go gently, as long as the limb is comfortable.
From the dislocation of the knee.
The limb is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and out, and behind;
and do not dislocate in front.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not return to its place at the knee, know that he is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place their face down on your lap, and rest their foot on top of yours.
then take their knee in your palms, pull it between your fingers, and bend both sides of the knee forming a curve. and other assistants extend their help until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it has recovered well its leg slightly bent.
and apply a poultice, and make the leg recover to the knee, and hold it together firmly for three or four days, then loosen it.
and the patient should not exert themselves until the limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not at all straight, apply firm extension as we have said in the treatment of the spine, as long as it is healthy.
On the dislocation of the talus bone.
The talus bone is neither perfectly aligned nor fully dislocated, being both inside and outside its proper position.
And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, and it turns red at the site where it is dislocated.
We reset it if it is slight, and one must gently extend their hands when they are seized only slightly.
And when it is dislocated to a certain degree, one must ensure the patient lies straight and holds the limb firmly with a helper above the ankle.
then take the foot in your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and gently pull the foot upwards.
and do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot.
If it returns, that's good.
but if it does not return, the work must be restarted, for it comes back.
and if it cannot return in that way, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and insert a firm stick between their legs, and wrap cloth around them to prevent the patient from bleeding.
then attend to the patient's leg, and have another assistant extend the foot or hold it at the ankle, so that he lies down on his back with his foot elevated. then stretch each limb evenly, and insert something between the legs of the patient to hold them still when they are pulled.
then apply heat evenly to the dislocation in both hands, and use other assistants to raise the healthy leg, and the dislocation will return steadily.
And when the swelling has subsided, apply an ointment and compresses above, tighten the bandage, and tie the foot to the leg, and hold the stirrups behind the ankle, ensuring the bonds are not too tight.
then leave it for two or three days, and gently move it if it is strained.
then disengage it on the third or fourth day, and for three days thereafter, the patient must be kept from strenuous activity. and if it goes beyond this point, it is not lucky that he does not dislocate again.
And if abscesses form, it is necessary to soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, while they are fresh.
Of the two (parts/sides) When both (sides) are dislocated, if they need to be rightly extended without effort, it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any other part of the leg or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back or on a table, keeping his leg straight, and place your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot firmly until it returns.
and when they are even and open nothing, he places the sole of the foot on a table with two joints, then pulls it firmly, and leaves it for three days, then loosens it. and makes it rest until it is healthy.
From wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation and one wishes to restore it, often the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in treatment, since you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for long, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, do not be bold.
and at the beginning of things, apply hot poultices to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you have no hope for healing. and if you see hope, then immediately reset the member to its place, so that the abscesses that cause it to move cease.
and when the member is in place, apply hot poultices to the abscess, and treat the wound as appropriate, using dried herbs.
and if there is a dislocation with broken bones and small fragments, as the bones are disjointed, then follow what we have said in simple diseases.
and keep from falling into fear, according to what I have said, for it is your motion according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arms and body.
