You, my very dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science, its fulfillment, and have finished it through its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this for you with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And since the work of hands is closely guarded in our region and unknown everywhere, the knowledge has decayed and been lost, and there remains no stronger evidence than the small descriptions in old books about what the hands have done. And from this, error and vanity have arisen, and thoughts are closed, and knowledge is separated.
It seems to me that I want to revive this treatise entirely by ordering it according to the way of exposition and explanation, and in a concise manner. and I will bring together the forms of cautery instruments and other tools for this work with their appropriate explanations and preparations, as is required.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected. And it is necessary for him who undertakes to master this science of anatomy, as Galen says, that he know the judgment of the members, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and blood vessels, and the number of them, and the movement and resting of veins and arteries, and from where they come.
And Hippocrates says that the name is not important, but the work is powerful. and especially in the art of the hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, risks falling into error and misleading others.
for I have often seen many who delve into this science without any knowledge or experience.
Because I have seen a foolish craze that cauterizes the abscess of a woman's neck or collarbone, cauterizing the arteries of her neck. for this causes so much blood that the woman dies in his hands.
And he also showed me another wonder where he treated a stone from an old man, and the stone was great. if it removes a piece of the bladder with it, and it became infected within three days.
And I had already been called to remove it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; I knew well that if they attempted to remove it, he would die.
And I saw another wonder where he took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg and with the break came an injury.
and the ignorant doctors tighten the break on the injury as if by strong force, and they do not leave any gap for the wound, and they leave it in that state.
and he commands that he does not dislocate it again;
and waits until the leg is completely swollen and painful, and it comes to destruction.
I am called to come to him, and I hurry to come and dislocate the leg; and when I saw it dislocated, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But any attempt at correction was already confirmed or the member was beyond repair.
and does not cease the corruption of the limb as long as the member is completely lost.
And I also saw another wonder that the abscess, which had been healed, suddenly became inflamed due to the wickedness of its lordship.
For the ulcer, when it is free from black bile, it does not need to be cut with iron unless it is in a part that can be entirely removed without leaving any corrupted tissue.
And for this reason, dear child, it is necessary for you to know that the art of healing is divided into two parts: that is to say, work where there is danger in many positions;
and I will show, in each part of this book, where there is fear and danger.
For this reason, it is important for you to guard against it, so that the foolish gaze cannot speak ill of you.
If you take up your weapons in courage, and confront your enemies lightly but resolutely, and use the best method, through the grace of God, you will attain salvation and be happy.
and leave the fearful diseases of sorrow behind,
and cast away your weapons that cause you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galen does not speak of any of his warnings: Do not take any foul disease too seriously, unless you are called a fool for it.
I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
The first chapters deal with fire cautery and medicinal remedies for ague (malaria), and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
and the shapes of instruments, and the tools for cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
The second chapter deals with cutting and piercing, as well as the use of suction cups and incisions, and the extraction of arrows, and similar procedures.
and it details the ordering of chapters and the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar conditions.
and it details the order from the most severe cases down to milder ones, as well as the shapes of instruments used.
Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm or benefit of each condition.
I say that the qualities of aid and its harmful effects are the longest discourse and the most subtle science, with secret answers.
and of these things, many wise ones spoke and agreed.
and I will be content with few of my words, for I fear the length.
I say that cautery helps universally wherever it has matter, whether it is in two or more complexes: This is to know: a hot complexion due to material, and a dry complexion without material.
In a hot and dry complexion, combining material, they devised nothing and said that fire treatment is great help. and the others said the opposite: that fire treatment is not worth for ailments that come from heat and dryness. For nature of fire is hot, and it must not be treated with heat from a hot ailment through warmth or dryness;
and it helps greatly to cure hot and dry diseases that come upon the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the color of fire, you perceive the body is cold.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found it to be true through experience.
And in every case, no one should intervene unless they have tried it themselves, and know from long experience the chapter of cautery, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the remedies and the passage of time.
we have only fear of other complexions, especially for cold and moist illnesses. And all agreed and consented to the cauterization.
And know, child, that cauterization combines fire in a way that is part of healing secrets and, moreover, offers greater gentleness than medicinal burning.
For fire is simple, and it does not come from outside unless it affects a hot member, and it does not harm any other member at all.
Burning medications come from one part of the body to another, causing illnesses of sorrow without healing. and by chance awakens the patient.
He does not waste it for its nobility and the goodness of its nature, if there is no excess.
And this is what I have found through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, and it was about the truth of the things.
and for that I apologize for the length of the speech, because I do not like to deprive you of the secret that is revealed by fire, and the quality of the work, how it defeats bodily illnesses, as the philosopher demonstrates in proving. or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on the time when cauterization must be performed, and carefully select the instruments.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm causing pain is removed by the help of cautery. and indeed, cautery is for necessary and urgent pain, rather than waiting for greater harm to come to the member.
And never think, dear child, as they do the foolish ones; Because the disease which is healed by cautery has no recurrence; and thus it should be done;
and thus it should be done; but it is not always as they should care for it, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors which are the cause of pain, and acts more swiftly than other medicines because of its virtue and power.
And another powerful thing is that the disease comes according to the state of the patient and the place of the illness and its virtue;
and they are assembled within him the excesses through the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauterization is administered to him where there is little excess and moisture, as with cautery for dense pain and similar things, and such pain does not return. but this rarely happens.
And many people do not understand at all why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true.
but they do not believe that cautery has any value after medicine, but their intent is false, for when we administer remedies in any illness and they are ineffective, then we resort to cautery, which does have value.
Then it is clear that cautery is the last of medicine, not at all according to the opinion of wise men.
The ancients said that gold instruments for cautery are more powerful than those of iron, and they did not call them harsh except for the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
and they said that gold in cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true, as I have tested it, and I have found that it is indeed harmful to no one.
and gold cauterization is more effective than iron, as they say. However, when you heat gold instruments, you are not certain if it is heated by the color of gold, and it can cool down at any moment.
and if he warms himself too much; if he does over a fire; and thus he has enough obstruction.
Now therefore I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the path may be easier to follow.
Fire cautery should be applied to the head with moisture and cold, and there are many ailments caused by this method, known as "soda", due to the descent of humors from the head to the limbs and ears, and also due to dreams, toothaches, throat pain, and particularly, diseases arising from coldness, such as paralysis, soda (a term likely referring to a type of stroke), apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged with a solvent medicine, purifying the third or fourth nerve affected, according to the virtue and age, and the patient's tolerance of the pain. and then makes the patient's head relax.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, placing his hands on some weight.
after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and hold there with your two middle fingers; if blood comes out, then heat the cautery called "olive" whose shape is as follows: And place it on the dislocated joint marked with ink, and move your hand down and pull out gently, slightly disturbing it. then gently take your hand away, and relax the joint if you see a small bone out of place. and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you can see the bone as I have told you.
after taking a little string, fill it with hard and soft cotton, place it over the joint, and leave it for three days.
after that, apply soft cotton soaked in butter; and let them grow until the burn is healed; after healing, dress the wound with "tetra-formula" as long as it is clean.
And the elders said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it will fester; and for this reason, help is sought.
And they say that one should not let the fire cautery burn off any part of the bone, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it will be healed.
And he advised that the cautery should be left on for a long time, and to press so hard that one might even break the bone as women do when they give birth so that the humors are forced out.
and one must leave the wound open for a long time. after that one must clean and dress it.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem very good to me in every way, except for when they are used on people who have no choice.
and it seems to me that I must leave it alone.
for the flesh is weakened by continuous solutions of moisture, as we testify in other members.
and also when the patient's shoulder is weak by nature, and the first appearance of treatment is more safe and gentle for me, and from this practice I achieve whole healing then together.
When chronic pain persists for a prolonged period, the patient should use herbs and pills known as "cough drops," as well as applications of heat and cold and compresses. and if one performs the cauterization we have previously mentioned, it will not be effective. Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong constitution and not too cold. then cauterize it deeply, as we have said above. After that, cauterize each corner of the shoulder bone, as we have said before, and cauterize the one called "vasselz" (vasculature). and these are the veins where suction cups are placed. and hold your hand so that you do not see it touch the bone. the patient feels far greater pain from this cautery than from others, and I will speak of that later.
and it is necessary that the cautery of the horns be more subtle than that of the middle part of the head, and this is its form.
For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long When there is sudden pain in a part of the head and the disease spreads to the oil (or perhaps the brain), and the condition is purged with medicated treatments, and all other remedies as I have described in the division of diseases are tried, but they do not help. Then he performs cauterization according to two manners, that is to say, with hot medicine and fire.
If he cauterizes with hot medicine, it is when you press a blistered area and remove the skin down to the flesh in small pieces, and then make an incision where the pain is located in such a way that you can replace the blister under the skin.
and when it is replaced, if he tightens it well and leaves it thus for twelve hours; and then untie it and treat with sweet garlic, leaving the wound for two or three days. then place cotton soaked in butter over the wound until the pus stops.
After the dressing, as long as it is clean;
and if you see that any of the burning medicines I have written about or the dosages for treating with burning medicines are unsuitable, then adjust them as necessary.
The fire cautery is done according to this manner. Heat the fire cautery with this tool:
And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a clamp where there is a little curve, and it has a small appearance.
and place it on the painful joint, hold your hand and gently twist it until half of the pain is gone.
and release your hand when the artery is no longer blocked, it is healed, and there is abundant blood flow.
After applying a bandage of twine, place it on the joint for three days; then I apply moist cotton in butter, and then treat the wound on the shoulder until it is healed;
and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare" (scalpel), be careful not to cut into the artery in this migraine that is not old.
of migraine
When you treat a migraine as we have previously mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery mentioned above is inadequate for the medicine and does not help, then you must heat up the cautery called "cultellare" (scalpel) until it is white.
and thus mark the afflicted joint with a line half as long as a finger, and with one hand make an incision, pulling gently so that you do not touch the artery and do not go beyond the bone.
guard the jaw that becomes mute when eating, and let the nerves pay no attention to anything but the muteness and lack of spasms in the patient, and be careful not to damage the blood flow from the artery once it is cut, as cutting it evokes great fear especially in those who do not know or have little experience. and leave the wound half-healed;
but I will tell you how to stop blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it clots in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not enough to heal the disease, and the patient suffers, then cauterize both joints as we have said, and treat the wound until it is clean.
and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter about the extraction of the artery, with a cautery having two blades. and this is the best cautery of them all and most helpful.
regarding the pain in the ears due to cold
When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and various solvential medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned in the previous section have been applied, but the pain persists, use this cautery called "point," which has the following shape:
After marking around the painful ear or both ears where pain persists, move slightly upwards from the root of the ear, then mark the place where the joint is. and make X marks around each ear;
after healing the joint, ensure it is healthy.
regarding the torture of the mouth
The torture that must be cured by cautery is limited to those that move with fluid, as we have said in the sections about disease.
and do not perform cautery on appearances that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this appearance of torture that moves with fluid from dryness and purging from the head and gargling, then it is not effective. Therefore, you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries. one at the root of the ear, another slightly below the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips.
and place the cautery on the part that opens a healthy wound, and make two cauterizations at the top of the ear, one slightly below the edge of the bone at the top, and another in the temple just as far away; and leave the cautery on until half of the heart is burned;
and this is the form of the cautery:
and it resembles the knife we have placed in front, but it is a little more subtle, and it is necessary that the knife be slightly thicker.
After healing, the limb as I have said before, as long as it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said before, but the patient does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations: On the two horns of the head, I bind the head, and I open the limb called "vassel" as we have said before, and do no cauterization on the opening of the stomach.
and let them be treated as we have said above.
It seems like there might be a slight error or missing context
For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of herbs that purify the mind.
after examining the patient's entire head, place the plaster of mustard on the occiput as described in the treatise on plasters.
and this is the method of cauterization: if you do as I have said.
If it is healthy thus, it is good. and if it is not, perform three cauterizations with hot iron on the thigh down to the collarbone, and leave two large spaces between each cauterization.
and treat it as the others, and if you see it tighten, and the patient suffers, perform a cauterization in the middle. and if it is necessary, two others on the two horns, and treat as long as it is healthy.
and let the cautery be called "olive", as I have previously said.
The head should be cleansed with earth and water, as we have previously said.
after cleansing the head with the patient's malady, then apply the cautery to the head and each horn, and behind, and three times on the spine of the column.
and if you need more skill, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the illness is severe, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back. and let them grow until they are as long as possible, and gentle on the touch; after the cure while it is healed, and perform the cautery that is called "olive" which we have previously mentioned.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic; first, the brain must be purified with years and other treatments that we have discussed in the section on great suffering from prolonged medication.
And if it is a young child who cannot endure it, make them gargle and chew, often cleansing the brain with good meat.
after the king has placed his head in the middle, perform the cautery as we have said before, and cauterize the veins, and on each horn. and if the patient is far and suffers, perform cautery on them as I have said to those with paralysis and softening of the flesh, on the spine of the back and neck, and cauterize them with olive oil according to the manner I have said.
If the patient is ill, perform a delicate cautery on them according to this method:
When, due to melancholy, excessive or corrupt moisture and thick fluid are present, then perform cautery with hot iron as we have described for those with paralysis.
And if, due to melancholy, the excessive moisture declines into melancholia and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies the mind, as described in the previous section.
After removing the head of the patient; after making the torus of the well-made bandage, just as I have described, place it on the head;
and the patient should be crossed and held firmly from all sides;
After applying this treatment, take some butter from an old goat; and heat it gently over fire, so that it does not burn the patient; after evacuating the ring from inside out near the base, and leaving it to cool down;
and do this to the patient once each week with another good remedy, as long as he is healthy.
If you need to cauterize, make several incisions throughout the entire cautery.
This method of cautery moistens the brain increasingly;
and then place a moist cotton wick in butter and goose fat.
of the eyes When the eyes come first as signs of the conditions I described in the previous section, then begin and give to the patient something to drink that purifies the head, and guards against all moisture, and promotes sweating or a bath while fasting.
Afterward, he commands the patient to raise their head, and applies heat to the head, performing two cauterizations on both temples if the headache descends from the brain, or on either side if it descends from one eye.
and seal all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, making the cauterization long according to the width of the temple.
and guard against the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it by applying pressure as you have learned.
And I will teach you, in the extraction of arteries and the cauterization of incisions, how to stop it.
and never cauterize or burn the skin between the two bones behind.
and we see that these are cold, phlegmatic superfluities, so he applies the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter to them: I apply the cautery to the head, and I cauterize both temples, and I cauterize where the two bones join. and if it requires more, he cauterizes the eyelid carefully with a small cautery.
When you medicate it according to what we have said in the previous discussion, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three bitter herbs to drink. After the king has taken the lead, and he performs the cauterization with olive oil as a mild cautery. and performs cauterization with the "claw" cautery on the shoulders, slightly pulling the hairs.
and beware of the artery, do not block it.
This is the form of cauterization called 'clavilis':
When the paper of the oil becomes soft due to illness and moisture, then apply this cautery which is called "olive". Due to which the shape is:
and if you see that the cauterizations on both shoulders are as long as the hairs on them,
and do not let go of the hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that does not allow the oil to pass through It never happens that the hair of the veins is turned to darkness, and they prick the vein, and cautery is performed according to two manners: that is to say, with fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy state; after signing on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as full of wonder, and it begins with the signs of the hairs.
then dip cotton in moist glaze of egg and musk from rose, then heat the cautery with which the shape is as follows:
After cauterizing the affected area little by little, ensure the colors are burnt into the skin deeply.
and the signs of the work's effectiveness are that you see the skin retracting and the hairs standing on end at the touch of oil.
then take your hand away and leave it thus for three days, then apply moist cotton coated in butter until the burning is gone. after the treatment, as long as it is healed.
And after this come the hairs, and the paper is softened, then begin again the cautery on that same place, as you did before.
And if the hairs are burnt away, cauterize while the paper (skin) is raised to its natural state and even, and do not let the hairs prick the oil.
The medicinal burning cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment shape of the leaf of myrtle.
then take French soap and fresh charcoal, each one .5., and grind them together well; and apply it gently, if it does not cool down, then with a light touch on the shape you have made as if from a leaf, and place some paper on top of it. and if the disease persists only in one place, then surgery should be performed there, and also in both places. and apply oil of cotton moistened with egg on it.
and the patient's joint should be in your healthy hand and place your finger over the medicine, and press lightly and move it every time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, for it burns just like fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body. And when the burning sensation has passed, if you raise the limb from below, and see that the paper is raised as if it were raised by constraint of fire or by incision. and if it is so, then it is good.
If no, then apply more of the medicine to the limb or the medicine has not opened up yet, as long as your work is even and your joints are set correctly.
then place a piece of moistened butter on it until the burning heat is extinguished, and afterward, treat the wound with the ointment called "dyafenis" or other remedies, as long as it remains clean.
And if it is necessary for you, guard yourself well with your work, taking great care that it does not neglect the medicine at all.
And if the paper becomes soft afterward and the hairs poke in the oil, then repeat the treatment on that wound which has been softened with the paper, just as you did before. afterward, treat it as long as it remains clean;
and this is the form of the wound with great pain;
And know that the bones of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to these constraints...
and do not depart from the right way for those who have the study of this art.
On the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have explained in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then you should cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position. and hold the patient's head between your hands in this manner so that it does not move, nor do they wiggle their head.
after moistening a cotton ball with hot or pepper juice on oil;
after heating the cautery instrument that is half:
and it should be shaped like the head of a quill, assembling the edge to form the cautery;
if you look, it is pointed from one end to the other, and if you look, it is also like a tent;
but nevertheless, this being bald is worth moving for your work.
After pressing the fistula, if it is open, drain the pus and dry it; and if it is closed, if it can be opened, drain the bowel;
after applying hot cautery, hold the hot iron over the affected area near the oil, so that your hand does not touch it. and apply the cautery to the fat of the oil, and the corruption.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery near the bone, that would be good. If this does not help, apply the cautery again, and if you need to, do so a third time, and leave it for three days.
after which you cover it with moist cotton in butter, and continue the treatment of the dry dressing until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply a corrosive medicine to the exposed bone. and the treatment according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that no one from the past spoke of. Grip the fistula tightly, and hold the place; After that, place a subtle, thin piece of material into the fissure to give it shape. and make it the size of a drop of rain. and hold your hand firm, so that the patient does not move, until the drop has melted and reached its natural state.
and it is necessary to place a soft, moist cotton cloth on the patient's wound for healing or in heat.
He plunges himself into a deep sleep from the opening of the fistula, and the healthy flesh heals with wonderful health.
And if the fistula is healed by cautery as we have said, it is good. If this does not happen, then it is necessary to administer warmth or cold, and bring the fistula back to the body according to what is appropriate for its own place.
cracks in the lips Many times, cracks appear in the lips called "poil," especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these wounds of which we have spoken in detail, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat a small surgical knife according to this form:
and places the hospital bed into these crevices until it reaches the source.
after treatment, the joint should be wrapped with cerate until it is healthy.
When an abscess appears at the root of the tongue or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of teeth, after putting off healing and rot and becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in detail, but it does not help. then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the extraction or opening of the fistula, hold your hand firmly until the heat from the fire reaches the bottom, and do not move it afterward.
and do so once or twice after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, as long as it is healed;
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if this does not help, it is necessary to discover the joint and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medication does not help, then place the patient's dislocated joint in your healthy hand. after heating the cautery, the shape that forms should be as follows, so you place a splint over the tooth.
and place the hot cautery instrument gently on the patient's hand, holding it firmly so that the patient feels the warmth spreading to the root of the tooth.
after relaxing your hand, restart the cautery according to your desire.
after filling the patient's mouth with salty water, leave it for an hour and then rinse with warm fire.
And in this way, the teeth that were moving will be confirmed, and the softened gums restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried up.
from the pain of teeth
When tooth pain arises due to cold or frost, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cautery should be applied according to these two methods: and with butter cautery and fire cautery.
The butter cautery is such that you melt butter with heat, and apply it with the tip of a iron or silver spoon. after taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a rod, dip it in melted butter, and apply to the painful tooth gently and hold until it cools.
and thus often do until the virtue reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that the moist cloth and cotton in melted butter is effective, apply to the painful tooth, and place a hot iron until the heat goes up to the gum.
He performs fire cauterization by applying it in such a way that you press a piece of iron or steel into the patient's flesh, making it thick enough to prevent the heat from reaching the surface of the wound.
After heating the cauterization tool, the shape it forms should be as follows: he places it on the wound and holds his hand until the cauterization cools down.
He does this often, as the pain will be most intense on the day it is performed or the following day.
And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cauterization, and then blows hard.
and this is the form of the cautery:
and perform the cautery on the part of the body that you wish, according to what you are able to do;
and this is the form of the instrument:
Of scrofula When the scrofula (swollen lymph nodes) are filled with cold moisture and do not respond to medication, then apply heat to the cautery cheveit (instrument), which afterwards takes this form, and it should have openings for the fumes to escape from the cautery to the other part.
and apply the hot cautery to the abscess once, as it is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
and if the abscess is small due to applying the cautery according to the amount of the abscess, leave it thus for three days. and apply a moist cloth with butter until the burn is healed;
after healing, bandage the wound and cover it until it is healed.
When moisture conquers the channels of the body, especially when it arises from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be relieved first by solvent medications.
After performing cauterization at the root of the throat, be sure not to go near the throat afterward, and do not inhale strongly but only a little bit.
After that, perform another cauterization at the joint of the collarbone and the top of the spine, and it is this cauterization, known as "clavicle," which we have described above.
and treat the limb as we have said before, as long as it is healthy.
When all and any disease of the prostate is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or pain, and it is an old illness, then make .II cauteries on the strong parts of their will. and make another cautery between the two mammary glands;
and this cautery, which is called "clavile" according to the shape as said before.
And if you see it, perform cautery by pricking all the cautery points called "points" from which the shape is formed as seen in the ear disease.
and these points should be from 30 down, or as deep as needed.
After the treatment, reset the limb according to what is mentioned above, and make the cauterization in three stages according to this form:
And because cautery is lighter, because you do it three times in turn.
On the dislocation of the shoulder.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, remember the patient on their back and sides; after that, open the incision inside the swelling with your left hand;
and if the joint is disaligned, then apply the fire cautery gently so that it does not damage the form.
and cauterize the heart as long as it feels hot, and the figure of the cautery should be three parts together.
and because of this, cauterization is done with a cautery that has three points, so the figure of cauterization has six parts.
and the nerve is according to the sensitivity of a person, and this is the shape of cautery with three points.
And never adjust against this nerve, for there are eight cauteries.
After placing the patient on the fire cautery bed, apply crushed salt with a cord. After resting the patient, do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comfortable.
And if it is dislocated from above, this happens poorly, then apply cautery over the thick part with a hot iron or many cauterizations by pricking.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is withdrawn, and the patient is healed.
When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach while it is being stretched from its natural state, and catarrh multiplies within it, and conventional treatment methods do not help, then the patient should be placed on his back and stretch out his legs and arms. From this, after, perform three cauterizations removing the flesh with a knife, and make them as thin as possible, claving the cautery deep, and two cauterizations on both sides until the cautery marks form at three angles, and there is enough space between each that they do not stick together when they become infected.
and they should perform the cauterization so that it sears both parts of the heart, and the shape of the cauterizations should be according to this form without adjustment:
and if you are cauterized with a large cautery on the stomach according to this form;
and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach at a point according to the amount you see fit; then cauterize at the entire cautery that is called "point.
After the treatment we have previously described, as long as he is healed.
As for the liver, it hurts from fresh and moist pain and a great deal of phlegm, as long as it is strongly out of its natural condition due to excesses. and the patients should be treated as we have said in sections, and it does them no good if they do not rest on their heads. and the signs of the third cautery according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, removing the hypochondria, where the pain in the side of man arises.
and say between each cautery the thickness of a finger. and they should be cauterized with long burns, not pressing too hard with the hand on any part of the cautery;
and it should only burn the outer half of the heart, and the patient should be able to stand on their feet.
and if he cannot, lying down, stretch his legs, and ease his burns;
And if you wish, to cauterize these wounds with a knife, if you are subtle and wise in the art, be careful not to burn the entire heart, for you would cause great harm to the whole body. and that it does not come to a boil, for the heart is very subtle in that place, and the wise ones to see it.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If he is on the bed, the patient feels great pain.
and if he is on the stretcher, he feels excruciating pain.
And during this treatment when the mirrors are consulted, it is necessary that the patient rest with his head elevated.
and then apply a sigil over the wound or abscess, and then heat the iron that resembles a rose, from which this form is derived: And cauterize until the colors are burned, and come just to the surface, as long as the inflammation is entirely gone.
after the treatment, according to the treatment of the wounds, as long as they are healed;
and it is not advisable for anyone to use this cautery unless they have studied extensively in the art of medicine and by whom these diseases have never been corrupted.
Then he can boldly operate, but still, I think it is better to leave it.
the cautery of tears
The ancients said that one should make cauterizations with the roots of aristologue, and in this manner: Take a long root of aristologe (a herb), the largest you can find, dry it, and make it as thick and as long as your arm. and moisten it in oil, and apply it over the fire, and cauterize the wound between the shoulder blade and the collarbone, and make small cauterizations slightly downward on the part below the beard.
and cauterize between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly declining behind. and cauterize the heel, and another one on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and along both sides of the lower heels, removing the cauterization between the shoulders.
and do not press my hand too tightly, but open it firmly as if smelling something.
And they say that no ancient tells of any man using fire cautery resembling a razor, and heating it and placing it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess. and suddenly intensifies the pain, as we have said about the abscess of the tender liver.
But in this case, the patients often die now, or there is a fistula that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse according to the divisions of treatment we have mentioned, and it does not benefit, then they (doctors) apply three methods of cautery, all of which are good.
Dislocate it in such a way that you make three cauterizations, or four, following the length of the bone, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver we have mentioned above.
and do not press my hand to any part of the cautery, and let the patient be careful on his back;
and another way of cauterizing is to heat the instrument with fire, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and remove the bone that is in the way, or where the patient feels pain coming from the left side, and elevate it according to the direction of the bone, according to the length of the body, and cauterize according to the width of the body.
After burning both sides of the flesh, until the colors are perceived on the other side, then apply fire cautery, and thus you will have three.
And if you see, cauterize the entire cautery on three sides.
After the treatment when it has been putrefied for a long time, and this is more important than the other treatments mentioned before.
Cauterization is not effective for dropsy, except in the manner known as "asclytes".
When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your cure is not beneficial, then you must make four cauterizations around the wound, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the heart, two behind the back on the spine, and one at the anus. and let the cauterization be close to the specific heart beat.
After leaving the cauterization open for a long time to allow pus to drain, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cauterization. and healing will happen more quickly, and the two sides will be aligned with the help of God.
The form of the cauterization for the abdomen should be like the claw that we have shown before. and make it olive-shaped, according to what is mentioned above.
When the feet are swollen in the hydroptic patient and filled with yellow pus, you should cauterize the back between the little finger and the ring finger. and hold your hand with the cautery without turning it.
And do not press too deeply, so as to close the citrus-colored eyes, and perform the cauterization according to this form:
After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the scalpel; and let the cautery be long, one of the sockets of the knee in front and the other behind, on the leg.
and leave the cauteries overlong without dressing, so that they heal in place.
after the dressing of the other wounds that we have mentioned.
When abdominal distension arises from cold and moisture, the retention and digestion of virtues in the stomach and intestines is weakened, and it cannot be cured by any means. and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great pain, so make a strong cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken before, or a cautery for the circulatory system. and I cauterize around the anus gently with a delicate cautery, and I cauterize the glands.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply a cautery to the wrist, one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach to remove the excessive, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the base or in greater numbers, and they have been old, consisting of corrupted cold and moist humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and do not benefit, then make cauterization. On the spine of the back, those who are entirely devoid of strength should slowly and gradually stretch, and by cauterizing the roots of the nerves, they should ease the pain in two ways.
and if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and swelling appears on the face, then great cauterization should be applied to the stomach, as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another across every part of the cauterization with a clamp. and leave the open cauterization for a long time. After treatment, reset the joint as long as it is healthy.
When you are completely healed, if you feel the fire of cautery as sharp as a razor, and then apply it thoroughly over that entire area. and let it stay until the cautery reaches the vein, from which comes the blood.
do this once or twice, and if there is much tissue, cauterize each as we have said. after the beneficial treatment of wounds while they are clean;
and if you cauterize with a hot cautery on the raw flesh, it will have greater help.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we shall relate in its place, a disease arises that can only be healed by cautery.
When a vein becomes fistulated, inflamed, filled with putridity and corrupt moisture, you must try all sorts of subtle treatments, and be sure to understand the full effect of each one.
After heating the cautery to a sharp point, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered, and repeat the cauterization until the dead or corrupted flesh is completely burned, once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount required.
and be careful not to burn the nerve that is sensitive, and great vessels.
if the fistula is in the wall of the bladder and the intestine, be careful of these vessels, and do not make any fire except on fatty flesh, and think that it is not painful.
After healing the limb as long as it is healthy, and if its joints are flexible, and the bones are slowly pulled out, then you know that the joint is completely healed.
and if the bones are not slowly pulled out, know that the joint is damaged and corrupted deep within the bone. and thus, as one of these would tell us about their joint.
When the pain of a fracture comes with heavy bleeding and cannot be managed by women, then you must perform cauterization on the wound on both sides using the cautery iron we have previously mentioned.
and so we cauterize it in the middle, if there are three cauterizations in a row, and they will provide greater aid.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then it should be cauterized in the upper part, just below where the urethra begins, with both hands, on the right and left sides, making each cauterization as long as our thumb.
and cauterize it further down the back if necessary.
and let the cautery be performed according to the shape mentioned above.
When the soil is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed. and when they come, they cause great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the wound, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back.
and so the cautery of the bone, as we have said.
When sticky moisture descends into the chest cavity and for this reason it cannot move from its place, and the signs are that the affected limb is longer than the other when measured together.
and it is found that the internal organs move strangely, so it is necessary to cauterize the patient over the chest cavity with a cautery in the shape of a circle, and mark around the joint as it moves, so that the chest remains within the circle.
and if it is the cautery like those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then make three cauterizations from the large olive, and let these cauterizations be as good as all the others.
and treat it as long as it is healthy.
of the pain of the back When pain arises in the chest due to cold and moisture, and the patient is afflicted with this condition for a long time, treatment as described in the previous section may not be effective, and the disease becomes chronic. So it is necessary for you to purge the patient of bad humours from foul pills, or other good-looking pills. Afterwards, perform cautery;
and the method of cautery is according to two manners: this involves the use of burning medicines and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which some are as follows:
that you cauterize on the wound of the neck with three cautery triangles, cauterizing them according to this form, making them deep and wide, and leaving enough space between each cautery for the thickness of two fingers, and they should be olive-shaped.
one should never cauterize in the middle of the neck, which is why there are three according to this form.
and if you see that cauterization with the circular cautery we have mentioned in the dislocation of the neck is not effective.
but make it in such a way that the circles contain all the pain, and every part of the heart is burned.
And this is the method used for sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
and if it extends to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations below where the patient feels the pain, and one cauterization above the ankle on the left side slightly.
and let it be a knife cauterization, and burn the thickness of the heart.
and if the patient feels the pain extending to both feet or near the anus, cauterize that area where it hurts three times or four with a point cauterization. And if it happens more, he must do so;
And if the pain is in the knee towards the thigh, he should perform cautery with a cutting or circular instrument, and be careful in all his cauterizations that he does not leave the cautery for too long, lest he burns the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
I myself have seen many who have made cuts on the ankle of the foot and left them until the leg was completely swollen, and also the ankle, making it pierced and corrupted all over the ankle. After an abdominal solution, he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and the other, according to this manner.
And the wise ones say about the cautery of the hainche (knee), which is the way, make the iron as thick as a new dime or slightly thinner, and twist it between them or intertwine them one after the other with a distance equal to the size of a thumb's nail.
and intertwine them over both parts, and make them as if they were new, and have a well-made iron of each.
and this is the form:
and heat it until it is completely red and exudes pus, then place it on the diseased haunch of the animal, and turn to the healthy side.
and apply the cautery once the cauterization is complete, and leave it for three days. and then apply an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time. after the treatment of the ointment as long as it is healed.
Albuscasim says that we should use this cautery little because of the fear of its regard, and see little of those who use it.
and nevertheless, these are good cauteries, which the patient can endure, and the place where it is performed.
He uses the cautery of hot medicine, so make you an instrument to intertwine with which you lower the edge of the door, and it is of iron or steel on a long wall, and at its highest point there are two, and between each there is the quantity of thickness of a finger. and they should be open above and below, and join together according to this form:
After that, place the board of the spine on the patient lying on their side, and quickly place your hand above the board of the spine. After pouring between the two circles of hot awes (coals) that have been heated over fire, leave them for an hour while the patient endures the heat and burn.
Because it has the same effect as fire;
and when the blisters have passed, take your hand with the instrument and lift the strip of soft awes, leaving it for three days, and apply butter until the blackening from the burn disappears; and leave it for three more days until the putrefaction subsides;
and this should be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as they are healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or the leg, use the instrument that suits according to what you have done in increasing the joint.
and this is the method of hot air, which I have written about in treating rectal medicine. Take alkali and quicklime, both in equal amounts, grind them together, and put them into a new pot. or if he has a small opening, defuse it so that the point of a needle can enter.
or if he has a small opening, defuse it so that the point of a needle can enter. and place over it some well-beaten lead or other, and lay chalk and alum gently on top, as much as there are two layers of powder when you hold it in your hand.
and leave it thus until all the water and mud have dried, then take all that water and pour it on chalk and alum as before.
And thus, it will be most effective and beneficial in many cases of medical emergencies and other cauterization of other limbs.
For it performs the same action as fire, and if used with other medicines to cauterize the pain such as fennel, anise, and calamus mixed with soap, all these things combined.
And Galen tells us of a treatment by which one noble was cured of the pain in his back and sciatic nerve, and he recovered completely, and they did not use any other treatment, and he remained well once this cure was performed, and he bathed as he teaches below.
And prepare it in this manner: you press the fresh and dry verdigris and grind it finely with a little fat, then apply it to the pain, on the hip and thigh and leg, and bind it.
and leave it for three hours, or until the patient no longer feels the burn.
And then make him enter a bath or water as long as the body is slightly warmed, and make him lie down, and the pain will disappear completely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it provides great relief.
and the cautery should be performed in this manner. Take lint and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the groove that is between the big toe and the one called the 'fossa'.
After taking dried goat's dung, ignite it with fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the cloth, leaving it until it is stained.
and repeat this process, ceasing only when you believe through sense that the pain has ceased, reaching up to the waist.
and these kinds of cautery are called "fire cautery".
of the painful back
When pain arises in the back, whether from pulling or compression or excessive blood evacuation or some similar matter that appears expanded and cold, none of these appearances warrant cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
It is necessary after the patient is freed of foul pills or other similar substances, that one makes three incisions on the back, where the pain resides, with each line marked with a sign, and in each line performs five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
and these cauterizations are performed according to the cautery called "point".
and if you see, make three or four cauterizations at the "key hole" according to this form:
This disease often afflicts young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight and painful throat when they swallow, and they feel weak. and you will feel in the last, most severe pain in the back and, appearing differently, it comes upon the other pains.
When you see this, and you observe its cure, cauterize it with fire according to this form. So that the cauterization may heal each part of the wound equally.
And if you see that the cauterization around the wound pierces with the cautery two or three lines, and the points are close to each other.
After the cure, hold the limb until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery to any numb areas that are affected by nerve damage.
of the pain of joints
When the pain in the joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each limb of the body, and when a sharp pain occurs, they call it "podagra" properly; and when it is due to a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicine, it is treated with cautery in this way:
Make the mouth of cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary to pin the sole of the foot, make a cautery in the shape of a "dot". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, then make cautery on each knee with three or four cauterizations from each part, keeping the entire cautery olive-shaped.
And if you need to do more, then do so, but don't hold your hand too tightly until the thickness of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and to the back, he should apply the cautery as we have said in his chapter.
And if the pains are intense, make points around the wound with two lines.
and if there is no pain remaining, make points on each joint and on the skin of the hand.
and if the pains come up to the neck or shoulders, cauterize each part and apply a good compress to the patient and take medications.
For if you govern it well and drain the moisture, it will be healed by God's help.
When the wound becomes infected, and the boils descend to the joints, which is new, it is necessary that when you see him being cured, he does not move too much on that day. and that he uses things which leave the stomach, so that the intestines descend from his stomach.
after making him lie on his back between your hands, and commanding him to keep his breath until the boils are healed, arrange them in order at your will, and sign with your finger from inside the fracture on the arm bone, and make a mark that resembles half a circle above the body.
then heat the cautery instrument with this form:
as long as it is white and it sheds scales. Then reset the bones to their place; and the healer places his hand upon it, so that they do not return backwards;
and open well the thighs of the patient, and place beneath him cushions and supports on the thighs, and others on the pelvis that hold his hands;
then place the cautery instrument upon the sign with your entire hand, and hold it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, repeat it again until you do, reaching as close to the bone as possible. and guard carefully so that the boil does not burst when you perform the cauterization. so that you do not burn it; and so that the patient does not die or suffer other evils.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is useless.
And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their size, and also for adults, as great according to their size.
after three days, treat the wound with butter until the burn is healed.
After treating other wounds as long as they are healthy, and the patient lies on their back for forty days until the wound is well healed.
and it is necessary that these movements be held for a long time, so that the boils do not appear when he moves to his room.
And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, a well-made bandage is applied to him and left for another forty days.
and have good rest, that he works little and guards himself from too much drinking and eating, and from excessive noise.
and when he gives this instruction, he heals them completely.
And I will now describe the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
When ruptures occur in other organs and are known not to heal, you will see that they do not grow back. Therefore, apply fire cautery according to its quantity, burning the third part of the wound. after the treatment according to what we have said;
and no of the ancients said that it must be cauterized with fire at three angles according to this form:
but first sign the skin with a sharp instrument and make a line across the width above the dislocation, and another one further away, and hold your hand firmly over the entire cautery.
But the initial cauterization is lighter and more gentle.
of ancient pain in any member When pain arises in any member, either from weakness or an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medicine provides no relief, then it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with a instrument called "poins," and the cauterization should be done according to the length of the member, its smallness or largeness, its strength or weakness, its position, and the nature of the pain.
If he is sane after the first cautery, that's good.
If this does not help, begin another cautery on that part, as it is customary for the limb to move on its own; therefore, you should perform cauteries until the patient is sane.
These diseases are never helped by a single cautery, especially the illness that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
As you cauterize, be mindful if the disease is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the previous section, without delay or movement, but if you doubt that the corruption might spread throughout the patient, then perform cautery on the head. I cut off the new hair at the root, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the beard. and then on both horns, and behind on the scalp.
and I hold the patient's hand so that the fire cautery comes close to the bone, and until the skin is broken out so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out.
and cauterize the mouse according to what it needs.
And if the disorder is scattered everywhere; and it is evident that you need to apply these cauterizations that we have mentioned above: first, cauterize the new growths, second, cauterize on the spine of the nape, third, cauterize on the spine of the back, fourth, strongly on the hip joint and another delicate one, fifth, on both shoulders. and second, on the sides, and second, on the tendons of the foot, and first, on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the palm pits.
and guard the nerves that are above the deepest pressure, so as not to burn them.
and never perform cautery on the bones of the fingers or other bones, such as those of the stomach or liver.
And know that the more cautery is done, the greater the benefit it brings, and the more it helps.
and know that the patient feels no pain from cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cautery be great or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the manner of iron.
After treatment, apply a poultice of meal with honey and other remedies until it is cleansed.
When swelling appears in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but it does not heal, then one should perform cautery on the member according to its size and smallness.
and the cautery should be slightly inserted into the heart's space. then cure the wounds as long as they are healthy.
And never should cautery be performed on the hand, foot, or back, at the end of the nerve that numbs the member, and thus is removed the swelling.
and nevertheless, no one should intervene unless they know the parts and the passages of the moving nerves in the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is raging, and the medical art avails nothing, then cauterize with a hot iron a little bit, according to the extent of the pain, until the white (flesh) is removed, and it changes color.
then apply a remedy of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and collicul (a type of herb) and alder bark, each in its own portion. and it should be mixed with all together, tied with a cloth, and moved towards the light as long as it is healed.
The treatment of the ulcer (chancre) by cauterization.
When a ulcer (chancre) appears in its initial stages, and you wish to stop its progression, cauterize it with an iron that forms a circle around the entire ulcer.
Nevertheless, the wise say that one should also perform cautery in the middle of a ulcer;
and yet, this does not seem good to me, as I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it succeed before.
and there is a more correct practice that it should be cauterized around, in the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauterization methods.
When anyone has a disease called "adubelati," and it takes time to die, either because of the excess it produces or due to the great pain of the illness when the patient is old (that is, too much), and there is little blood, or because of the time; and you see it hasten to die: then cauterize around with small cauteries by pricking; afterward leave it thus. For she will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierce through entirely with the cautery, the heat of which is as follows:
And place your hand in the midst of this ill-named 'adubelati' (disease) while the cautery has pierced through, making it like the cautery so that the patient feels no further pain in such a way that the course of the rotting is halted.
After the cure, until it is perfectly healed.
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens," which is nothing other than a weakening of the limbs, as it affects the members just as fire does dry wood.
If you see this illness in the body that can be treated with fire cautery, then heat the cautery tools slightly and thoroughly, according to what is suitable for the part or the illness.
After cauterizing all parts as long as you can see all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, ensure that everything that is corrupted is removed.
And then leave it for three days, and place on the joints cauterized, suffering from burning with oil until all the scorches from the fire are healed, and all the corruption.
After the treatment of wounds that cause pain.
And if you see after three days that healthy hair does not grow, it is good.
and if this is not the case, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted part.
And this treatment is sometimes cured with a hot medicinal drink instead of fire cautery.
but fire cautery is still of greater help, and I have already described the treatment with hot medicinal drinks in detail. take as much as you need.
from the pieces which come as fragments Many times it happens that pieces due to deficiencies arise a disease called "close" according to our intention, and it is a great wrong that hurts the foot.
And the cautery for this disease is according to two manners. That is to say, cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
For fire cautery, you should be well-heated, just as if you were to sear with a brand, or a quill of hot iron, made to the appropriate size that it can pierce from all sides, and have sharp edges.
After heating everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail entirely until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to fester; then make a poultice of sage leaves ground with silk, and leave the poultice on all night; then the nail will break off and be pulled out from its roots.
Then cure the wound with fresh, clean bandages until it is healed.
And if they are affected by fever and many times it occurs in hands and feet, then you should apply a hot water cautery; and it is in this way: take a cane of iron or wood, or a feather from a dove, and place the nail and the glue, that is to say, the wart remover. and place the cane around it so that it embraces everything, then add a little hot oil, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while rotating so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and be able to find the hot water channel all the way to the root.
and the patient endures a little the biting of hot water for an hour; then leave it alone, and it will pull out at the root entirely.
First, make one after another, as you stretch all those that are in the body, then cure the wounds that cause pain.
When anyone shivers from cold or trembles with quartan fever or another illness, it is necessary to make four cauterizations on the spine down the back, one cauterization between each spine. and make one cauterization on the foot, and another cauterization on the stomach with an olive cautery;
if he lets it tremble, and hastens the health of the cold disease.
Never is it apparent through external defects or pus-filled blisters that come from deeply corrupted, putrid matter.
it is necessary at first, when they appear, to make cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery with fir wood, by which the point is seized in the fire, or with long roots of aristologe, or with a lenticular cautery.
And under no circumstances should cautery be performed at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse in advance, but the excesses from which they come are broken, and they are healed.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times, serious complications arise from the blood of an artery that is cut during treatment, whether it be when opening a vein, incising an abscess, cauterizing a member, or similar procedures. and it is a great problem if it stinks.
However, if this happens to anyone, you should hurry to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the pain is completely relieved from beneath your finger, and no more blood flows.
then place over the fire various small and large olive oil cauterizes until they are all red.
then take, according to the size of the wound and the location of the artery, a large or small amount of salt, and place it with the cauterize on the vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterize until the blood stops flowing.
And if a sudden spark flies when you cut your vein, and the cautery is extinguished, quickly take another from the fire.
and do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood stops flowing;
and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and ensure no other harm comes to the patient;
and know that when there is no bleeding from the artery, it cannot be properly examined, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the three methods we have mentioned. or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by tightly binding threads, or by medications applied that have the power to stop blood. and it becomes tightly bound and stretched.
Whoever administers relief from a tight ligature by placing rags or burning items on it, or similar things, will not benefit unless he does so carefully.
And if this happens to no one and they have no medication at hand, they should place their two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, tightly pressing until blood stops flowing from the wound and from the vein. and do not move it, but apply cold moisture often as long as it is very cold until the flesh is frozen and swollen and numb.
and prepare, in advance, what is needed for cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter all about the diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and we have explained their causes, tools, and forms of cauterization.
and I have placed this chapter on the most common ailments first, and I will follow the same path in subsequent chapters for those who want to find easier remedies.
And so, before we begin, it is necessary for you to know that this chapter involves greater risk and fear than the first one on cauterization; therefore, more caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things. where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to attempt folly. Because many ways of people come to healing. if they come from such who were so weakened by their illness that they died shortly due to the severity of the treatment they received for their illness and the magnitude of their suffering. And of these, one must fear.
And of these, there are some who understand and say: Wait, I am confused. and the disease is spiteful.
You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great care in your honor than in your profit, and act prudently, not fiercely, regarding what is certain to you and what you can safely acquire and lose.
and use divination and indication in curing your patients so health may be restored.
and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and long-lasting fame.
Most noble son, our lords grant you good understanding and rectitude, and if you desire the holy inspiration from his hand, amen.
I have ordered this chapter for you, in considering by chapters, according to what is before or in the chapter of cautery, which I have devised from the head down to the feet, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the head is squeezed too tightly during delivery.
and never comes from a known cause that we cannot explain.
And I have never seen this illness except in children, and to all those that I have seen, death comes quickly. and for this, I seem to think that it is better for me to abandon the work in part for some treatments.
And I saw children whose joints were filled with water, and the head grew larger each day that it could not hold itself up.
and the moisture was so severe that it became gangrene, and this moisture is gathered below the bone onto the syphac, between the heart and the bone.
and if the dislocation is such that moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you must make a deep cut across the top with your knife.
and it should be as long as the moisture flows.
and here is the form of the dislocation:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the openings of the joints in each part widely open, and there is a sharp pain when you press it with your hand from inside, and it does not return to its place, If it is necessary for you to cut into the head, make three cuts according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture completely. After making the cuts, close them with patches and powders, and then apply wine and oil, leaving it thus for up to five days.
then unbind it, and dress the wound with bandages and poultices, leaving the head equally restrained, and give the patient dry meat from a bag of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another method of incision is to observe the size of the abscess and the gathering of pus.
because never is it before; not at any time behind never on the right side and never on the left side.
Then open the abscess wide and drain the pus, and cut the hole according to your ability.
and beware that you do not cover the artery; and let the blood flow freely from the wound, so that the patients do not die from the slow decomposition of the wound and the evacuation of moisture.
When someone suffers from a disease called "cataract" in one or both eyes, and the illness is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is the cautery with which they will cut the two arteries.
So it is necessary, when you see them cover their eyes, that the patient turns his head back. after rubbing the limb with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then carefully extract the patient's collar with all the cloth. then look at where the vein is located, and the joints on both sides are behind the ears, and they are properly repositioned.
then mark the joints with a signet ring, then cut one and both with a sharp instrument from the second part of the vein, down to the bone, and this should be done across the wider portion.
And if you see, turn the spatula beneath the artery and cut through the tissue above, cutting just as it should go through.
And when the vein is cut, it bleeds continuously unless held above.
and if the artery does not open when pressed, you should measure the quantity of space of three fingers' breadth, then mark it with a signet ring and cut through to the bone.
and that one must apply heat to the wound if it is a sixth part deep, or possibly a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the flow of the artery.
then examine the wound: if it remains on the bony point with a sharp edge, and no abscess forms, then strain the wound and bind it, and apply treatment for healing as long as it is clean.
from migraine pain When old migraine pain occurs, accompanied by catarrh due to moisture in the eyes and cheeks, and the persistent and similar symptoms of old age, it is treated with various medical cures, but often none of them help; then we must drain the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient pulls back the hairs from his temples, and finds the artery which opens in the temple, as it opens well with its pulse, and is little withdrawn outside, so that no one who is too quick can catch it.
and if it is reduced, pull the limb away from the patient with some cloth, then rub the joint with a rough cloth and immerse it in hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. then take the spatula with its curved shape: then gently scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then pinch it high up and pull out the threads that are attached to each part.
and if the artery is thin, return it to the point of the hook and cut off that part according to the quantity of the two joints. For if it is not cut, it will never stop causing pain entirely.
And draw out the blood from the veins, up to six times, just until the third.
and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two strands of strong silk thread, to prevent any bleeding beforehand and to avoid complications from the wound.
then cut off the excess between the two threads at that very moment, and then, if you see fit, use a surgical knife to cauterize just below the bone until the fragments are cut through.
and this is the mother work, if the patient has fever and is of hot complexion. Because cautery is help for ending moisture: for this is of greater help against moisture.
Or, for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the wound with wool and apply well-made bandages.
and when they are loosened, take care with dry medicines that cause heat and bandages, until it is healed.
and without any delay of the artery as you do it, if you quickly cover with cautery, or use the juice of vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the wound is cleansed. and if you do not have this present, place ice on the wound until it is frozen, and raise the cold water as long as the wound continues, and strain it as appropriate.
And it should have between the two knives a space of sufficient width, and then when you have marked with the knife both sides, and place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, cut the vein in two sides. and be separated between the two sides, for this cautery is not firmly attached to either side at all.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
and what is more mobile and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery cutting from both sides, but the cuts should be well spaced to preserve their heat for longer. Because when the instruments are too tight, they hold the heat less.
tears When the tears of the eyes flow into the veins that are on the test of the head, and no remedy helps, you will see the face of the patient becoming pale, and feel a throbbing on their forehead as if from cold. and its oil is warm and moist so that the hairs of the skin fall out, and the skin becomes shriveled and scorched from the heat of tears, then this remedy is necessary. And they called it the "contused cure", and this is what you do for the patient who has this disease: he lets his hairs grow on his forehead, then you make three incisions on his forehead evenly according to its length.
And they called it the "contused cure", and this is what you do for the patient who has this disease: he lets his hairs grow on his forehead, then you make three incisions on his forehead evenly according to its length. and one of the incisions is also as deep as two others across the entire forehead, extending down to the nose, and the other two are made along the sides above the skin, but be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on the sides above the skin.
and move your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and each wound should have a quantity of three fingers' width across.
and take a piece of sponge and cloth to wipe the blood, then take the spatula sharp from both parts, which has this form:
from the incision that is made on the temple, up to the second incision; and scrape all the flesh that is between the two cuts to the entire satisfaction that is on the bone, then make another cut from this one until the other second, and then extract this spatula. if you insert the instrument called "cultele" into the first fissure, and it is very sharp on one side and soft on the other, this is its shape:
and place the cutting side towards the opposite edge at the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle fissure.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the top to the bottom until the incision is continuous up to where it opens towards the heart, and then make another slit in the middle until it reaches the other side.
and then extract the blood equally, and press the region for the blood taken;
then place a thin layer of old cotton in each slit, and cover with moistened linen cloths in wine and oil and wool, and ensure that no abscesses form.
and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a strong compression of cold water, then the basic treatment with rose oil and other remedies to heal wounds, as long as he is healed.
When there is a sudden severe catarrh, and you see the eyes become cloudy and small, weakening vision, and the pupils burned. and the hair becomes matted, and the head feels intensely painful, and the patient sneezes. Then you will know from these accidents that these matters and this purification come only from many veins, and the moving cure that is, it is this one.
And instruct the patient to bend their forehead backward, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another one quite wide. And begin from the split in the left temple to the right temple, and make the cut up to the bone; and move your hand away from the muscles of the temple that move with contraction;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood out with a sponge, and then separate the two edges of the split and insert old cotton and linen. then place him on a moistened sheet with wine and oil, and keep him from getting an infection;
when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until it begins to heal, then apply things that dry out, which help healing.
In the same manner: take two parts of flour of wheat, and three parts of cologne, and make a paste. and administer to these wounds to heal them completely.
ear inflammation
Everyone who hears these words is one of the three things: or seeds, or animals, or stones from my mine or similar things as if to do: or seeds, as in beans, peas, or other similar seeds: or things that flow away like water, smooth and clear, and similar objects.
When anything, whether it's a stone or another object that does not fit properly in the ear, causes pain or does not grow inside the ear, place the affected ear in the sun.
If you see a stone, and it exudes any little drop of purple oil or sesame oil, then proceed with its removal. and it causes sneezing due to condition, and it stops the nostrils when sneezing comes, and places around the ear pieces of cloth or wool. and stretches the ear upwards.
Many times this treatment brings fever.
and if it does not come out, apply an extraction with subtle pincers, from which comes this form:
if it jumps out into the pincers, that is good;
if it does not, apply an extraction with a subtle, small-toothed forceps;
and if it still does not come out, make a thread and twist the head of the thread or punch a hole in the ear with great force, and plug up what is around the thread with soft wax so that the air cannot enter with the thread. then take it off again as it was before, for many times it comes back just as we have said;
and if it does not come back in this way, take plenty of care to prepare the instrument sharply for this purpose, and place a little cotton around it. then press the pressure against the stone or anything else, and take it off again.
and if none of these things that we have said work, then quickly split the ear so that the abscess hardens and stops moving.
and the method of the incision is such that you first make the patient from the cephalica whole and extract the blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and bring the ear back upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear where the fat or tissue is attached; and make the incision as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it gently with your mouth.
and treat it until it is healed.
And if there are grains present and they swell, then administer an extraction.
and if it cannot be extracted, then administer the mildest spatula according to this form: and make sure to perform a careful incision of that grain.
But do not attempt this if you believe the grains are moistened by earwax, as long as you have made many attempts.
then extract it gently with pincers and suck, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
In the case where you extract something from the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use a strong sneeze immediately afterward and open the ear with cotton wool. And lay something on that same ear, whether there is moisture or not. If she jumps through fire, it is good.
if this does not help, take many needles according to the length of your finger, and heat them slightly over fire. and then place the patient in a position where one of their feet is raised, and try to open the ear by inserting another needle from the other side, and use a third needle to press against the one inside the ear. and continue this process of needle against needle until the pain disappears completely, and thus it will disappear entirely.
and if you see, take a thin wire, and insert one end into the ear, and twist the other end gently over fire until the thinner wire is burned.
then make other adjustments of other joints until the pain completely disappears, as we said previously.
When extracting a small creature, such as a bug or similar small object, treat it as we described in the previous section.
but if it is large and one can feel it, use pincers for its extraction. and it is the easiest thing to remove, which is in the ear.
During the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section and how to deal with discharge, the treatment is not effective, so you must examine the ear in sunlight. If no worm opens, if you treat them with fine tweezers, and they do not open, take the cane from which this form is,
And it should be tight from below and wide from above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suck on the cane until it forms a complete seal. Make sure often until all the veins are open.
And if they do not obey to come out, then pinch the cotton around the vein as I have said before.
and if they do not protrude as we have said, then administer distills that the ancients have tested in the extraction of worms, and you will find them discussed in the treatment of distills.
and distill your oils and medications into the ear with all these instruments, in this way as you see: And whether it is of silver or gold, make thin plates from small openings to distill.
and to press for distillation using a well-made silver instrument, and if you see, take a razor and wrap it around the tip with cotton. then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the pan, and the fire should be in the ear.
then put the razor into the cotton and press with your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear. and it makes the patient feel deep pain, and so the distilings appear as if they are burning in the fire, just as they distill into the ear. and ensure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
ear inflammation
No child is born with any perforation in their ears.
and the same thing happens to adults due to a sudden wound or a foreign object in the ear, and this obstruction never completely blocks the ear if it cannot be seen.
and never let the wound become infected, and see that it heals well.
When it happens that the wound does not heal properly, if one cannot see it, it requires different treatments, and in this case, where one can see, it is necessary to place the patient's ear towards the sun. and look inside: if you see the inflammation clearly, and the work has all these symptoms, then this is how it looks:
And make incisions and cuts all around and behind, so that the ear is not damaged.
if the operation is on the cartilage or edge of the ear, use fine tweezers and gently pull, while ensuring that all the cartilage is completely cut through.
And if the inflammations are completely in the ear, take a fine, sharp razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then insert it into the ear canal.
If you sense that the patient experiences great pain during the operation, gently perforate and be careful not to damage the edges of the ear.
then place a plug according to the width of the perforation and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Make no movement as long as the wound is fresh, or take a cloth and dampen it in rosewater, and sprinkle vitriol powder on it.
and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you take the cloth and use another moistened cloth in cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone. then treat it as long as it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other remedies to remove the bleeding which are treated through distillation.
Consider that when hairs come out in papers from the skin when moist and then dry, it is necessary that you extend them with tweezers and pliers, and cut off the tip with a spatula from its roots. then place the cold glass on the inflamed joint.
And if, after removing the skin, you cauterize with a delicate lenticular cautery, and the healer after incision moves it;
and often they heal, but nothing stays in its place; and when they are cauterized with fire, their roots are burned and do not grow back.
of frost Many times come to paper one thing that seems twisted in its form and hardness, and for this reason, this disease is called "frost," and it is a gathering of great moisture on the paper from above and below. The work is as follows:
The work is as follows: take care that the frost is silent on both sides, and this is a slight thing to know;
make the cut deep, then scrape gently from each part, then take it with pincers and cut.
if you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, it will not harm the patient.
and if the fracture is large, with an open wound, treat it until it heals.
and if it is small, make no great effort, for the inflammations will soon restore it and cause harm.
And if the pain descends into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper against it, and use tweezers to pull out the pain, cutting and pressing from both sides.
and if the paper is removed by incision, it causes no harm.
and when the frost is broken, leave the oil of salt water, and heal the wound of those who have been afflicted until they are well.
from the fat of the eyes Gripes are a fat that is caused by threads on paper above it, and this happens more often in children than adults, causing them great pain, and they experience catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear the light of the sun because tears flow to their eyes.
and for this reason, they lie on their faces again, and sleep with their eyes closed, and their eyelids are moist from the tears that fill them up, which change their appearance due to the pain that opens in the eye. And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the pain between them.
And the method of the operation is that the patient places their head on the healthy side.
and then take the linen cloth, and prepare a tent in a circular manner according to the amount of discharge from each part, and place it over them. and press your hands on both sides so that the bones come together in line with the circle.
then making a groove in the middle of the moisture with a sharp knife, not wider than the wound made in a vein.
and stitching the skin perfectly until you reach the bones; and from the groove, pulling with various arrangements, according to the shape of a white fat piece.
Take then from this a whole piece of cloth, dipped in fire, between your fingers and move your hand to the right and to the left until it is dispersed.
and ensure that you do not plug the gap, that you reach all of the grime up to the oil, and do not blow on it.
And if the gap does not open at the beginning, gently widen the gap a little bit.
then remove it as we have said, then moisten cloth with oil and water, apply to the joint, and stretch in all directions.
And if there are such people who grind and apply something to corrupt the moisture that is lingering.
Then treat him as long as he is sane.
And if it comes to the hot abscess, treat it with external applications as long as he is sane.
hairs of paper When on paper grow hairs that are arranged differently from nature, they become inflamed, causing just as much harm as if they were stones, and bring about types of illnesses such as tears, softening of the papers, and albugine, as long as it is due to the destruction of the hairs.
and the treatment is according to four manners: or by cautery with fire, or by remedy according to what is present, or in the chapter of cautery; it is done either by incision and stitching, or by binding, according as I shall say.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your healthy hand, then turn the paper from the oil to your left hand.
if it turns out, that is good. if it does not turn out, then if he pushes an needle through all the threads above. and be sure to cut the edge of the paper where the hairs grow, and pull the thread from above all the way through the paper, and turn it towards the razor.
then making a cut in the skin, adjusting the hairs, smoothing them out completely, from the large tear to the small one.
then pull out the thread and place under the paper a small piece of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of a cross, like the shape of a yew branch, and nonetheless it is important that the figure be according to the quantity that you see the paper rise, which is measured in all.
And if at this part, one skilled in the craft uses a great quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is.
then make incisions throughout all the spatium on both lines that you have marked, starting with a large tear down to a small one. and it should have one of the splits near the natural hairs thick as a root, then bend the knife in one of the two angles towards the heart, and then peel it completely.
then join the two lips with a stitch using a fine needle and thread, wipe away the blood, and allow the excess tissue to drain from the two edges, without any sticky substances, if you are able to do this.
and if this does not help, then leave the stitch and threads for three or four days.
then treat the wound without stitches using dry and constricting things, because the paper will be relieved at the healing of the wound and the gathering of it, but the stitch is moved (as the ancients said), and these are painful tasks. and if in another way:
and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the seal of myrrh, as we have said, at three points, according to the shape that is here:
Then take hold of what overcomes the small forces equally according to the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the pincers, and the task is not even, take a needle where there is thread, and tie it around the shape. and tie the other thread through the larger tear, and the second thread through the smaller one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers.
then gently apply equal pressure with your hand, to the entire skin where you have marked it, as we have said, then gather the two edges of the wound together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
and if an abscess forms at your incision, it can be soothed with wax and similar remedies.
and no time passes when the paper fibers are changed.
it is necessary that you use what we have said about incisions;
but sewing in one direction and another is more artificial.
The treatment of fractures is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and make it inside according to what I said, and then make two strings by art, and also fine liens as long as the paper and as wide as the spatula. and cut as much as the parts where you hold the strings;
then carefully join both together above what is over the paper of oil, and pull the two strings from the two parts formed. and leave it thus for no days, and the skin that is pulled will die and wither and fall off as long as it adheres to him.
If it is delayed, if the wound reaches a certain force, then treat it as long as it is healthy.
and if the wound is infected and pus forms, and when it becomes raised and the paper-like skin does not allow the hair to grow.
and this is the shape of the two lines you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
the work involves piercing with a fine needle, and threading soft and delicate silk thread. then join the pieces together gently, one to the other, so that the length of the bones is a palm's length.
then order in the wound another thin thread of silk briefly, and tie the ends securely with the thread.
then place the patient's head in a healthy position.
and make sure the wound is free from dirt so that the work can be revealed, for it is a delicate and small task, then insert the needle into the entire wound at its root where the hair is attached, and slowly pierce the paper-thin skin until you reach the natural hair beneath.
then extract the hair all the way up to the root, and push the hair back into the root if there are one or two or three or more of them.
then extend your hand until the hairs come out completely from the root in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the root is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the root completely from the inside along the line that you have ordered, until the root comes out fully and you see it through your eye's vision.
So then, if you remove the wound and the thread, and close it with oil and leave it for two or three days, until the hair returns to its place and the scar heals.
and if the hairs are small, then accompany them with long natural hair, and either raise it with the one you leave, as long as it is elongated, and then gently lift it.
Of the putrefaction of the wound When this illness called "aleacrati" or putrefaction occurs in the oil, it has two manners:
One is natural, and the other is unnatural.
And it occurs suddenly from wounds, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
And the method of performing this in the case that you split open the wound, separate the lips of it, and place linen inside, binding it as long as it remains healthy;
and it is not advisable that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than before;
but I work with softening substances, such as fenum (fenugreek). and the rosewater of water or flaxseed is cooked, and the diaquiled onions melted in any of the oils, it envelops a bandage, and applies it to this.
And the true treasure of your cure is that you must be careful, so that it does not harden according to its former shape.
and these works that we have spoken are not only remedies for this illness, but to prevent it from returning according to its former form.
This illness which is dislocation, truly called "fracture," is both natural and accidental.
The accident arises from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things;
and the path of the procedure is such that if you press an needle, it has a double thread, and thread it into the wound, and pierce from the left tear (eye) towards the right, so that the thread comes out in two parts of the wound.
then the wound is covered with everything, with the needle above, and the pad has a wide spatula. and if the shape of the paper returns according to what is necessary, it is good;
If this is not done, take a razor and place it in the crevice, turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side within the paper.
and let the cuts of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make them at an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter 'G'.
then remove the one that is according to the thickness of its sides from the paper, then adjust the two parts carefully and sew them with a thread of flax.
then apply the treatment for what we have mentioned about softening and warming medicines, as long as he is healed.
And if the illness comes from a wound or stitching or cauterization, then you must make a clean slit beneath the skin and paper-like hairs, according to what is mentioned before. then separate between the two parts of a tent, as I have said before;
then separate between the two parts of a tent, as I have said before; and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is much diverse in form, and skilled masters have devised all sorts of devices to bring back the appearance to its natural state;
and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the work and the use of various instruments in many arrangements.
When this suture is performed by unskilled hands in such a way that the paper (bandage) on top is smooth with oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, it is then necessary for you to insert the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it slightly from above.
and stretch it with pincers, as you remove what is hard in the delicate spatula, neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp and cutting through the oil.
and so your incision, from which you have peeled away the assembled part, should be gentle, so that the skin returns to its natural form.
and it heals completely, without ever mixing with foul oil, but rather with clear water and collars.
then place between the skin and oil a thin cloth of linen, and above the oil lay a moistened wool in abundance. and after the third day, use warm collars and suds until it is healed.
You know that the nail is according to two manners: it is nervous and seems hard and dry, and another that is not nervous at all, but seems like white, frozen moisture, which, when touched with iron and treated with pincers, cannot be done by anyone.
and both of them begin to extend towards the great tear duct, growing smaller and smaller until they cover the entire vision and all the light and motion of the eye.
And the method of incision is that the patient places his head on a healthy side, then opens his eyes. and take the paper in your hand, then curl the finger like small pliers, and stretch it above. then take a needle, and put a horse's, or deer's, or cow's hair in it, and tie a strong thread. and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the finger, and pierce through the entire length of the needle, and tie the finger with thread, extending it above, and scrape all the hair around the side of the nail, immediately after pruning the cuticle and the silk of the hair up to the head, then carefully cut off the remainder at the root with a delicate scalpel or small forceps, leaving the natural shape of the nail intact, so that through the incision no tears come to the habitually sensitive skin.
and never stretch the fingers at the joint solely, and with thread, as we have said; then the skin is scraped off the entire soft part, which takes the shape of:
and be sure that the soft part does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the knife is not pierced.
and after the incision, pour a little bit of broth into the wound, and then apply a collar made of litargire (a type of metal) and leave it until the next day. then focus on the treatment of it until it is healed.
If the nail is not firmly attached and you cannot push the needle through, or the hooks cannot enter, this condition of the nail often requires treatment with various medications.
and they grow as I have described in the dissection, and if you see it covered, open gently for the sick person, and take a light spatula according to this form. And gently remove the nail from above, and if you see that it shrinks slightly and the pain intensifies, mix a drop of collar (an ancient term for a medicinal substance) made from lightning stone and red string, and apply the oil to the affected area until the next day.
If nothing in the oil contradicts you, such as a hot abscess, then apply it and treat the hot abscess first until it is healed, and then continue the work as before until it is completely cured.
then begin the other task according to this same work, as long as it is entirely healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh causes pain in the eye due to great damage, suspend it at the corner and cut off a part, not all of it, so that no more tears flow.
then distill into the eye a red collar made of litharge.
Some men's eyes never turn red, they cover the pupil and rest on papers, twisting them in the fire, and look like a ball of rosin.
and the work consists of the patient placing their head on a healthy surface, then opening them up, and applying all the appropriate hooks, and supporting it with strength.
then take the first hook, and go on applying them one by one until the end, taking care not to hurt yourself during the work.
and let the incision be smooth and delicate, as we have said in cutting a fingernail and with small movements, thus removing the nail as the shape demonstrates after this chapter.
and when the incision is completed and all the charcoal is removed, apply to it the oil of crushed silk or distil a red collar and similar corrosive medicines, and cover with hot cotton soaked in oil so that it is assuredly hot.
and if it does not improve and the pain intensifies, and you doubt that the abscess is hot, leave the oil and treat the abscess with calming remedies for a hot abscess.
then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make similar cuts adjusted in the oil by this appearance.
But nevertheless, it is necessary that you pay attention to each weak joint in the natural way; and of the unnatural way, in the work of doing;
and do not put your hand into any of these works as long as you see that this member is suffering from that work.
These are the red veins that are covered over the eye, they obscure the sight of their work and weaken the eye every day.
The first task is to look at which joint is affected, for it is severe and out of place, and there is no other disease outside of the joint. Then instruct him in this manner:
instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position, then suspend the veins at every point according to his wisdom, and let the veins be fine and double according to this form.
And there should be two incisions by degrees in the body according to this form:
then gently compress the veins, and drain the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins disappear from the skin.
and be careful not to puncture the skin with the forceps, and perform this task at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you only succeed in draining the veins.
and when you have done this, slowly drip the green and red collyrium into the oil to dissolve what is lingering in the wound.
If you cannot gather all of these at that hour, make a poultice over the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for no days until the pain is relieved and the inflammation of the hot eye is assured, then continue in this manner as before until it is healed.
and this is the form of strength:
They call these "arrested" fistules:
As you treat it by cautery and medicine for the burning pain as I have previously mentioned, if it does not heal, there is an infection in the abscess where he must die, and remove all moisture from it until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the instruments mentioned here and shape them accordingly.
and it is called the "sharp point", and it should be made of iron from the base to the tip, and pointed like a lime as it is in the current shape.
And place it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then twist it between your fingers, and press with your hand as much as you know that corruption is gone.
and do this again, then return to the use of drying medications.
if the joints are fused and it grows, and the bowels' wall is fused and remains that way for 40 days, and it does not renew or become abscessed, and no bad accidents come, know that it is healed.
If there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula back to the opening of the cold according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone a second time by iron or medicine, and when it is discovered, take the foresight according to this form, and let the instrument have three angles, and make the cut reach up to the top as you see here:
then place it on the delicate bone, remove your hand from the oil, and return to the entire instrument until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain because if he keeps his hand on his cold,
and then restore the joint with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the pain subsides and the joints harden, then consider the matter anew. if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
When the eyes are fully open and there is no disturbance or pain, it is necessary to keep the patient still.
then apply heat, then use suction cups or a hot compress without causing injury, then apply the oil made of mullein, aloe, incense, and dragon's blood, and then strain the oil, and wrap it with bands and cloth.
and the method of bands: if you bind bands soft enough, doubling them in three (or four), and then placing one over the other according to their respective needs;
then stretch from above with a firm band, and restart the poultices to suck without causing harm;
then remove the poultices and leave the compression for day and night, and if it becomes too tight, it is good to gently stretch it;
then remove the compression after day and night, and if you see the skin repairing itself, that is good;
if not; if the splint, bandages, and bindings, and the leeches are reapplied while he is healthy.
breakage of the woven fabric When disruptions occur in the wound covering, it opens up and fills with small pieces like grains of resin, and it is encouraging to see.
then if you see it covered, the work is such that you push a needle into the base of the lower part, then another needle where there is a double thread in the upper part. and pierce it, leaving the first needle according to the arrangement;
then cut the skin with a double-threaded needle and tie one part of the edge around it, tightening well, then extract the needle and apply the other moist lint in abundance.
and leave it until the thread disintegrates with the edge, then treat the wound with comforting things until it heals.
and never should the wound be restrained by any part of a circular bandage until it is healed.
And if the joint appears to be well-formed, pierce it with a delicate needle that comes from oil, draw out the white moisture and lower the joint, and it will enter again immediately.
then extract it as long as it is healthy.
This disease called "alcunnati" is only from moisture that is gathered in the oil, resembling clear water flowing down, but it is not clear water.
and the manner of the work is that you place the patient on a seat with their legs raised and straight, then take the head in both hands from two sides, and move it until you see the moisture rising towards your fingers. Then it is fixed, and the bandage does not descend or become loose, and the patient can see clearly as before.
and if it does not come loose, know that it is urgent, and if the bowel descends, it must be treated as we have said.
if you delay the patient in your hands, then take a fine spatula and make incisions on the corny tissue through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corny tissue and the cornea, while the bowel is still there.
and when it comes out, it should be distilled in hot honey or mixed with honey, or boiled water and honey, then treated with another remedy until it is clean.
The phrase "des aigues de loil" translates directly to "of the waters We have seen the signs of water in the division, and what is needed to pierce them. if it is opened according to health.
You should place the patient between your hands crossed, away from direct sunlight, and tie the healthy oil tightly to them.
then place the paper from oil in your left hand if the joints are on the left, or in your right hand if the joints are on the right.
then, in your right hand if the joints are on the left, take the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand if the joints are on the right.
then, with the tip of the instrument, cut through the crown carefully along the thinnest part near the meatus, then twist the instrument called "almagda" vigorously and move your hand as it pierces into the meatus, feeling that the "almagda" reaches the empty space.
and it is necessary that the length of the magical way be exactly the same as the measure of the space from the base to the end of the shadow. and this is the crown of the oil;
if you will see the bone on this paper for the clarity of the cornea, then place the instrument exactly there where the water is, and press it from one way to another.
If he lowers it now, he will see the patient before him and the instrument in his hand.
After resting, let the water take the second way, place force with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise, slowly extract the magical oil by turning your hand a little at a time.
and then put back in acute a little bit of silk string, and remove from these the oil inside. Then apply heat to the affected oil with hot wax or any other moist oily substance, and wrap it in clean oil.
We, and those of our time, place a hot poultice on it with plenty of fire.
And if the foreign body cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are some people whose eyelids are too tight, it is necessary that you press the instrument called 'alberit', which has this form:
And then pierce only the outer joint, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then apply almagda, as we have said.
and upon completion of the work, prepare for the patient a comfortable place to sleep, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
and be careful of all movements, and feed him with light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition for three days.
then dislocate it in the same dark place, test its sight, and make it see nothing, and then put a bandage on it for seven days.
and it is not appropriate that you do this during treatment or after incision now, but it is necessary to lighten it, because the acute pain has increased.
if an abscess forms after seven days, dislocate it on the seventh day and apply the remedies for a soothing abscess.
and when it is calmed, he should open his eyes and place a side on his face to cover the light, and be in that dark house again.
and then he leaves the house little by little and returns to his own affairs.
and he should know that no disciple should interfere in this case. And then came to us one from Iran who told us that in their peaceful lands they had a method of perceiving things unseen, from which they drew water, but I have never seen anyone like this in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients. and by chance, this is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the shapes of alchemy, so that those who do not know them will see them.
and let them be of pure gold: And the center of this same subtlety should be in the middle, and the three corners sharp.
No creature is born or grows with diverse joints, so that there is none that resembles a scorpion in its multitude of limbs.
and if it has such a creature, enriched with beautiful fur, and if its flesh is of a good color. In this case where the pain is severe and not chronic, it is necessary that you make the patient lie between your hands facing the sun.
In this case where the pain is severe and not chronic, it is necessary that you make the patient lie between your hands facing the sun. and open the patient's nostrils, and pour the liquid into those that are blocked, and treat them vigorously. then hold what you can support with the delicate spatula from one side, as long as you know that this blockage is completely opened.
And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open it with all the delicate and light instruments until nothing remains. and without letting your mind wander, if an abscess forms, cut it as necessary;
and if these are malignant abscesses, act quickly and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the debris is removed, then apply fresh, clean, and warm compresses or wine. If the abscess opens and moisture reaches the palate, knowing that it is healthy;
and if the moisture does not drain as necessary, knowing that there is debris in the bone above, preventing the instruments from cutting.
Then it is necessary that you insert a thread somewhat thick into it, and be careful with your hands, and leave between each a little space as needed. and place the patient's tooth with the thread in its socket as much as possible, and pull gently until it comes out through the gum.
and often children are taught this way, and it is a light task for him who wishes to do so.
then hold the head that comes through the gum in one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth in the other hand, and pull one after the other as we who are holding thread do.
Do as you know, that the new wound is corrupted, then treat the child, wipe off the blood, and moisten the wound with Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the body as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is remaining of the wound.
and then put a bandage on the wound for no more than days until it is healed, and if it needs further treatment with dry medications, then use them.
and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, from which they distill oils and medications:
and it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a candle, and lead it accordingly;
and if you make a closed candle, it becomes an instrument full of medications to purge the head;
and it should have many parts on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
Of the pain near the nose
Many times a sickness appears in the head near the eyes, called "tul" (or possibly "ulcer"), it grows and becomes great, as long as it is a visible thing to behold.
and for this reason, it is necessary that you catch it at the beginning, remove all the bone, and then apply fire or hot medicine to the joint.
and if it is delayed in being treated until it becomes great, be careful if it is hard, of pale color, and lacks sensation.
if he does not let the wound touch any iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when one treats it, great harm comes to the patient.
and if the abscess is of a soft consistency, not hard like an arrowhead, and you can easily open it, draining the patient without harm, then treat the wound with dry and cooling things to heal it.
Know that when the continuance of a bone breaks into one of these powerful cartilages, it profits little, for no man.
One should therefore watch that this does not happen to anyone, if you consider whether the wound is fresh and full of blood. and then adjust the two lips to one stitch, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the lips are dislocated on both sides, it is necessary to cauterize all parts of their healing place until they heal, then adjust the two lips to one stitch and tighten it, and apply powdered dragon's blood and incense dust. and place a piece of strong glue or other adhesive binding on the powders and leave it until it dries, then treat the wound with medicine until it is healed.
The method of stitching is such that you join the parts together: using needles, as we said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
abscesses of the lips
At home, there occurs within the lips an abscess hard as grains of corn, both smaller and larger.
then you must turn the lips and make an incision on each one, taking them with pincers and cutting into each part.
then use the lever after the incision of vitriole powder, until the wound is stained;
and then the lever from silk, and dry the wound with clean things until it is healed.
Many times it occurs on the gums, tightly stuck together, which the old call "albulus";
so it is necessary that you hold it with pliers and cut at its root, leaving the bow or the vein to flow.
then place a hot compress on the affected area, or other powders that restrain and desiccate;
and if the wound returns after incision, and this happens many times, if the cautery is performed a second time, if it does not return after the cautery;
Never should they be assembled at the base of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, or on the rough, unpleasant scales. and never are the teeth black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption comes to the gums, and they stink.
it is necessary that you hold the patient in your hands, and their teeth or gums be in your possession, and pull out any visible roots, as long as nothing remains. and do the same for black, green, yellow, and other hues, as long as they are infected.
and if that which is at the first reason is removed, it is good. If this does not work, start again from the second day and the third, as long as you have everything under control.
and know that teeth require various tools to extract, as the operation shows, because the pliers used to pull out teeth have different shapes from those used to space them. and these shapes and others should be with you, prepared.
When treating a tooth that is causing pain, take your time to gently extract it as much as you can, for no one should do otherwise. For it is a very powerful substance, so there is no excuse for cutting it off.
Then, when the patient is in great pain, it is important that you be certain about which tooth is painful. Many times the patient feels great pain, and thinks it is from a tooth infection, and extracts the painful tooth. But the pain does not leave them despite this, as long as the evil tooth is extracted, for we have seen this happen to these saints.
and when you are certain of the painful tooth, it is necessary that you cut around the tooth with a very sharp knife to protect the gums from all sides.
then move your fingers or use the fine tweezers on the first slight movement, as long as they are well dislocated, then firmly hold the tweezers. and place the patient's dislocated joint gently between your knees, holding it firmly so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it doesn't come out, take none of these instruments and push them gently from every side, and move it as you have done before.
And if the bone is broken and pierced, it is necessary to fill the space with cloth, either in the wound or the opening. and if it is squeezed gently with tweezers, so that it does not break when squeezed.
And one must speak very clearly around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Be very careful so as not to break it, and if a part breaks off, return the remaining piece to the patient, for due to the evil of the root, he will experience greater pain than before.
And be wary that you do not act like the ignorant healers who, in their haste and foolishness, break the treatment at every turn and do not follow what we have described.
but they bring about this great disease because of the roots that they do not address, or because of the treatment that they break, just as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is loose, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt.
and it causes bleeding, which often occurs, if one uses the place of vitriol ground;
and if this does not help, then cauterize.
The shapes of the instruments, with which one should first mute the teeth, should be long and blunt, not doubling when pulling the tooth.
and these are the shapes: And let the members be of good size so they do not bend when pulled, and well-forged of iron, and toothed for proper movement.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains stuck, it is necessary to place a moistened cotton ball with butter on it for one or two days, until the joint loosens, then use pliers called "algefri" to carefully extract it, making the patient feel relieved.
and they should also be made like a file, and this is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to emerge from these clutches, it is necessary that you uncover the skin all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", which is a pliers, in this way:
And it should be firm and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out on its own, that is good.
if no, even with all the tools, the shapes come as follows:
And if one uses this instrument with two prongs, the shape is as follows: and other tools that are used in the reason of teeth, and this instrument that seems like great pliers, whose shape is as follows:
And let this instrument be strong so it cannot break, and know that many instruments of iron are. and also other instruments, which are not mentioned.
and the most skilled surgeons create their own instruments, according to what their works and the illnesses they encounter demonstrate, for there are many diseases that the ancients did not teach about due to the diversity of symptoms; if one breaks a bone or another part, and it becomes stuck, or if it cannot be moved, then if he seeks the appropriate instruments I have mentioned, and uses gestures as an aid, this is how the process goes.
And they should be thick and well gripped to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can be held and removed.
and then return to the patient the appropriate medicine for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, small or large, use all these instruments.
When the tooth appears not according to the natural shape of the body, and its form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the original one, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be filed or smoothed.
then cut it; and if it is caught with a tooth, take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak, and let it be made of hard steel.
And the surgeon should hold the tooth firmly in his hands day after day for its hardness, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it from one side as the shape requires.
it is also like the lime from which they make needles;
and in the lime, press the tooth gently with your fingers, so that it does not move until it falls out on its own.
Then the surface at the end is entirely smooth, and if the cut is too deep it damages the tongue; therefore, it is necessary to file the sharpness until it is even so that it does not damage the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth are loose due to biting or pulling, and the patients cannot bite down on anything without pain, they take restrictive medications but that does not help.
if they need to restrict it with a golden thread, for the silver thread turns green and decays, but gold never changes.
and so the son's hair should neither be too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth.
and if you need to direct the teeth, take the thread and wrap it twice between the two healthy teeth, then place the fragments between the loose teeth, as many as there are, until you reach precisely the healthy tooth on the other side. then restart the covering up to the point where you tied it, and gently but firmly pull your hand, until it does not move.
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Then cut the pieces of thread with pliers, assemble them, and insert them between the healthy tooth and the one with the abscess, so as not to damage the tongue.
and then leave it so tight as it can stay, and if it loosens, the threads will pull out, if released from another thread.
if it stays tight for a long time, it will serve thus throughout all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two molars, as you see:
And when the tooth is dislocated, put it back into its place, freshening it as we have said.
and do not allow anyone who is not skilled and patient to intervene; and never should the shape of a tooth made from a bone of a deer be used, but rather place it in its missing position and hold it tight as we have said, and wait and serve thus for a long time.
Never should these ties that come from beneath the tongue or nature be considered, for thus we are born. because of an accidental deep wound;
and the work involves opening the mouth of the patient with pain, placing his head in your hands, and extracting his tongue.
then cut the thick nervous ligament, as much as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or resistance, and it suddenly opens a wound, then draw the hook and cut through that ligament.
and be careful that the cut does not go too deep, to avoid damaging the artery beneath.
and when you have done that, lift up the limb with hot water and oil, or cold water, then place a thin strip of linen under the tongue.
and each night, the patient suffers from a condition that prevents their limbs from healing.
And if the infection from blood comes, then put a hot compress on the limb made from crushed vitriol. and if the pain from the infection goes away, then cauterize it with a hot iron, which is good for healing. then treat with another remedy as long as he is healed,
and if you see it is of any red, black, or hard color, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
and if it turns to white and there is moisture, cut the tumor with a fine blade, and remove it from both sides. and if the wound does not heal under your care, grind vitriol until it is well soaked, then return to your task until you have treated everything thoroughly.
Then raise the limb from rest and from weight, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
from the abscesses of the throat No matter how often holes appear in the throat, which are called "godath", and we properly call them "two amandres", when you treat them, as we have said in the previous section, and they remain unsanitized, be careful.
if they are small abscesses with a hard, pale surface, do not try to pierce them with iron.
And if it is red with a thick root, do not pierce it with iron, also because of the discharge of pus. but let it grow as long as it is strong, and then you will remove it, or it would break by itself.
and if it is of a white color and the roots are subtle, then prepare the instrument to extract it, but first ensure that the abscess is calm and at rest.
Then make the patient face the sun, and ensure their bowels are in good health. Open the mouth and press the jaws between their hands, pressing the tongue down with the instrument to form this shape.
and it should be of silver or fine gold, just like our knives.
You cannot press the tongue against all these instruments and see the abscess, so take the needle and drive it into the sore, and pull it out from above as much as you can.
and do not pull anything from the wound with it, then cut with the instrument, which forms something that looks like strength. but nevertheless, the head is bent, one way or another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if you make it with pliers, like this: And make incisions on one side, and on the other leave them untouched;
and when you have treated one of the abscesses, treat the other in the same way, and afterwards gargle the patient with hot water and clean, cool water, and the discharge of pus will occur, if the patient is gargled with hot water, or with cooked pomegranate skins, or myrtle leaves, or similar things, until the pus is cleared. then cure it while it is still healthy;
And never does another abscess form in the throat other than the two glands, so bind them as tightly as the two glands.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was newly formed inside her throat, namely the small abscess.
and had tightly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could not eat or drink, and would have died if left thus for a day or two.
And the abscess was so swollen that it had forced two ribs through the two openings in the throat where it entered.
I hasten to do so, and insert one pin, then pull it forcibly, and take a large portion of the bowel.
then I repeat the process on the other side of the opening, and open the mouth and press the tongue.
after inserting the pin into these abscesses, and taking out a portion, I pull only a little bit of blood. and thus the throat of the woman is opened, and she begins to drink water and then wine, and does not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time.
and it (the abscess) repeatedly reopens, filling up again the space that I had emptied out, as long as it is very large.
then I secured it and cauterized (the wound) inside the throat. so it delays without growth.
and I separated these parts, and let God do His work after me.
of the eye
When the eye returns to its socket, and it is swollen and distant, it is called "perpendicular".
and if it is so large and round, then it is called a "eye".
When it is treated as we have described in the previous section, but the treatment does not help, and you notice that the abscess has subsided, and it appears subtle, then it is necessary to drain it.
and the one that is round and compact, not distant. and it is red or of a dark color, then it is necessary to carefully perform the incision on it. For there is great danger for the sick person.
It is necessary, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument we spoke of earlier. then insert the hook into the eye and pull it out, and cut it with one of the instruments I mentioned in incising the two mandrils.
And it is necessary that you do not cut off more than the excess beyond the natural limit.
for if you continue doing this, it will grieve your voice and words.
and after the incision, use what we have said about incising the two mandles, and heal it as long as it is clean.
And if the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you use an instrument for cauterizing the sensitive parts.
The method of cauterization is very acute. And it is that the patient places his head on a healthy surface, and then presses his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and immerses it in hot water, not too thick or too clear. and with the use of this instrument, which gives it the following shape:
And let the physician have a comb, as if it were a spoon's handle, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the wound.
and have the patient lying on their side, so that saliva and mucus from their mouth can drain the medicine without going down to the throat, and thus healing.
then take your hand and press the medicine onto the wound for about half an hour, until you see it cease to hurt and the pain from the medicine subsides.
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument all the way into the hole in the cotton, until the cotton is saturated with the liquid.
and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and remove after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the cauterization with the medicine, when repeating it, after cauterizing, wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and clean everything around the medicine.
and he should be raised with cold water, and he should be cured with gargles until he is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision, rather than cauterization.
if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take cayenne pepper and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and similar herbs, and combine all of them or any of them in a pot, and add water, and boil.
and the pot should be tightly sealed with strong clay, and on top of the pot, use a lid according to this method: And whether it is of silver or gold, and if one of the joints is closed in the mouth of the patient, so that the vapour rises to the eye through the chain, until the eye becomes numb.
after the recurrence often, while the eye dries and heals, be sure not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of the abscess, as many complications arise. and do not make any movements except during the decline of the hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not available, take a chain and put a piece of cloth in the mouth of the patient, so that it is not too hot. because the heat of fire does not allow moisture to accumulate in the mouth, and this is a good remedy for overall health.
often there is a burning sensation in the throat from bone or fish spine, or any such thing;
so it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the tool, so that you may observe the thing move.
and if it does not open and is swallowed into the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit so that the food may be cooked in the stomach. by chance if this thing turns around through vomiting;
or the patients swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of cucumber, or a lettuce root, or a dry crust of bread; and hold the sponge in its mouth and then swallow it; and when it arrives at the stomach, if it is hard, then pull it out forcefully;
and if it does not come from what we have said, take a plunger tool according to this form:
and let the instrument be curved towards the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and hold the head slightly raised. and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so that nothing comes out, and do not push the bone inside.
and it is important that the patient pushes the instrument, because if he does not move it, the object inside will be stuck. if the bottle sinks, pull it out with all the tools equally, until it is completely empty.
regarding the throat
No treatment should be administered without considering the symptoms, as I mentioned in the previous section, through the use of medicines. and if it does not help, then look into the throat of the patient with the sun, and press their tongue with the tool I told you.
And if you see the vein, draw it out with all its small pins, or subtle pliers that are fit for this.
And if this does not work, take a sheep's gut, insert it into the throat of the patient with the disease, then twist or lift the gut in hot water and do this often. And if the patient suffers from fever all day.
then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it into both cheeks, moving it with your hand frequently. and if at any time he feels pain, then it is certain.
And if it does not give way as we have said, then the patient should be treated with the instrument used in the fumigation of the eye with ash, to dislodge the foreign body.
do this many times, for it will come out without resistance.
The method of fumigation is as follows: you take a pot with a hole in the middle, lined with a perforated cover, and place the instrument to be fumigated inside.
then pour the smoke treatment, and have the patient put the tip of the cane in their mouth and close it tightly, so that no smoke escapes, but it comes up to the throat.
and the blood will now flow, and if it does not come out, repeat the smoke treatment many times.
and the patient suffers from thirst, and chews salty and sour things, but does not drink water.
and then it will be easier for her to speak without this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it can be seen, resembles twisted pliers designed to enter the throat. and it resembles the beak of a bird of prey, and has the roughness of limestone, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go.
Many appearances of abscesses are, according to the memory that comes to mind after reading this book, and they differ in penetration and size.
and this is through two manners, one being just like its own image, and of those that are held by moisture.
And the second method is for the joints where they are in the body.
For the abscess on the upper part of the body is different from that at its base, and the abscess of the fleshy parts of the limb is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if there is no need to pierce an abscess, as long as the bowel remains dead according to its completion;
and if they are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses which are in healthy joints.
For when abscesses come from damaged joints, and it is left until it becomes gangrenous around, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Or, the abscess is in the main member, and if you delay the piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member.
if he has a wound in the fundament, pierce it in such a way that it becomes dead.
and it is not advisable that you pierce an abscess without completing the healing process, otherwise, if he has a wound in the fundament, it will not heal completely and become fistulated. and it will not heal fully in the long term.
And it is important that you know the right time for piercing an abscess when it is dead, according to its completion, and this is when the pain is soothed, and the fever leaves, and the swelling diminishes in the affected area, and the abscess becomes smooth and well-shaped, and other signs appear.
and it is necessary that you make the piercing sit more dependent on the abscess, where it opens movement.
and the piercing should be as long as the body, and if the abscess is in the hand or foot, or in the joints and tendons and arteries, and everywhere it is even without any curvature. In these cases, according to that limb.
And when there are abscesses in the fatty parts of the body, it is better to leave the incision until the swelling has subsided after the digestive process, as we have said.
For if you pierce it in front of this one, the body's veins will be stretched from the pressure, and it will be filled with much filth. and by chance they harden the lips and deepen the wound within him.
And if at any abscess that is pierced according to the thickness of the body, as needed by the member.
and it is necessary that you heal small wounds, small openings; and in large wounds, large openings, and many cracks according to the size of the wound;
and if for such wounds it is necessary to pull the heart, and cover; when it becomes as dry as cloth and is numbed, then it must be treated as we do with blisters.
and if they are split in three angles, or such as we cut like the fur of myrtle, or abscesses from attacks;
and if it is such that we make a deep cut, and other sizes and similar cuts.
Those that have no head, like a soft, superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce them deeply.
and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has a strong bow, and you pierce it, if you cannot draw out all the bow in that moment, but only part of it. then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out something from it; do this many times with great effort, until the bow completely draws out;
most often the patients are of weak constitution, or pregnant women, or very young children, or old, frail people. For often the patient jumps with fear at the sound of the bow, which may cause the sick to die, and you will not be blamed.
Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if the wound is cleaned, and observe whether the wound of the abscess is small. and if it is a deep wound, then apply linen or fresh cotton. and if it is a large abscess with many openings, then you should insert a tent into each one so that they come together.
and if you have a portion of hard skin in the abscess and it is closed around it, then you should fill it with dry cotton or linen raspings without moisture and bind it for three days.
then the bone, and the treatment of the wound until it is healed.
And if blood flow occurs due to the operation, apply cold water and ice, and moisten the compress, and place it over the bleeding joint repeatedly.
And if the blood poisoning persists, with appropriate governance and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the eyes or the abscesses are very sensitive, then you must place these and cover them with moist cloths of wine and hot oil.
and if it is in summer and the eye is fleshy, then you must place moist cloths of water and oil, or wine and fresh oil, for three days, as we have said.
and then remove the abscess and clean it and treat it as appropriate while it is still fresh.
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or as told to you, how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, read this chapter now.
Or sometimes the chief sickness comes from small abscesses, and they are like threads, also like the sinew of a goose, and there are many similar ones.
There are some that are large and soft, as well as those with moisture also containing pulsations;
and if it is of such as are hard and resistant to cutting, and there is no doubt that the arteries do not act against it.
And the work of the trunk is such that you should try all instruments called "intrusive", from which the shape below comes, something it contains.
For if it contains moisture, they make a hole from above down long.
And when the moisture is evacuated, if scraping leaves no skin containing the moisture, for it repeatedly returns when nothing is left.
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, with water and string, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and they will correct what is delayed from moving.
And then begin the treatment again, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you are sure that it does not delay from moving.
then dress the wound with suitable medicine as long as it is healthy.
And if the abscess persists for a long time, following this form, then cut it deeply. and he should soak the wounds, scrape them from all sides, and use all your care to draw out the pus from the wound where it lies.
and if the arteries react against it, do as I have told you.
And also do the same for an abscess that is persistent and hard, cutting and treating it as I have told you.
And make an incision above the abscess and around it, if it is softer, because they contain little blood. And if none of these abscesses or joints have any moisture, and it is one of these deep abscesses that I incised on an old woman's shoulder;
and I found the abscess as hard as a sharp, white stone that cannot be broken. and if none of these helps, one would also make a wound as deep as a stone.
In other cases, when the pain comes in the upper parts, such as the top of the head and the roots of the ears, keep the opening closed for several days so that the bowels can move.
and treat it as appropriate.
Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and dissolves the adhesions, and attacks the angles, and never occurs elsewhere on the body, and it is painful, and twisted upon itself.
And each ulcer is properly inside its bone, just as the sore and abscess on the head, as we have said before. and the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. Some of them contain moisture, and there are others that are malicious and refuse to obey health.
in that case, when you see a good disposition for touch, and it resembles the healthy color of the skin, and is quiet from every side, and not rigid at the joint nor in the tendon, or too deep.
you must then lift it from above, and peel the skin from every part, and the two lips of the heart should be at once, if necessary, as we have said in the chapter of the head.
And move it little by little, and be sure not to touch the nerve or the vein, nor be too aggressive with the knife, so that your hand does not slip, and do not look too far ahead, lest you miss what you should.
And if you hit the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, apply vitriol or any powder that stops blood flow, and close the wound. and leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound becomes softer, and begins to heal.
And when the wound is stained with blood, it returns to your work, as long as you complete it.
then seek your finger's subtle indications if there remain no small lumps, if it scrapes and cleans.
And if there is a large vein in the root of the lump, it is not enough that you only scrape off this lump at its root, but tie a double strand of thread around it and leave it hanging without harm.
then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.
And if you cut off the entire sore, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no delay due to the size of the sore. If you need to understand how to deal with the root of the issue, pull it out forcefully, and cut it as we have said.
If you need to understand how to deal with the root of the issue, pull it out forcefully, and cut it as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold an excess, cut them where they appear to be closing;
and make the cut in the same way as that mentioned above, depending on the case, then apply these remedies and similar things, so that it corrupts those who are stuck in the corruption. and when the wound is well cleaned, if the healing remedy causes pain, as long as it heals.
The ancients spoke and wrote about the treatment of the throat. but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is the writing of their word.
For those with a squint, it is necessary that the fold in the throat, called the epiglottis, be avoided. and no help is done through this, because all the veins and the pores of the sick person are close in those who have an abscess in the mouth, or throat, or intestines.
When the illness is in the channel of the tongue, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to divide the epiglottis, we should do so in three or four small cuts across, between the two circles, or according to the depth of the cut, not into the cartilage.
and if these muscles are suitable for cutting the epiglottis, then there is no risk, and the vessels are long and thin.
And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary to stretch the throat skin to its fullest extent, and cut the heart open until it reaches the chest. and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the syphilis as we have said;
and it is demonstrated through the cutting of the chest's blood vessel that bursts from the place which is broken, and by the loss of voice.
and leave the wound open for a time.
And when the hour has passed and there is doubt about the strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound together with care, and cut through them all the way to the cartilage.
then administer medications that induce warmth, as long as they are healthy.
Albuscasim understands that one must not proceed until the throat is completely sealed, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, lacking all hope. Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot strain, and they will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
and for this, the ancients command to keep the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat, as long as it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a damsel took a knife, and stabbed it into her throat, and cut part of the tongue from the gums.
and I was called to heal her, and I found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was coming from it; I realized that there was no proper vein or channel leading to the throat, but the veins were emerging from the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was clean;
and having restored the damsel's voice, which had been hoarse, she returned to her previous state.
because I say that there should be no fear in the operation of the epiglottis.
Cysts in the throat are called "neck hernias", and they are large apertures colored like an arrow, and they are common in women;
and this is according to two manners: natural and accidental;
in nature, there is no mechanism.
and the accidental is according to two manners: one is similar to a tumor, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that arises from an artery. and it causes fear, and one should not attempt to make fire outside in a large place; rather, they should test and examine the entry point carefully. If you let it grow out as much as a new grass, and it does not give way to any force, if it is broken, just as we break our bones, and treat it with all your care, if there is no pain. and wrap it tightly, and treat it as appropriate, until it is perfectly healed.
There are many ways of which I will describe all their similarities;
and it is necessary that I explain all the differences between us and them.
I say that the origin is heat and fever holding, as long as the ebullition has not passed, and completion of the putrefaction. then rest the fever and the heat.
With the new heat, there is neither fever nor pain, and it contains satisfaction, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a wound, and becomes swollen.
and they are according to their appearances, whether oily, moist, or of a certain color, as I have said in the division.
You should, when you come to the treatment of a new patient, first try and inquire about all the instruments called "entromissory", according to their form, as described in the chapter that follows.
And the method of questioning abscesses is that you press more moistly where you feel the abscess, and move your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the center, according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the instrument, and be careful of any sudden jumps.
If moisture is running through the flesh, what color it has, do as I have said for other abscesses;
and if moisture does not come from the instrument, know that it is full, then do crosswise and take it as tongs, scraping gently from each side and taking care of the cloth where it lies so you draw out the pus with the new.
and if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if nothing remains, it will return to the body many times.
and if a small amount remains and does not disturb you, apply some corrosive powders or hot compresses to the wound, treat it with cooling things, and use other remedies until it is healed.
and if the wound is large, cut both edges of the wound and treat it with remedies to promote healing.
and if the pain is intense or persistent, apply a poultice of crushed vitriol and leave it for two or three days, until the wound heals and the blood flow subsides. then return to covering what has been dislocated from the new.
See the shapes of the instruments used for dislocation, which are of three types: large, medium, and small;
and then take three squares that are called "albaret," and one that is called "breb," and there are three ways to do this: cut, fine, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
and are also like needles used to cut sorceries, made of gold, or iron, or silver, and the ones that are yellow in color are more effective for encircling the abscesses of fistulas;
and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the opening's size.
The shapes of the incisions are much alike, as you can see here:
and if the incisions have two curves in three ways as well;
and if they are once which have three curves, and are also of three manners;
and if they are once which have two curves, and once only one curve, and are of three manners;
and all this is necessary for their place.
The head of these [instruments] must be sharp, and there are some that do not cut well from both sides, which scrape the skin, so that one does not cut into the vein or nerve.
and from these intrusions, the splinters are removed from many parts, so that the patient does not lose them when opening the abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see.
and do not use any more force than necessary, especially with fleshy parts like legs, arms, mammary glands, and similar areas.
and never use any other small instrument resembling the edges of fingers, according to this form, to stop blood. and it should never be placed in a place that severs veins and arteries, and never according to this great form.
never inflame the breasts of any man when they begin to be corrupted, as long as they appear like a woman's breasts.
and become pale and swollen, and anyone who wants to cure them should do so according to this form from this line b until g. then scrape off the fat, and apply medicinal fire to the wound, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal it as long as it is clean.
and it holds the eye downward, and is loosened by its size, as happens with women, when they give birth in two places, through two similar openings. so that one holds the other at the end of each, and the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line. b. to the next line. g. then strip the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, as long as it is healthy.
and if he is not healthy, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive dressing. and leave it until it absorbs the moisture and fat, then dress it as long as it remains healthy.
Abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are hard scrofulous nodules or they contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g. And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply clean cotton to the wound and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with suitable medicine until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then it should be treated as we have said about the cuts in scrofula, and if the wound gapes, then apply cautery as we have previously stated.
When the artery is blocked and the skin above it is sealed, many abscesses form, and this also occurs in the vein with an inflammation and abscess.
and if you recognize it thus when it is for the artery, then cut deep enough to reach the abscess; and when you feel it with your hands, if it feels strange;
and when it is for the vein, then there should be a strong appearance of redness;
and it is madness to cover this abscess, especially when it is deep in the flesh and filled with anger and other substances, and is very large. It is necessary to avoid iron cure, and he who has the main problem should also be cautious, and in the case of an artery exposed through the skin, make a long cut above it.
then open the wound in small incisions, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues, while it is exposed.
then insert a needle from the inside and pierce it to the other side, gripping the artery with a double thread in two parts, according to what I have taught you regarding the extraction of both arteries located in the temple.
then mark the place between the two joints of an instrument as long as there is no pain from it, and release the abscess.
then administer the treatment as needed, as long as the ligaments remain strong. then apply this treatment as long as it is healthy.
and if the abscess is as large as a vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can reach of the abscess all around, then insert the needle through the skin and pierce it, and pass the thread double, so that you draw it from the other side. then, as I have told you, take the abscess, or one of the parts of the thread to the shoulder;
and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, if it rebounds another needle through all the abscess, from the base to the incision of the first needle, and pulls the threads in four directions;
then cut the abscess until the excess is gone, then cut off the excess with a cure, and leave what is tied.
then place a damp cloth of wine and oil on it, and administer treatments with bandages and ointments until it is healed.
Similarly to how abscesses occur in arteries and veins, nails can also develop abscesses when they are injured or subjected to excessive work, among other things.
And this occurs more often with dislocations and joints in all parts where there are articulations, and it is a sharp abscess, and its appearance resembles the colour of the flesh, and it is in various positions causing pain.
and when they tighten it, the patient feels pain, and is not completely healed of the injury, but the heart remains weak.
and it must be completely still from all sides, and does not move forward or backward, neither down nor up, and the one in joints should not be covered with metal. perhaps they have a spasm; and those who have a head or forehead, make the skin smooth with the scalpel.
and those who have a head or forehead, make the skin smooth with the scalpel. if the abscess is small, use tweezers to grasp it and cut it at its base;
and if it is large, suspend it with a hook, and scrape off the skin, then cut through the bone and sew up the wound until it heals.
No such thing occurs in bellies or anywhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its appearance, and it has subtle roots, and large excrements.
and it has both small and large ones.
and I have seen at home those who had them in the belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, had a fine root, were well-split, and always secreted moisture.
I gathered them and found one weighing XVIII ounces, and another VI ., and the work of the incision is such that if you look at the patient, their moisture is evident, and the color of the articular surface is white and moist with a delicate root. if you remove them with a broad spatula, they should be in your presence for fire cautery.
if you remove them with a broad spatula, they should be in your presence for fire cautery. For cutting often brings great danger of blood loss, and if without your notice, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision to be made, take a well-prepared thread, and with it tie the wound as we have said, and leave it for a day.
then restrain them, and do not cease to tighten the thread until it pulls the wound closed without effort.
and if the roots are thick, be afraid to close them especially for the belly, but you can well close half of them, then cauterize it so that it does not reopen.
then treat the wound, and ensure you do not cover the part that is red, pale, and lacks sensation and milk-white.
For this is an abscess enhanced, and I will come to the treatment of cancer hereafter.
When the wound is closed due to crusting. If the appearance of the bump is due to cautery or an opening in a syphilis wound, and it is on the belly and not in any of the bowels, as is the case with other ruptures, or pus that drains from veins or arteries according to what is above, or from flatulence;
and if it is from the rupture of syphilis and the discharge from the bowels, then the abscess has a color similar to that of the skin, and it causes little pain, and opens up with various discharges. And if it is due to an intestinal issue, then it is more complex, and when pressed at the patient's will, it rebounds, and sometimes becomes tightened, greatly constricting the entry to the bath and causing much effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain.
and if it is due to blood, it opens up through these signs: the abscess is large and hard, and it is fixed in place according to its quantity. and if it is due to wind (or gas), it feels soft upon touching, and the work required is such that you must observe whether its appearance indicates blood from an artery, a vein, or wind.
and if it is due to wind (or gas), it feels soft upon touching, and the work required is such that you must observe whether its appearance indicates blood from an artery, a vein, or wind. If it is necessary, you must leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter about abscesses, both for the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowels, then you must instruct the patient to keep quiet and lie entirely still, and then tie a cloth around the entire area. then command the patient to gently move it between their hands, then enter the area you have marked with a cloth, and stretch half of the abscess above all the sharp edges. then tie it with a strong thread or a firm cord of strong silk, and make sure the knot is tight.
then open half of the abscess extended over the bandage, and press your index finger into it, seeking the inner organs. if you feel it grip the ligament, release it, and press the intestine out through the opening in the abdomen.
and if you find the swelling, take it at the point, and cut off the excess.
and if the artery or vein runs counter to your work, then return to your task and take two needles, press them firmly, and push both needles back in the same way you made the incision.
then stretch the abscess in four directions over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, leaving the place to heal, and seek death by itself. where it is tender and possible, then treat it as appropriate, and heal the abscess as we have said.
where it is tender and possible, then treat it as appropriate, and heal the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as appropriate, and bind the wound.
A cancer We have spoken in the previous section about the signs of an abscess, and how it must be treated with medicine, and how one should avoid iron treatment.
And let us speak of the ulcer that invades the wound, and take great care in its cure, and say to the ancients that when an ulcer is present or can be cut out like an ulcer on the mammary gland, or the thigh, or similar places, then it must all be removed when it first appears.
no one has ever healed it before me.
And for the work, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, it is that you repeatedly clean the patient of black bile.
then make it healthier if there is visible improvement, then operate on the patient in a good place to perform the work.
then pour onces or chancres, and wash all parts, and clean all parts without leaving any residue;
and let the blood flow completely, and carefully press the place with your hand or any object, and if the bleeding continues after the treatment of the wound, cauterize it until the blood is stopped. then apply other remedies as long as he is healthy.
From hydropsie (a condition marked by excessive fluid accumulation We have previously discussed the similarities of edema, and how the gathering of fluid is formed, the signs of each condition, and the treatments using medications, as well as those treated with iron.
and one should not use iron for these two conditions: This is to know, namely, tympanitis and impetigo, for it is a mortal thing.
So then, when you treat this appearance of dropsy, which is called 'edema', and the cure does not benefit, consider if the patient is weak or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as intestinal ailments or similar conditions. if they do not allow iron to touch them, for there is doubt.
and if you see the patient with great strength and they have no other illness but dropsy alone, and they are neither too weak nor too strong, then thus should you proceed: Place the patient upright on your hands, and the minister presses the belly towards the end, pointing the water to the lowest part of the pain, then take the spiny spatula according to this form. And make incisions from the second part. at the tip, but not so deeply that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and cannot be broken.
then check if there is any inflammation towards the intestines: if it is necessary, you must cut through the bowel three times straight down from the top of the finger. and if the dislocation is due to a weak liver, it occurs on the left side of the hip three joints down.
and if it is due to moisture, it occurs on the right side, and it is not appropriate for the patient to lie on the dislocated joint so that excess fluid does not flow to the weak liver.
then cut through all the skin with the instrument, and press, and apply your hand to the entire area between the skin and the muscle just as if you were peeling it, in the quantity of a fingernail or around that area.
then pierce the soft flesh until the knife reaches the bone, and it is the white of the wound, then pull out this instrument, and with it, form the shape: and it resembles a thin silver chain, made of fine gold or silver, and in the middle part there is a small hole. and on one side, three holes. and two on the other side, and one on yet another.
and it is the shoulder cut as if with a quill, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes make with the quill:
at the top of it there is a wound, so that when the instrument comes into contact with water, it sinks straight down onto the instrument.
then empty it, taking half or a third, for if you remove more than is necessary at that moment, the patient may die due to the dissipation of their spirit from the weapon, or they may lose consciousness, or they may draw close to death.
but according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the virtue in the sick person signifies, and its pulse.
then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held by the force that stops the opening above the sinus, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce according to this manner.
then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering, and take a small quantity of water.
Take no action, and guard against any sudden movements as long as it does not cause any pain but a little water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and leave too much water, treat the wound with dry soil or hot sand, and use sweat or a bath and sunlight, and color it with wine. and treat with drying medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after draining the water, as I have said before.
No child is born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
If it is necessary at any time for him not to pierce through all the very subtle particles according to this form.
Then make or find a subtle hole in the bladder, and close it and hold it thus for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, open the closure, let him urinate, then close it again.
and if by chance he doesn't remember, because the strong flow of urine does not allow the closure to be kept closed.
If the closure is small, it is a sign of a weak bladder, as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Those who do not have a hole in their bladder are blighted, because no one is born with a hole at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they close their penis. and they cannot move because the material cannot reach the joint, and this is a bad illness.
And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, then the head of the bone and the neck are extended as if they were a quill, so that the opening to the middle is created as it should be.
and be careful of the discharge of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, apply pressure to stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
from the pimples of the penis Many times this illness comes to the tree (limb), and it appears as a ugly deformity;
and it has malignant and benign forms;
you must then press them gently, and wash and clean them all, then place moist cotton in an Egyptian dressing; then continue the treatment with the dressing until it is healed.
And if the affliction is malignant, with a putrid and foul appearance, it requires cautery treatment.
When you have achieved it, and if the splint is in a state of rest on the bone, with part of it inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary to remove the splint that is inside first. and if it is sewn shut, then open it.
Because when you bind it together, unless the pieces of the bone are perfectly aligned, it will cause discoloration and corruption in the bone and limb.
so it is necessary to remove all black and corrupt parts, then apply a paste made of honey and flour from red apple bark and leaves, and continue to treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if a blood clot comes, then instruct the lunar cauterizer according to this form:
The cauterization helps if it follows the combined dispositions: that is to say, at the discharge of pus, and at the corruption;
and if the tip of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, it is necessary that you drive or guide a stick into the pus and drain the patient;
and when the hair is dried at the tip of the rod that has happened to those who have not been circumcised, or it becomes a wound or an abscess, it is then necessary that you scrape it with a sharp instrument, until the cords are loosened and the part from the rod is freed;
and if it is a difficult thing to devise, then you should cut it with a sharp instrument at the base of the stick and the blade.
then separate the pieces gently, and place a thin cloth soaked in cold water between them, so they do not stick together again.
Circumcision is not a complete healing process like other wounds; however, when we perform this operation of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best and most gentle work for their health.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have observed most of the masters and elders who performed circumcision near the anus, and how they use force, and all sorts of new tools.
if the threads were to break because there are two of them, and by chance one is cut above and the other below. or he might cover it again, and the pain becomes doubled, and the purification, which should be near the anus, is not assured for the point of the member.
and to the purification of the nail, if by chance the fire escapes and runs away, the work will be ruined, and often times they grow like this, needing no purification, which I have seen.
Of the cleansing that is done with force on all the fibrous threads, I have found the benefit of experience, for the forces cut exactly as well from above as from below.
For when you press your hand, if it is cut evenly throughout, then you release all tension. but ensure the thread is well wrapped around the skin.
and be sure of the method in the first attempt so that if the child hears you and understands that you are only tightly winding the thread around the stick, then afterward, make it relax in all ways as much as possible.
then stretch it straight between your hands and restore the strength in your hands or beneath your feet so that the demon does not see any of these.
Then take your hand to the staff and blow through your nostrils, holding it up until the end of the staff is covered. Then cleanse it well of the dirt that is gathered on it, then tie the limb with a double thread, and bind it to another bandage.
Then cleanse it well of the dirt that is gathered on it, then tie the limb with a double thread, and bind it to another bandage. and hold it at the second joint with your two fingers and thumb, and cut between the two bands, then gently lift the end of the staff. then let the blood flow drop by drop, for it is the cause of pain. and put powder on it and on the powder I apply a glue made from egg whites cooked in rose water, mixed with oil of roses, good and fresh, and leave it until the next day, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
The way to purify the body is as follows:
Both feet should be clean and cut, and the toes also, as equal as possible to the rest:
The error in purification is when the veins inside bleed during the incision:
Then you must extend your finger, so that the joint creates an abscess.
and hold it even, and if you cannot hold your finger, with pincers if you have them, then cut it.
And if they remain for three days, and the skin beneath the arrow is swollen, leave it until the abscess heals, and gently peel away the scabs.
if the abscess heals as well as you can see, and it protects the part of the arrow, it will not harm anything.
Cure therefore the place suddenly wounded by powder, which we have spoken of treating in the section on powders, and if one takes too much heart, and it goes above, then it will not harm;
Cure it therefore, as we have said, while it is healthy.
retention of urine
The retention of urine is an indication of a stone or frozen blood, or bowels or a chronic illness, or similar conditions, as we have spoken of in the division.
and if the urine cannot be released, and you see a retention due to a stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient bend over on their knees. and place them incorrectly on the back, extending their belly from above the back and restraining the patient in any way possible. and then they constrict the collar of the bladder to the position of the stone above, causing the urine to flow freely.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer an extraction with all the instruments called "syringes", which have this form:
and let them be fine, light silvered hairs, like the feathers of a bird. and the blade should be one palm length and a half, and fine at the tip.
And the method for urination is that you take a double thread, tie it around the base with a wool or cotton ball, and then insert the thread into the syringe.
and cut off the excess thread, then insert it all into the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit down, and drain the bladder using moist oil and olive oil and lukewarm water.
then gently insert the syringe into the shaft, until it reaches the base of the shaft, then bend the shaft upwards towards the opening.
then squeeze the syringe before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient's pain until it reaches the empty space, and this is not done according to these orders because the direction in which it is guided is twisted.
then gently pull the thread through the wool little by little, and the urine follows the thread, then extract it firmly, and stop the flow of urine.
and begin the syringing as soon as the bladder is empty, and arrange the patient comfortably.
When scabs or pus comes to the bladder, where putrefaction is assembled, you should view it distill water and medicines, by using the entire instrument called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it opens again: from one side, and from the other, as you can see.
and the hair roots, by which the compresses cut well the wound without added harm, if we can drain the moisture and press as much as necessary.
and when you see your medicines moving in the bladder, place the keen-edged knife into the moisture, and pull gently until it comes out.
if you pull out the moisture with the knife, then quickly twist the limb firmly again; if the moisture goes deep inside, reaching the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
and this is the form of a gentle enema, whereby the bladder is enemaized;
And it is of silver or gold, and the joint is higher;
and takes it out from within the chest where the joint is attached;
then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you intend to use for a warm bath, then wrap it between the two breasts, forming a good double-layered seal, and heat the moisture over fire.
then insert the catheter into the urethra and press your hand against the bladder to expel all the moisture until the patient feels that the bladder is empty.
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle of it, and punch it through with a round hole. then insert a strong thread into these openings, and reassemble the circle as if you were closing it, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and secure it with the instrument.
and do the same as you did with the bladder, pressing it with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
from the stone
We have already discussed the methods of stone and arrow extraction, along with various medications.
and we have also spoken of the distinction between stones that cause pain and all their signs, and in what type of stone one must perform surgery. and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that stones in the bladder occur more often in children, and this is a sign of acute urinary retention, similar to water in its subtlety.
and open the wound wide, and greatly ease the patient of their pain, and probe many times, and then it heals; and at the mouth of these sores, we destroy their foundations;
and the healing of children is gentle until they are four years old, and it is much more difficult for the elderly, and it is halfway between for those who are between youth and old age;
and the treatment is lighter for those who have great stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a enema, in order to expel all feces from the intestines. For it often gets stuck when trying to pass a stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and straighten them, and move them from side to side, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and never moves up again.
then have him sit between your hands with his legs apart, so that the bladder is tilted downward.
then take the stone and touch it inside.
if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not give way to the touch at all, dampen your index finger with oil from your left hand, and if the patient is old, or your middle finger with oil from your right hand, and if the patient is young and fully grown; and press it into its base, and hold the stone, and when you feel it in your hand, if there is an infection at the base of the bladder.
then press with your finger, and the stone will come out from where you see it cut.
And instruct the physician to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend the testicles with his right hand, and with his left hand remove the skin that covers them in the area where the incision is made.
then he extracts the spatule, which gives it this form: And make an opening between the testicles and the base, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh.
and it should be straight on the stone, and your fingers close together or at the base, and make the cut across so that it is wide enough to accommodate the stone, but narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
In case the pressure becomes so great that it has to leave its place, allowing it to depart without effort.
and knows that there is a hard part where it has corners or edges. if it is caught trying to escape.
and if it is in a part that is smooth, resembling a ball, and round, with a light opening.
At such points where it has corners and edges, make the size larger.
and if it does not fall, you must use pliers that are like a file on the head to extract the stone so that it does not escape. you then use a small, curved instrument on the head;
and if you cannot do it this way, if the hole is wide, and the stone is large, then extract it with a strong pull like vitriol;
and if there are multiple stones, first extract the largest one from the bladder's neck, then cut it out, and afterward, pull out the smaller ones if there are any others.
And if it is very large, you must cut it out carefully, and make a larger wound. For there are two things that happen to the patient: or he dies, or the urination returns immediately, as the muscles cannot contract.
but nevertheless, make every effort to gently pull or remove debris with tweezers, as long as you treat it piece by piece.
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, compress it, and place a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess. then resolve the patient's pain on their collarbone, and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
And when you dislocate it, if a lot of hot and cold oil and water arises, then apply curative ointment and basic ointment until it is healed.
And if abscesses form in the wound and cause corrosion, and blood clots in the bladder, and due to this the urine is retained, which is known in this manner as without warning with the urine. so press your finger on the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and rot.
then open the wound with fire and hot oil, and draw out any debris, and aid it in every way you can, as long as it is clean.
and it is necessary that all the hours you treat him, you bind both thighs to him, and gather the medications on the joint.
And if the stone is small, it is caught in the urethra, and stuck in place, and the urine cannot pass through. if you treat it as I say, cutting many times, then the size of the cut is an excuse for the size due to this treatment. I have tried this myself.
Take the first piece of iron according to this form and insert it at three angles into one tisson.
then take a thread and tie it around the urethra beyond the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder.
then gently twist the drill in the wood until it reaches the stone. and turn the drill back to your hand in the stone little by little, as you can drill through the stone from another side.
if urine comes, then press your hand against the part that is stuck inside the wood. if it is broken and bursts with the urine, and the patient is in pain;
and if you cannot do this for any reason, then pull the stone out from inside and another from above, then make the stick go around the stone between the two bones, then extract it strongly, and loosen the ligament, and clean the frozen blood in the wound. and treat it while it is healthy.
of women's stones" (a reference to kidney stones)
It is rare for stones to occur in women, and if they do, the treatment is difficult, and it is hindered by three things:
One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
and the second reason is that it is difficult to find a woman who is well-versed and reveals herself to men, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that, by chance, one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of healing.
And the fourth way is that the stone in women's bodies is often harder than in men, so it requires deeper incision and much fear. If this situation arises, you should seek a knowledgeable midwife, and if you cannot find one, do not hesitate to use this subtle knowledge on a chaste woman.
and it presents a wise dance in the life of women, where a woman who knows a part of the art, and instructs her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone. and carefully observe if this woman is a virgin:
and carefully observe if this woman is a virgin: then she must remove her hand or finger and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, by stretching her hand down her finger, and restraining it from moving, she should instruct the patient to remove their finger or hand with the pain, and press and squeeze their left hand on the swollen bladder.
If it is cut, it is necessary to move it slowly and gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to the thigh root.
then cut into the stone at the thigh root, near the middle of the hard mass, where it is most mobile and feels the pain in that part. and do not move the stone from above or below, but make the first cut small.
and do not move the stone from above or below, but make the first cut small. then insert the saw into the cut, feeling the stone so deeply in the wound that it can come out fully, and know that there are many ways of cutting stones.
This is to know, small and large and sharp and smooth, long and round, and which have roots.
knowing these similarities to know the outcome.
And if the wound does not heal, mix vinegar and apply it to the place, and keep it for an hour until the pain is relieved.
then return to your task, as long as the stone is hard, and have the tools I told you for removing stones from people to help you in your work.
and if the wound persists, and it is an artery that has been cut, apply powder to the place and press with bandages and bends, and do not repeat this, leave the stone and do not extract it again, unless the patient dies. then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the swelling goes down, then return to your work while the stone is still firm.
Ripe water is nothing other than the assembly of moisture or white mucus, which is detached from the heart of things, containing the fire.
and it is called "syfac" and never properly in the web of fire, if one believes that it is another fire. and it is the skin around the thing between the white mucus that we have spoken of;
and this happens no more. And the formation of this rice is due to weakness in the skin, which causes it to spread and accumulate matter.
And it never happens from striking the testicles, and this moisture takes many forms. or it changes to jaundice, or has no red, or black, or clear white, and this happens more often.
and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is as white as we have said, then the abscesses are red, very long, like a snake's figure, and do not open the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the affected skin, the abscesses are red with a part of the flesh, and for that reason one thinks it is another flesh.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part, one should feel it well.
then when you see to know the color of the moisture, try to pull out all the intrusive matter, from which the form is as it is above. According to what follows, judge of what is inside after the introduction.
And when we cure it with iron, the patient must be healed according to their strength and the replenishment of their body.
then lie down on your back, on one thing a little high, and place under him several sheets of cloth.
then sit on your left side, and instruct the helper to sit on your right, and stretch the rod towards one of the two ribs at the heart's edge.
then take the scalpel, and cut through the skin of the ribs from top to bottom, making a slit entirely straight by dividing the rib cage tissue until it turns white, and carefully remove it according to each rib's power.
then pierce the swollen part with a sharp tool into a wide opening, and extract all the fluid, then place your fingers, and the swelling will subside.
and do not touch the center of the swelling, but only the affected area. cut it all or in pieces along its side carefully, for if you do not cut it cleanly and sharply, the fluid will return.
and if the air bubble rises to your work, then return it to its place when you have completed the work with the swelling.
Then gather the two books of the heart's edges together with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the heart corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, in doubt of the flow of blood.
then cut the edge at all the suspension, and extract the heart, and treat it as we have said.
And if the vein is gathered into two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; if you treat the other part just as you did the first, then wipe off the blood, and apply a fresh, moistened lint cloth with rose oil to the wound.
if you treat the other part just as you did the first, then wipe off the blood, and apply a fresh, moistened lint cloth with rose oil to the wound. and apply another moistened cloth with wine and oil, and place two cushions on it, and cover them with doubled cloths, and bind it to all parts according to this form.
Then take two cloths, make them of shredded wool according to this shape and join them together by sewing in the groin of the breeches, one at the front leg root up to the back, and the other at the hand joint.
and the other two joints on both sides of the shoulder, gathering all the restrictions in the loop of the collarbone;
and never apply this cautery with a red-hot iron, but rather use a delicate surgical knife to make the incision, and cut through the flesh of the joints, and keep it warm as we have said before, so that the white part containing the blood is exposed.
if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce this white part in small incisions, and then apply this hot cautery gently:
And the doctor, in every way you can, as long as you stretch everything out.
and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is safer; and be careful about the decay of pus, and monitor for signs of infection from the work of great size;
and if anything goes against you, whether it's an abscess or pus discharge or any other issue, treat what contradicts you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then administer a perforation, as I have told you, and make sure that when you are certain through the signs we have mentioned that the dislocation is caused by moisture, you keep the patient in a raised seat. perce the abscess at the bottom of the socket, throughout the entire gumline, and make the perforation as deep as possible.
and make the perforation wide enough for all the pus to flow out.
then place cotton on the joint, bind it, and let it heal until the remaining water has dissipated, then treat the wound until it is clean.
if the white cloth does not allow water to drain from the wound, it is necessary that you insert a needle or the instrument used to remove water from dropsical wounds, in the shape as mentioned above.
and thoroughly clean the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after six months or so, and when it is gathered as before, then the patient will spend his days in healing.
You know that in the division of this branch, it causes greater pain in various ways, which is why I think it is better to leave it alone.
and I will tell you about the work and appearances of an abscess.
I therefore say that many abscesses come where there is inflammation, especially in the bowels. and this is the case in many instances.
This is to know, by way of superfluous acidity and ague, which is spread through veins or by percussion.
and the colour of the abscess depends on the colour of the flesh. and it causes no pain, but the abscess is severe.
and sometimes there are many abscesses, dark and black, and of a purplish colour, which do not come from new veins or the opening of arteries.
When it is due to a lack of artery, if it is blocked by the hot arrangement of an abscess when you press on it with your hands; and it is not advisable that you touch it.
What is made of vein inflammation is blocked by its arrangement at the expression of gentle pressure with the fingers, and it can be carefully cut along this model, and on other parts. and it is that you cut the heart of the veins, then heat rises above, and the pain comes strongly white satisfying, and releases the suspension from all parts of the egg.
If the bone is already healed with these new scars, then it is necessary that you treat the bone, and the joint.
and if it is stuck in the sinus or inside the veins, it is then necessary that you release all of this material, and treat the joint appropriately.
And if the shoulder's birth is at the back, it is necessary that you dislocate it completely, and extract the bone, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, apply a moist woolen compress with rose oil and wine to the wound, then use other remedies until it is healed.
This is an abscess enveloped in a similar wrapping to the bowstring, with the softening of the joints, and it severely restricts the patient when it forms.
and the treatment for this disease is also very careful, just as with the previous one, and we will tell you about its work according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient lie on a clean bed, then squeeze the suspension of the parts below your hands, to all the vessels close to the wound, and wash them with masters (possibly referring to a type of medicine or solution) and spread them open.
then use a sharp spade to cut widely across the vessels, as they are uncovered, and then peel from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
then he inserts an needle with a double thread, and fastens it to the first place where the vis (possibly a bone or fragment) has come out, and then fastens it again to the other end. Then arrange them straight in the middle, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture.
Then treat the wound as with others, so that no vessel leaks and neither of the parts is corrupted.
For if no harm comes from it, and all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to drain the parts of every vessel. so that the eggs do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, dry up, and cannot help themselves.
The remedies of this branch are obtained through amputation or satisfying it by extending the abdomen in the area of the angles, so that the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the openings.
and this rupture is either from satisfaction or extension, and these two ways of occurrence have many causes:
or from impact, or jumping, or shouting, or lifting heavy weights, and similar actions;
and the signs when it is from satisfaction, if it occurs little by little, over a long period of time, and does not come suddenly; and it makes the abscess even up to the healthy side, because the pus pushes the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the incision that a sudden pain arises at the beginning, and various abscesses appear beneath the skin close to the bone, due to the discharge of the intestine and the blood from the syphilis.
And never drain the pus with the intestine, as it becomes trapped and causes great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these painful treatments with iron, for which one must be cautious.
And the method of the operation is that you command the patient to straighten the intestine back into its natural position inside the wound, if it can be done. then hold it above his collarbone between your hands, and press the hips.
then apply heat above, and cut off all the skin from the legs down to the long hairs. then insert into the books of the side, according to your need, to open the wound, and be sure that it does not close.
then strip off the skin that is beneath the muscle, exposing the white flesh completely from all sides;
then place your two fingers as follows: after the white flesh that is beneath the skin of the thigh, and between the second flesh, and from behind the muscle, and between the second flesh.
and then move the right hand down towards the heart, and make it white with pleasure on your left hand's top, and ease the tension throughout all the pleasure towards the waist. and instruct the practitioner to extend the pleasure upwards, and release that which is behind the ligament;
and cut between your fingers if any of the intestines are wrapped or hardened with pleasure, and if you pull out anything, it will come up to the stomach from inside.
then take a needle or a thick thread made of X threads, and insert it into the back part of the pleasure, which is after the skin of the hairs. After shaving, cut the shoulders that appear from the hairs, as long as there are four hairs. then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind it tightly there, as we have said that it removes the skin from the bones with a strong bond from both parts. then wrap the shoulders with the hairs and bind them in such a way that no foreign objects can enter inside, preventing abscesses from forming. and then from there, place the bandage according to the first long bond, and after these two bonds, leave free the space between the bones of the joint, as large as one finger. and after all, according to the shape that the affected part has.
then cut into the part that is beneath the skin of the joints, as far as it is possible to reach without damaging, and bend, as we have said before.
then apply moist wool soaked in oil, and dress the wounds, and wrap it with the bandage that we have said. And never should the white skin be cauterized as we have said, after incision, out of fear of bloodletting. For this happens often, and leaves the scar as it pleases;
and if it takes time to heal, then apply hot water and continue with what we have said until it heals.
then treat the wound with another remedy until it is completely healed.
herniated cartilage
In this case, one never sees anyone dare to treat it with iron.
And the elders say that it is made like a gear that fits together, in such a way that you bind the vessels after cutting them lightly from the inside.
then cut me open, and treat the abscess of him who opens, as long as the vessels bleed.
and treat it as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
no rupture should occur from the wound, as we have said, and open the vessels.
and do not let any intestines protrude like lumps, and if they do, it is an emergency, and repair them every hour.
and still if it lingers too long at this point, he believes there is a wound or ulcer, until the intestines descend.
and this occurs due to the extension of the ulcer, which is aggressive, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and inflames the limbs and opens them.
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before.
and it is never treated with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies on their back with their feet in your hands, then take the joint of the dislocation and insert a plug firmly according to the amount of three fingers.
and then extract the beneficial substance that is under the skin, take a thread and insert it into the visible joint.
and press it deeply into the belly, then cut the two visible joints of the dislocation on the side of the thread, and do one after the other.
then extract the side of the thread, and do not cover the dislocation with any beneficial substance or extend it in any other way, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestinal root. then treat it with wound care.
then treat it with wound care. And when you treat the wounds, if they become dirty and the wound is clean, do so.
The treatment is difficult, and it has no appearance in the rupture, but cauterization on this limb is more mobile and closer to healing.
of the softening of the thick skin of the joints
Often, the skin of animals becomes soft in no men, because the flesh that is inside is softened, and it becomes visible.
and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient lie on their back, and cut the skin that has become softened on the natural skin.
then bring the two edges together with a stitch, and if you see, first sew the surplus of the softened skin at three stitches or four firmly.
then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds, as long as they are healed, and pull out the thread.
Dou chastrement (Double cautery)
Knowing that castration is forbidden in our law, and for this reason, I would prefer not to speak of it in this book.
and it is not necessary for two reasons:
one is that it should answer honestly when asked, and know the treatment.
and the other, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
I say, therefore, that castration is performed according to two manners: or by attraction, or by division.
In the method we perform by attraction, we should make the animal rest in hot water until the scrotum is softened and relaxed. then press with your hand until they are healed and you no longer feel them.
On the castration of the penis: It is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the hide of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each one separately, when you have well scorched them.
and do not leave any pain or unpleasantness, the subtle pleasure that is on the vessels.
and this manner of castration is preferable to that which is done by attraction, because in attraction, perhaps something of the testicles remains, causing the animal to desire luxury.
then treat the wound as long as it is clean.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism exists in two ways among humans: One is when the two openings are so similar to the features of a woman's nature, with hair and never urinates in public.
And the other manner is in women, who have hair on their lower limbs as well as a phallus and two vagina-like openings.
And the treatment for both men and women is that you apply the adjusted compresses to all wounds and treat them like other injuries.
In the second manner, of men whose urine passes through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
Tendons are a tightly adjusted char on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see. and no woman has it either as much as a hand, and that is the cure.
You should remove the excess of tendons from your hand or fingers, and cut it lightly.
and do not harm me too much with your cuts, so that complications from bleeding do not come, then apply another remedy until he is healed.
and there is another affliction that is born in the mouth of a mare, and it spreads, and perhaps suddenly leaps, and it resembles a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease. If it is necessary to take care of it, as we have said concerning the wound, and treat it until it is healthy.
Erroneous is the judgment when the nature of women is not properly perceived, or the opening (wound) is small. and it is either by nature from birth, or accident through illness that comes to be;
and it is either by nature from birth, or accident through illness that comes to be; or it is through a slight or specific affliction, and is done perfectly in the middle, or on the side, or underneath, or wherever it may be.
and clearly discern conception, childbirth, and perhaps even the flowers of youth.
and the knowledge of these is through the art of dance.
If the dislocation is recent, it appears soon either on its own or through movement.
If it is a delicate pleasure, and it is close to the heart, if you hurry, then it will be thus:
with both of your index fingers assembled, have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs.
then form the two leaves into a shape, as long as the delicate pleasure is complete, and be sure to close the opening.
then take wool and soak it in oil, place it on the wound, and have the woman lie still each day so that it cannot heal.
And if the dislocation is hard and complex, it is necessary to use a scalpel-like instrument resembling a leaf of myrtle.
If the dislocation is from a bone fracture, then suspend it at the joint and the bone.
and use medicinal substances to stop blood, such as hawthorn, dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of eggs.
then apply a wide bandage, so that the wound cannot heal.
and do this for a long time, and apply a dry linen tent to it.
then he shall be cured of other ailments as long as he is healed.
And when there is swelling from heat, if it is not an abscessed wound, it needs to be treated in this way: For an abscessed swelling in the heat, it should not be probed or punctured.
Of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without usual care, become enlarged and when hemorrhoids have been present for a long time, they thus become involved.
and we have previously described in the division the similarities and signs, and I will now say those that receive treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and their complications, when they are in the advanced stage during pregnancy, are not easily detected, unless they require treatment with heat.
Those that are at the opening of the vagina can be felt; these are those that can be treated.
It is therefore necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then stretch the other as pliers, and squeeze it at its roots, then apply powders of medicinal herbs to stop the blood, such as witch hazel and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
then he immerses his feet in the wall for an hour, then places them in cold water;
and if the fever persists, one should apply a poultice of sumac and bark from pomegranates and gall nuts and similar things, and then take flour from barley, mix it with honey and lard, and make an ointment to apply on his back.
And if it is still wet, that's good. If this does not help, apply suction cups on the back without injuring the nipples;
then take linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of olive with old wine, and place it on the joint.
And when the abscess has subsided, continue the treatment with the wound as long as it is healed;
and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a sharp point, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous text. and then continue the treatment until it is healed.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the body, such as cancer and previous abscesses, and sores and ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
It is therefore necessary that I tell in this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the margin, which is not at all an abscess that draws bow-shaped.
and if you want to know the work of iron, look if the abscesses are active at the beginning of their appearance, and are full of heat and fever, and if they turn red, then you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it die as long as the pain is calmed;
and then make the patient lie down, and have him take a few small positions where he bends, supports himself on his back, and brings his feet closer to the affected leg.
and spread his thighs apart, and place his arms below his knees, and bind them tightly with a strong band.
then turn the patient towards the right side, and bring the instrument used to open the wound, which afterward forms the shape.
and it is necessary that when you bring the instrument to perform this procedure, you first insert the tip to determine the depth of the wound, so that when you insert the instrument afterward, it does not go further than required, and does not harm the patient. and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with fine cloth, so that the instrument does not hurt.
and it is necessary that he places the cone of the instrument above and shades the instrument.
And when the abscess opens, and it is done gently with the hand, it is necessary to cover the head and guide the spatula.
and when the bowel is empty, it is necessary that you place in the wound moist tents soaked in rose oil or dry green oil.
and place the clean tent over the wound directly on the breast, and put over the wound and the lying hand a moist cloth dipped in water or mullein;
then treat the wound after two days of healing have passed, as long as it is healed;
and never raise the wound and the breast with a enema of water and honey, and then water or cooked roots of lily and long aristology. then return to the wound dressing.
And if the wound is healed in the ulcer, it is necessary to avoid heating with iron, but treat it as we have said in the preceding section.
from childbirth Trade is most important in birth than she knows the shape of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman struggling down, and desires to smell the air.
then the child should be hastened to be born. then know that these children are according to the natural shape, and their heads come first, followed by the rest of their bodies.
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press the belly, so that the child is born quickly.
because when it descends towards its head, it accompanies him, and it empties the marrow of its excesses through good cleansing.
and this, which comes otherwise, does not come naturally.
For it never comes upon its feet, but rather pierces the body or limb, or comes up onto the belly, or back, and turns by chance upon its neck, or takes other malicious forms;
so it is necessary to be skilled in movement so that it is wise and subtle in these matters, casting aside error and disappointment, and I will show you all the forms of how one should assist it.
If the fever comes upon the head through natural causes, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, making her rest on a saddle, or as women hold it;
and if its nature is of oil or fennel, cooked, then take a small spatula in the shape of which we have spoken and apply it between his teeth. and split the second layer, cutting with his fingernail as deep as the moisture that is embedded within.
and press the woman's belly as the child descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to enemas the woman with fennel mucilage mixed with sesame oil.
then make him sneeze and cough from a cold condition, and hold his mouth and nose for an hour. if now the child is born.
And if both hands rise up, it is necessary that you gently reset them little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on her side, and raise her feet up; then stand him up on the ground, and tie the woman so she does not try to stand;
and if his hands cannot enter, and the child dies, if he cuts them with a knife placed before him, and extracts the child, then reset them equally.
From the exit of the child on its feet When the child comes onto its feet, it is necessary to push it upwards; and then turn it slightly and slightly until it is even;
then press from the feet and extend little by little.
He can jump as high as his feet allow, if he is commanded to press, and the act makes him sneeze due to the condition. if he jumps, God willing.
And if it does not happen as we have said, if it is turned little by little, according to its natural form. For then it becomes slightly easier.
And if it does not come as we have said, take some moss from a high place, and oil of hawthorn, and melted resin, and grind all in a mortar; and place it on the nature of the woman inside and outside this treatment, then make her lie in hot water up to beneath the ribs;
and when she is moistened, she should be given a collar of myrrh, placed upon her, and left for an hour; then make her lie upon a seat, then have her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose closed, and gently press on her stomach, for the baby is now ready to be born.
from the emergence of the child onto its knees When the baby is in this position, he will gently move his hands little by little; then it must be rested on his collarbone, with the weight hanging down, and he lies on his side. he bends his hands little by little and then grabs the patient's belly, removing the cushions from below until it is completely relaxed. and if it is not successful, he takes hold of the feet and moves them, then moves the belly up, and finally pulls with his hands. and gently pulls the child. and instruct the woman to press until the child comes out.
From the birth of the child who comes out with a large hand during I wish to learn how to bring back the hand. if it cannot be brought back, then raise the woman and let her go.
if she cannot go, then lay her on the bed and straighten her legs.
then apply the musk as I have described.
and if she does not give birth, hold her on a seat, then try to bring the hand back. and deliver the child according to nature, make her sneeze, and instruct her to push as hard as possible until the child comes out.
from the birth of the child on its mother's chest, with its hands spread and its face turned towards its mother's back. I know that the pain takes hold of her hand, then she squeezes it little by little and gently.
and when it is even, apply the natural muscles and oil as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little.
and when you have done this, let the fire rest on the seat, and command it to inflame. and make it sneeze. in the same manner, throughout all of this.
in the same manner, throughout all of this. When it comes about in this manner at regular intervals, if the moisture is removed with your finger, as long as it empties.
and bind it firmly to his face and neck, if you remove the bandage, let it not be restrained, and the child will die.
then turn the child inside, as long as you have placed it properly, and instruct the woman to never press down.
from the opening of the eyes Know that many times twins are born, and never three or four. and this is not an unusual thing, and it often happens. These are strange things, and they do not live long, being called thus.
These are strange things, and they do not live long, being called thus. I know that they multiply, and are devoured by the pleasure which creates them, which is connected to the bow.
and they never leave as naturally as all of us, as we have said.
And if they become serious, if the cure is as we have said, and there are subtle symptoms, making them too sudden and light in their effect. and do it so that it is moved towards health. from many children
No joints are formed in the human body as in I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and they are all shaped like a child according to the measure of his noble wisdom, and it is necessary for the skilled surgeon to know all this, for perhaps something similar may happen. it is done according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you cure a woman with a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the previous section, and it will not come out, and you are forced to use manual force; If it is necessary for you to know if the woman is of sound mind and does not fear death.
It is necessary for the woman to be lying on her back, and her legs inclined downwards.
and the midwife should apply the remedy from the second part, keeping her lying in bed so she is not treated for the descent of the child.
then rub the wife's mouth with moist oil mixed with althae and fennel seed and linseed, then anoint her private parts with these oils and musk.
then stretch it slightly in the mare, then seek the place where it twists, so that it is suitable for this, and be careful that the cord does not descend on its head.
if it sticks in its own place or in its neck or in its mouth or on its palate or under the beard or by force or near the sides, and if its descent is on the ground, then insert or hold it at the joints;
and it is necessary that he holds the twist in his right hand, and places the curve between his fingers of his left hand, and stretches it slightly with all his hand, and inserts the twist into any of these joints we have said, as long as it reaches the empty space.
then find another bone, where the third one is missing, so that the extraction is even.
and then stretch it equally from one side to the other, to pull out, and let the bones bite so that they hold, just like this shape:
And if part of it remains stuck, take neither oil nor any tool to it, but press the other part and pull;
and if it persists, lower this incise or raise it higher, and do until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes forward before the other and cannot return due to tightness, it is necessary that you wrap it with a cloth until it releases completely. then cut at the joint of the foot or the knee, and it is necessary that you do the same with the other hand, and hold both feet.
And if the baby's head is large and stuck in the birth canal, or it has a sharp, bent assembly, it is necessary that you press the spiny forceps between your fingers, and do so until the head emerges and extract the water. You use the instrument called an "almidach" to shape it with the tools and chapter that follow this one.
and thus, I myself make it attach naturally at a great cost.
and then pull the bones with pincers, and the joints jump out and are constrained by force, if they are broken, until all the moisture that is inside comes out.
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces at the limit that you can.
and if it is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture is drained.
And if the fever is on his feet, it is a light attraction, and the direction towards the mouth of the wound is mild.
and if it is twisted in the stomach or the bowels, you must extract it at the drape (or fold) wrapped around the hand. and making the stomach or bowels empty, until the moisture inside is drained;
and if any other parts are broken and the feces remain, then press the hand into the wound from the anus, and pull it towards the mouth of the wound. then I press the bone deeply, and pull it out;
and if the opening of the wound has narrowed due to hot abscess that formed, it is not advisable to work on it at all, but instead one should apply moist and greasy things. and apply them wetly, using gentle water that softens and moistens.
And if the limb is on its side, and you can make it even, apply what we have said for the living child;
and if he cannot move it, even if it is cut into pieces, he should not leave any of the secondine behind.
And when this is done, he should be given what we have said about the incisions in the abscesses that come near the mare.
and if the bleeding from the abscess comes, it should be treated with immediate restraint, and other remedies should be administered.
And I saw a woman whose stomach had been cut, and another doctor had treated it, and prevented further harm. After a long time, a swelling appears in the cheek, it swells up so much that it opens, and it begins to cause great pain.
I was called upon for treatment, and I thought for a long time, but I could not heal the wound.
I applied a strong poultice, and an egg came out, and after a few days, others followed. I was very amazed because that belly has no bones.
If I thought this was a bone from a dead child.
I examine the wound, and pull out the bones as much as possible, until the woman is in better condition. and examine the woman long tens thus, and then withdraw a little bow from its place.
and I have not recorded this chapter for any other reason than that, when the master encounters a strange thing, he knows how to provide aid.
After this comes the form of pressure, with which one binds the books.
and at the second turn, as the second joint of the limbs. Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth should be wide enough to fit two fingers' width and the edge of the tree trunk, about one palm and a half long; and also adjust both limbs to the same tension of this same horn, firmly joined together, about half a palm's length or slightly more;
and this dual adjustment is screwed into the mouth of the horn to open it when you turn both horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling tweezers. and it should have two adjustments, as you see, of one palm length, and two fingers width;
and when you see the vagina opening fully to the instrument, have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread and her knees bent, then carefully adjust the two adjustments together in the vagina, and hold the end of the instrument from below between her thighs. then use your hand to handle all the instruments, just as you did with the pliers evenly, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the wound, until the pain ceases to do what it wants.
all these instruments are skillfully crafted, and there are many of their kinds, each resembling the other; and when you see them properly equipped, the work is done more quickly, and with greater ease for the practitioner due to their quality.
Do not disregard the instrument even if you have not arranged it, for the necessity does not excuse the lack of preparation.
When the second stage of labor is reached, it is important that you instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze gently, while holding her hands at the mouth and nose. and if she jumps from there, that's fine.
If the bone does not come out, I will take a sharp tool or an opening, and insert herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all of these herbs, or none of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire;
then insert a cane or an opening into the pot, and put the other end in the mouth of the wound, and hold it until the vapor goes inside the wound;
then make him sneeze, as we have said. If the treatment does not help, then proceed with the next step.
And if after this treatment she remains weak, and is not strong, she is instructed to wet her left hand with oil of sesame or musk, then wrap it in a cloth and leave it in that state, and seek the second treatment. and when she has found it, she should press and stretch it little by little straight, so that the marble does not break during extraction.
but it is necessary to move slightly to the right and left, and then pull. if it comes and goes.
and if the mouth of the wound is tightly closed, we have said the remedy of sneezing and inhalation of herbal fumes.
and if it is not from any of the things we have said, be careful not to follow a false lead.
but it is important that what is in the mouth of the wound, you bind to the woman's thigh, then cleanse it with a four-ingredient remedy. if the bone goes out of place and is put back, it will come again.
but nevertheless, when it comes out so that there is a bad smell in the stomach and head, and the patient becomes sick. Therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fumigants:
no one has tried the fumigation of parsley and dried figs before.
The form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated to stop the flow of blood and the bleeding so is this one.
And it resembles a tube, similar to a cane, and one places the head gently in the earth, and the wide end over the fire.
and let there be fumigations over the coals, and the scurvy until it is cured, and then another begins.
Many children are born who have not yet had their foundations perceived; instead, they are wrapped in subtle cloth. So it is necessary in the bath that he perceives this subtlety at its proper place, and does not pierce it with a sharp object, and holds back the tightening so that it does not touch.
then place it on a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply the cure of ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not heal, insert a plug of wool or cloth, and leave it for several days, and when the child is strong enough to move around in rooms, then remove it.
And at no time does this sudden stop of a wound or abscess occur. if it is necessary to cover this sudden stop: if it is cured, as we have said about the pain of the wound.
Fistulas that originate from beneath the foundation are called nodosities, and those that come from above the foundation are larger, or in the space between the two parts, if there is a fistula or multiple fistulas.
and when this node is old, if it opens again, and the moisture causes a white or subtle bow, and these fistules do not persist.
and they are known because of what arises from it or discharge when the patient has discharge, and by chance, one jumps up.
And if the fistules pierce through to the bladder, and through to half of the penis; and reach up to the joint of the thigh, and up to the other part of the knee.
And thus recognize the present fistula in the fundament, and not elsewhere. and it is that you insert your index finger or fundament, and push a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no curvature.
And if there is curvature, if you insert a fine point or a horsehair, as long as you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through curvature or expulsion or pus, as we have said; says that she does not feel any pain; if you hurry with the cure.
And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to the urethra, if it lets go of the urine, and cannot be healed by medicines.
If it is felt just at the joint of the thigh, then there is danger that the vein becomes blocked. if there is no twisting or sudden pain around it, and if it bends at all, then there is no need for sudden medication or dressing.
and for these persistent fistulas, there is no sure cure but toil and the vain efforts of ignorant practitioners.
In those that are neither persistent nor ancient, there is hope for healing by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands.
and holds the legs up to their thighs, with their thighs bent towards their belly; then apply a bandage of yarn, or cloth if there is flexibility, as long as you know where the bandage should go.
If the patient feels pain deep within, it is necessary to insert your index finger, then they will feel that the pain is being pierced.
and if you feel it exposed between your thumb and index finger, where the pain or discomfort is felt, then know that it is present. if it cannot be treated with any effort, then it cannot be healed.
One can nonetheless do everything one can to heal it, but this rarely happens.
and with this aid, it is necessary to apply a gentle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned above. and heat the entire area of the fistula until it removes the source of the problem; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred marks are healed, which resemble the quill of an eye;
and then apply moist bandages made of butter until the charred marks are healed, and subsequently use a healing dressing that is hot and soothing.
If he is thus healthy, that's good.
If this cannot otherwise be healed;
and if it attempts to enter, and does not pierce through the flesh or the foundation, and between your finger and the attempt, place a thick covering of cloth or something similar, and you will see the fistula through the covering where the warmth is. if you remove the cover from the beginning of the fistula and pull it back before attempting to treat it, and then apply heat afterwards, as long as it reaches the tip of the tent. and the tent will be delivered and removed.
Then disfigure those bones that look like a bird's feather, and leave nothing intact.
And if the pain strikes you, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
For fire cautery joins two bones together: that is to say, the burning of these adjusted bones, and the inflammation of blood and the dryness of moisture;
then treat the damp wounds with butter or ground herbs, as long as the bones are bowed, and push the burned bones back into their place.
Then treat the wound with hot, hard, burning coals, and these are dry medicines.
Because once it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
And if a fistula appears all the way to the bottom of the foundation and is removed from the body, if you press on its root or foundation, it hurts.
If you feel the pulse, and it is between the pulse or the throbbing or the pain, and it is ready to pierce, if there is no other way of salvation and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it out completely, or if you can, apply tent and treat it first.
and do not push too hard, so that you do not disturb the structure that holds the foundation, and let the eliminations happen on their own without force. then apply the cure, as we have said;
then apply the cure, as we have said; in case it turns out to be healthy, remove that covering and clean it, then apply pressure until it heals from the root, either with a bandage or another suitable instrument. then remove all foreign bodies in the wound as much as possible; then study to restore the wound, and hold the fistula in check in the area where the foundation is lacking.
then study to restore the wound, and hold the fistula in check in the area where the foundation is lacking. if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
And never are fistulas like this: and it is when you press on the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation through the skin above, then take a needle sharp at the tip according to this form: And push the wire crookedly inside, pushing the tent all along the fistula as far as it will go at the top.
If it is persistent at the edge of the foundation inside, then pull the thread from that hole, so you secure your finger or foundation.
and take the thread from the joint, and bring together both parts, tighten one on the other, and leave it for one or two days.
and do not loosen it, as long as the thread breaks through these three parts between them and moves.
then dress the wound as long as it is sealed and clean.
If you cannot pierce the fistula, no matter how much you try, it is not pierced deeply enough. For it is not appropriate to make the closure too tight, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
It is a form of sharp, spiky tissue from which one makes the fistula if it is very thick and hard, cutting through its parts. and on the other hand, for if one cannot do it, or should not do it, as you see here:
There are two kinds of hemorrhoids: or they are inside the anus, resembling grains of resin, both small and large, and sometimes there is blood, and sometimes many, extending from the anus to the opening, deep into the anus or near its opening.
but those that are too dry have little moisture, and still remain, or a bit of clear water or some blood, and have the colour of fresh flesh.
and the treatment for those who have them deep within the foundation: so instruct the patient to stretch and move about in rooms, as long as the foundation remains firm, until the children are born. if you act quickly, and have a pince, or hold it with your finger, then cut it at the roots.
and if they cannot hold them for their moisture, if they take them in the draping or cotton or a piece of chamoix; and extract them at their roots, then cut them and cover with any hot powders that are suitable for cauterizing; or you cauterize them as is said in the chapter of cautery, and apply other remedies until they are healed;
and if the foundations cannot be removed, then wash the patient with a sharp and strong enema to clean what is in the foundation, so that it can come out easily; Let the patients take care, and if their pain is strong at the root, it is a light cure.
Let the patients take care, and if their pain is strong at the root, it is a light cure. and if you press them with your thumb or pliers, cut them, then heal them as we have said, while they are healthy, and they fear the incision with iron. It is necessary that you administer the stitch according to this manner:
It is necessary that you administer the stitch according to this manner: take a thin thread, twist it into a needle, then pass the thread through from above and pierce the needle from below, and bring both ends of the thread back under the needle, making them wide.
and holds the thread tight, then ties it off, extracts the needle, and does thus with all the others, leaving some to drain off the excess blood.
then places a moist cloth or oil-soaked compress on the affected area and commands the patient to rest.
and leaves it until it heals, and once fallen, applies curative treatments and other remedies until it is healed.
Carefully and thoroughly from herbs or foundations Often there is a drying up of herbs in the intestine, due to constraints of nature, and when the illness is old and no medicine avails. It is necessary that you remove the skin with a scalpel or your finger, preventing it from moistening. then treat it as long as it is sound, as it should be;
and if it cannot be sound, then begin the razor again more strongly than before, as long as it is still moist, and it will be cut. then treat it as long as it is healed.
He trembles. a flea is a small, hairy appearance before the skin, and it goes into the flesh very deeply.
and never does the fire touch it, and he feels as if he is dying from trembling, and it spreads throughout the body, and there are more pains in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a feather from an goose, or a strong feather from a falcon, and place that feather on the trembling, until the red circles cover the trembling entirely. then turn your hand over the entire feather until it covers all around the trembling, and press it firmly, and extract the trembling from its roots.
And if you see, make this of an iron or steel cable according to this form, and be subtle from below and draw from above: I do not understand, for it makes me weak, and I must hold firm.
And if you see, if cauterization pricks, as it is in front or at the beginning of cautery.
Never use silver or gold enemas, or molten iron or brass wire.
and never use these small and large instruments, according to those who are accustomed to them. He who thus administers treatment to children and those who are weak and afflicted, are small.
He who thus administers treatment to children and those who are weak and afflicted, are small. The form of the enema is small and wide at the top, or the abdomen is bound according to this manner:
and he should have a desire or the belly should be tied, as you see, and the feces should be perceived inside.
and he has a hole on one side of the ribcage, and on the other side, one.
and the belly or womb should be filled with medicines from a bladder of a beast or parchment, and perceived around all the small holes, and between each hole there should be a distance of space, then thread through these holes a strong thread made of twisted crisscrossed fiber in X or any other way, and tighten the abdomen as if it were a bowstring. and when the medicine is prepared, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then rinse.
and it takes the form of a soft circle:
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply a warm compress to the head with oil or egg yolk or similar, then wrap it gently. then the healer should massage it with both hands together, until it is completely warm, then remove the compress and ask the patient to lean against the wall, lifting their legs slightly, allowing the medicine to exit as best it can. and if he sleeps soundly through the night, it is greater aid.
And if you use the enema for a stomach disorder and the medicine quickly escapes, then it returns as soon as it is healed.
And if the hemorrhoid is at the foundation or an abscess, then the enema should be as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle enema where the skin is tightened:
We have spoken about the treatment of wounds;
or we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the place where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the use of stone, and sword and knife, or spear or axe or arrow, or similar things;
or according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that breaks through the skin, or the head, or the leg, or the belly, or the liver, and similar parts;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, as the memory of their treatment will come in their chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it's due to a blow from a stone or similar things, and the skin is nonetheless torn and the wound is deep, and you slightly doubt an abscess forming. if it quickly becomes healthier from the cephalic wound, especially if there is little blood from the wound, and on the contrary, if the healing is in the affected part.
and patients should avoid wine and rich meats.
And if he does not want to get better, his flesh will waste away, and he should not drink wine or eat meat.
and apply a poultice to the wound, if it is an abscess, then use cotton moistened only in rose oil or strict wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, then apply to the wound, as long as it has fresh blood and is not moved by air or powder, I will say a little bit later.
and if it burns him, as long as he does not put any bandages, he will be healed.
And if the wound is large, such as the size of a sword or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by tenting, then bring them together with stitching, as I will say about abdominal wounds, from the suture.
If the wound is open, raw, and does not heal but only lasts for a short time, then it must be treated. then treat the wound with medicine and restore hard skin in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat hearty meats, such as beef and cooked wheat, as well as poultry and similar foods.
And if you find putrid flesh, not reaching the bone, and treat it immediately, cutting out all decay and applying a poultice.
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without cut, cannot be stopped by medications, if you wish to cut it, and if you dislocate it, hold it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put this powder which hardens so that the fire moves it.
And the method of the powder is thus: take a portion of the incense dragon's blood, two parts fresh salt, three parts, and mix the powder subtly, apply to the wound, and form it tightly, until it disperses well and joins all its blood.
and then pack it well, and leave it to loosen, if it doesn't swell. because one cannot have medicine as long as it is healthy.
And never should charcoal be used alone if you do not have incense or dragon's blood, but the fire has not moved the wound.
And if the fire has moved the wound, especially if it is deep, unless someone puts this powder on it;
but apply no hot compresses or poultices made of ground oats mixed with water and honey while it is still fresh. then apply other remedies as long as it is healthy.
And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with delicate pincers.
and I will tell you after that about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the collar (or neck).
If a wound occurs on the collarbone and it is simple, with no distinction between it and any other part of the bone, but there is damage to the nerves or arteries in the collarbone.
If it is the nerves, there is no other treatment but to let them heal, and put nothing restrictive, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retract. and do not apply anything sharp to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity extends to the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be prepared, as if it were washed in clear water and mixed with rose oil, and also washed in clear water, and other herbs according to this manner, and moist plasters.
And if the wound is large, cutting it open and binding it with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
and if the wounds are deep and infected and full of pus, then pierce them or deeper still.
and if the artery is cut, and blood flow stops, then disregard it, and apply heat, and cauterize the wound.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the colors, and the breath is preserved, so that the flesh goes, as much as the heart on the edge of the throat, and do not touch the throat but return it according to its natural form; and then the strict fasting, and leave it for no days, and then apply remedies of treatment until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then the latter; and if there are pieces of bone, if you can remove them all, then do so; but if you cannot obtain them, leave it until the wound suppures and heals on its own;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I mentioned. And if there are bones or a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a blow from a spear or a knife, and the wound is very deep, then pay attention to whether any air escapes from the wound; have the patient breathe normally. you then know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not very deep, and the blood flow is fresh, do not apply the powder immediately; do not bind it tightly for the bleeding will return to the body and cause the patient more harm. but I apply an attractive remedy, and bind it twice a day;
and if you have no remedy, place a piece of cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and let the patient lie on the wound for three or four days, or even longer. if no spasm, no shaking or pain in the body occurs; and when you see the bones returning to their proper place, then you know that the wound is healed. Cure the wound with various remedies and others, as long as it is healthy;
and if it cannot heal, dig deeper until you find a fistula;
if the treatment is as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is shallow or deep, on the front or back, then treat it as follows; if it is great, by stitching;
and if it is small, by powder, and if it is tightly pressed into the bone, and has broken parts, then it may clean the wound, and strengthen it if they are defective. and if they are not defective, then leave it to heal, and lighten the extraction.
and for other wounds in other members, the judgment is as we have said.
disruption of the belly
The ruptures in the belly are great, medium, and small;
from the great wound never let any intestinal tissues protrude, or the nerves of the intestines, which causes external infection;
and the stitching is more delicate, and no smaller wound is as bad as a large one, because one does not apply pressure to the intestines when stitching them up, unless they are sewed together tightly from both sides.
because the intestines quickly swell and feel painful if pressure is applied when they are not yet healed, and because it is better to move slightly with smaller wounds, so one must first reset the intestine to its original position before applying pressure like with other wounds.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common stitches are used in the stomach stitch, and the stitch for other wounds of the body, and there are two other specific stitches that are common to other wounds.
Nevertheless, the stomach stitch is more precise, and I will describe each one and explain them.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine protrudes, and it is an easy matter to close, this is according to one of the four manners: for because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to injury.
And when it is cold, warm it up in this way: soak a sponge or soft cloth in hot water alone, or boil water with vinegar, lemon, and spices, and wrap the intestine while it is still swollen.
and never use constricting wines, but rather heat it gently until it is deflated.
And when you see the swelling depart, if you have a moist or hot and bad wound, then it becomes easier for things to enter, a little at a time.
and if it cannot enter, then make a slight cut with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to move the bone, that we must not cut without great need;
and this is the instrument for the fracture:
if it cuts into the couch (or bed) and does not divert, then look at its shape. And when the wound has enlarged and the intestine bursts out, if you can return it to its natural position in its proper place, do so, for that is better.
When the wound is large and located on the lower abdomen, it is necessary to have the patient lie on their back and elevate their legs higher than their head. and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then put the head and heels higher than the affected parts, and also, when there is a rupture in the abdomen, place your attention so that the wounded part is higher than the other.
and thus we must administer what I say to large and deep wounds.
For small wounds, make them as if you were equipped, then take in your hands a gentle medicine that heals all the rupture with its touch, and close the lips.
and this is the common method of stitching: you pierce a needle or several, according to the amount of space in the wound, then leave two spaces at the top of the wound, and insert a needle with strong thread into it. and pierce both joints of the skin with the two points of the scalpel, which is to go through the skin from inside, as long as you make it pierce from this part, and bring together the two points of the scalpel in three parts.
then stretch a double thread around the needle from both parts, then bring together the two joints of the wound properly, and then leave two spaces, and insert another needle.
then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to your need for needles, until all the wound is constrained.
and let the needles be of medium thickness, between subtle and thick, for the subtle needles take hold of all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter properly. because they need to be medium;
and do not push the needles too far through the flesh and skin, that they do not puncture and open the wound before the suture.
and then remove the needles, so that they do not disturb the patient when sleeping, and put bands or cloth over the wounds to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is sutured.
and this stitching method with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles.
The second stitching is common and consists of assembling the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of cloth together with a needle using a strong, medium thread.
and when you have stitched these four pieces together, return the needle to the beginning point where you started, in the manner one sews clothes.
and leave a space between each stitch the thickness of a minor thread.
This suture opens the wound, and I sewed a wound that had been cut by a knife on the stomach, which was more than one palm wide, and it extended from the intestines another two palms, and the wound was in the stomach.
I returned the intestine to its place after it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed completely within fifteen days, and he was cured.
And they marveled that he was alive, and it was a miracle.
and I did not cure him with any treatment, for I was in a place where none could be found, neither any remedies. and apply a warm compress to the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it is healed.
Now I shall tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
take the needle, and the thread from the healthier part, just up to this one inside;
when it has pierced the center precisely, if you want to close or stitch or wherever you have pulled out the needle, and then pierce from the other side inside up to this one outside.
and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as a tailor sews the fur, and once you have satisfied one side, you take up the other until the stitch is completely finished.
The second way of stitching, which Galen rightly calls "the natural join," is like what others do who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the principal satisfactions to the other principal part in this manner.
stitch a needle or a thread of wonder nearby, and make the single prong pierce only through one side, leaving both satisfactions' threads. then turn the needle and make it pierce from the weaker part until it reaches the inside, just as much as is necessary.
then pierce both parts from the weaker side until it reaches the inside, in two other places where there is a miracle on the other side.
and this is the most effective method of stitching and the most common one.
These words should be heeded, and no one testifies otherwise; the belly must be sewn with needle and thread.
and one must push a needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, it is the most difficult to sew compared to other openings in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you open a fresh wound and all its blood, so that the flesh has moved, it is necessary to close the intestines and stitch it.
then apply the burning powder, and the fire will move it, but if you place any dressing on it while the wound is still open; and take the thread, and make it secure, and close the wound; then treat the wound as you would any other, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicine, then apply, as soon as it begins to move again, a clean cloth, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Because you do not need other medicines for more complex conditions when the wounds are simple.
and if you doubt that the wound does not extend to the principal members, it is necessary to apply a light bandage in hot oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected area, and under the armpits.
and if it causes pain or cramping in the bowels, and this often happens, then give them enemas of red wine, especially if the inflammation reaches the intestines.
and he pierces it from within, and knows that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestinal organ, called "jeun" (fasting), cannot heal when it is inflamed, and this is due to the weakness of the veins, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the nearness of its nature to the nerves.
And if the wound gushes with blood, it should be pressed back as soon as possible, just like the intestine, while it is still fresh.
and if it is old and has turned black, it is necessary to keep the dark part still, so that no more blood comes out, because there are veins and arteries there.
then cut off what is between the bones, and hang both feet down from the opposite side of the wound until it opens up to facilitate the extraction when the blood lets go.
from the rupture of the bowels
When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in no man, for I have seen a nobleman wounded in his belly by a spear;
and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach, which festered and became a fistula, from which emerged excretion and flatulence.
I applied the treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to be subtle until he was healthy, and his limbs were healed.
And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient would not have pain in his stomach; and there is no harm, but it requires better dispositions, diets, and beverages;
and they should not attempt any experiments when there is a small wound in the intestine, but rather tie it in this manner: take a large piece of cloth, then gather the edges of the wound, and when the cloth has opened its mouth, place it between the two lips so that it pulls the mouth open.
and then cut off the head of the cloth, and this should hold so that it cannot be released, then place another piece of cloth in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely sealed. and cut the wound.
If the pain is sharp in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a way:
take the end of this intestine thread, which is well spun, and then tie it to the end of this fine linen thread twisted, then wind the thread on the needle, and sew the intestine, and rearrange it in the rupture;
and this method of stitching with stitches is no exception but according to the path of destiny and hope.
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it affects one of the vital organs, there is no treatment effective unless it be extremely subtle.
or whether it is a fistula, wherever it may be. You know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is generally called a "fistula," especially when it is covered with hair and deeply seated.
And a fistula appears according to the truth of its nature, hard and white, where there is no pain, and it is also smooth like the feathers of a bird.
and it never becomes clear or open, sometimes thick and other times thin. never too cold, and sometimes too hot;
and I have spoken of the division of wounds; that every wound which is not clean, and there is no fever, it is only out of one of the nine causes: that is to say, from the smallness of blood or pus; or because of its evil nature; or because there is a hard fever inside, and on the lips, which does not allow any healing; you have too much bowel wind; your bowels are overfull, and the matter is of bad quality; this medicine is not good for treatment; because this corruption is a way of pestilence; because the sluggishness of the region causes delayed digestion, delays health, and is innately bloated; You have veins or bones:
and I have already described all these causes, signs, and medicinal treatments in the relevant sections.
It is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
Know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that affect large veins, arteries, and nerves, or the liver, intestines, bladder, any of the ribs, or the spine in the back, or any joint in the hands or feet; and if it occurs at a part that belongs to the main member, and has similar joints.
And all the fistulas of this nature are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but hard work and ignorance.
and if there is no fistula that does not come to the place I mentioned, and you have confidence in the cure and understand it, then take a piece of iron or steel, if the fistula is directly in line with it.
and if the fistula is twisted, try to insert a thin piece of cloth or a small tool with flexibility, as the plug will bend and move around the curvature.
and if it has open wounds and you cannot close them tightly with bandages, then wash it through one of the openings, for moisture flows from one opening to another and cleanses it.
then squeeze it firmly in your power, knowing if there are bones or nerves, and feel it completely, and ask the patient with pain where they feel it and the location.
and when you truly know the location, and it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any of the places I told you, then cut according to what I said, and remove the inflammation and the corrupt flesh that is inside.
and then the cure as long as it is clean, and if the fistula is well dug out in the right place, it is necessary that you fill it completely, as much as possible, and then apply moist bandages with a medicinal ague, and keep them on the top of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the excess that is left at the bottom.
and then apply hot compresses with healthy garlic, as long as it is clean;
and if it is not clean with that method, as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
If a vein or nerve does not affect your principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, remove it as soon as the corruption is gone, then treat the wounds with care until they are healed.
and if it is not healed, and the bone remains bowed as before, know that you are not allowed to proceed further.
if it becomes exposed and you want to go deeper, removing all the corruption, then restore the joint.
and if he is thus healed, it is good. If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too great, and you cannot repair it. if there is no other force than to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupt bone that you can pull out with tweezers, and if it is extracted with a suitable tool, and if there are many bones, then pull them all out, leaving none behind.
and if moisture makes it contrary, there is no error or fear, if hot and humid and cold, and release the bones.
And if you cannot remove them for an hour, then place something purifying over the wound, and let it stay until the bones are rotten around them, and then they will become lighter on the bones.
and if it is a large bone, like the leg or thigh, then remove as much of the corruption as possible until all the blackness is gone from the bone, and then close the wound.
and if there is a large amount of decay within, it extends to close to the bone; if it is necessary, cover it gently and protect it until the decay is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurs in a person's leg, so that you may take an example from it and receive aid in your work.
It was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to something within the body, causing materials to gather at the leg, and he suffered from a large abscess that would not open.
but the excess because of their foolishness increased so much over the abscesses that they corrupted many matters, and became fistulas, and there were many ruptures throughout the body, causing bowing and moisture within.
and many more cases I witnessed over two years, and there was no wise man in the art of healing, until I was called to it, and saw his leg and the remedies by which he was cured, and what corrupted through the ruptures within the body. and the skin of the young people became red, and had the color of a citron.
I set up a tent in one of these gaps, and then I examined all the gaps, and I found that some came together against each other in every part of the leg.
I quickly prepared a tool, and chiselled into one of the gaps until I discovered a portion of the bone, which I found corrupted and pierced, and the corruption reached down to the bone itself.
I examined what I had discovered as the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption, except for the one I had found.
and I began to heal the wound with potent medications for a long time, but it would not close.
and then I began to recognize and discover the bone as it was before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and healed it, and then I secured it, and focused on fusing the joint. but I could not until I had completely healed the bone, and gently pulled it to its original place, then treated it with medications. and it healed soundly and securely, and never wanted to repeat the operation again, except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had from him. For in the evacuation of blood, it often becomes completely healed, and a hard callus forms in its place, and is of good disposition and causes no harm or pain at all, neither going away nor coming back.
And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be handled in this way: take hold of the ligaments, and strain the end of the bone that opens, and command anyone to extend it upwards; and tie another, thicker thread to the first one, and attach it to the bone that is now detached, and pull the bone upwards, until you remove the broken piece, and expose the bone at its natural position.
and place I a piece of wood between the bone to keep the corrupted flesh from opening.
and it is necessary to examine carefully as one can see and feel the corruption, and sometimes another way.
And if the bone is corrupted and will not open, and the corruption is in one place or throughout, then expose the flesh entirely.
then place wood between it and then gently open from one side to the other of the corruption, leaving the bandage tight around the corruption as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, remove the corrupted joint, and the bone it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, and there is no other way to remove it;
and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle, and it is very strong, but nevertheless you must inquire into this corruption how it affects you. and purify it in every way that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve contradict you;
and knows that the saw and the threads to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. and for this reason, it is necessary to have the right tool for each task.
and knows that the work will show you the tool you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of illness. if you think of the instrument you need according to what is necessary.
The joint dislocates either due to pressure from within or due to external force;
and when you have treated that corruption with medicinal remedies, and they are ineffective, it is necessary to immobilize that member until the corruption disappears, so that the patient may be saved from death or from the greater evil of permanent damage to the limb.
and the signs of this are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackening, the corruption spreads from member to member, affecting the entire body.
If you hastily cover it, and if it is due to the penetration of some venomous creatures, such as a sea scorpion, a snake, or similar, and the wound is deep in the head, if you do not allow enough time for it to heal, do not let it come near your hand.
And if it comes near the hand, if you dislocate the joint, so that the wound does not reach the arm.
and if it reaches the arm, if the dislocation is at the shoulder.
and if it passes through the knife, it is death, and there is no cure stronger than the quantity of its virtue.
and thus do the same when rust or stone comes into contact with it. if it comes in the first joint, then cut after the other joint.
and if it comes from rust, cut off all of it. and if it ascends the leg, cut at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other cause but to bring the patient to death.
and the method of binding or wrapping the member: if you fasten it above and below, extend one minister from below upwards and another from above downwards, and you loosen the band that is between the two liens with a broad spatula, until the bone is exposed.
then bind or wrap it, and place each side with a cloth, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy tissue, and cause further injury and abscess to the patient.
And if the bleeding occurs when you open, cauterize the wound harshly, or place any restrictive powders upon it;
then return to the treatment until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a strong ligature, and heal it as long as it remains healthy;
and I will tell you if it returns to the same place as before;
it will have a blackness that seems burnt from fire, and this decay begins first in its two big toes, spreading throughout the entire foot;
and when the bone feels the heat, it covers itself with a protective covering, and becomes healthy.
and after a long time, the corrosion or pain from the hand returns, and it comes to me, and I place things that repel upon the purification of the body, but the corrosion cannot cease.
and it seemed to me that I should cover the hand, but I did not want to hope for repelling the matter. and I also doubted that if he cut off his hand, he would not die, as the strength of the man was weak.
and he becomes completely desperate, returns to his land, covers his hand, and is healed.
and I have no other objection than that which is done otherwise, if it is necessary.
No abscess forms in the fat tissue, and it lingers so long that it causes great gathering of bowels. and then it bursts and pierces, causing the bowels to rupture and remaining in the body as if they were a vessel. and the skin that is above is as delicate as fine cloth, and it does not adhere to the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called "healthy," and is not called "fistula.
but if it is so long that it extends to the bone in a curved shape, it is called "fistula.
and the skin is such that you must strip off all the skin around it, especially when it is delicate, just like a fine cloth. and do not hesitate because of its putrefaction.
And if you believe that the flesh hesitates, and the corruption is not entirely removed, and the flesh is dry and hard, then treat it with a warm bath.
examine if the breasts are swollen and the bowels emit a foul odor, then give them a cleansing with Egyptian medicine prepared as follows: take equal amounts of ash, oil, and litharge, and heat them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey.
and then take according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and enemas the breast, and extracts the gap. leave the medicine on for two hours, then extract it while squeezing.
do this several times, until the breast is cleansed and the pus is extracted.
and never use enemas with water and ashes when this medicine is not present, and take ashes from the vine trunk, pour water over them, then strain it, and use it for enemas, as long as you know that the breast is well cleansed.
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water from ashes can help, if he is enemaed with water and honey, or has a little bit of litharge ground in it. or you should enema him with honey and sweet wine, for honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine helps to aerate the health.
and when you have done this, and you are sure that the sins are well cleansed, then he should be enemaed with what causes a certain plant to grow in him, and you should press it carefully, and apply it with rose oil and wine.
you should cleanse it with certain medications and remedies, whose properties I have discussed in treating wounds.
and if the opening of the wound is too small, and the canal of the clister cannot enter, you should widen it slightly with a hot iron and apply a poultice of Egyptian or basilicon medicine until it is widened.
and if the wound is too wide, so much so that it causes great suffering to the patient or prevents the clister from entering, and if the opening curves downward or upward, then the bandage should be applied higher or lower accordingly.
and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves to its lowest position, for when the bowel is completely relaxed, it does not allow anything to enter, and if you cannot cover the wound as you see appropriate, arrange it thusly: so that the bowel moves slightly downwards, and does not leave any part of the bowel behind.
so that the bowel moves slightly downwards, and does not leave any part of the bowel behind. and take consolidating medicines to apply to the wound, and lay them on the linen cloth that covers all the wound. then take a smaller force near the hole in the chest where it is wider, and apply gentle dressing on another cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound hole in the chest to ease pressure, and do not remove the large outer cloth for several days.
and the one who is over the chest wound often removes it to ease pressure, and knows what comes from the wound, whether it's blood or pus or something else, or digestion, or undigestion.
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when the medicine has been applied in this way and you see the nature that springs up at the wound, then know that the healing has begun, and bring it closer to health.
and then undress the wound in the morning or on the third day, and when you dress the wound, change to another bandage, and renew the dressing.
And if subtle poisons manifest after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
For there are people who late at night put their wounds to bed, and others who do the opposite.
and if he has an indigestion or a sharp pain in his side after many days, knowing that it will not go away.
and if he cannot bring his side to heal, and it is distant, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue as a final treatment, for there is much vitriol within it, and this is the last medicine.
take the final treatment, and apply it with rose oil, and mix it with old wine of equal substance;
then confirm it and use it;
and this same mixture, when cooled and thickened, without the presence of garlic, you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it over honey while it is still hot.
and then I wrap it in cloth and place it over the breast, and never administer without first mixing with long roots of licorice, which is also like flour from oats and chamomile. and use of simples or compounds: Break them, and make a powder, and add the honey I mentioned, and use it.
and if the cure is lengthy, and this cure does not heal it, then know that the corruption has taken hold, and it presses on the bone, or makes the joints hard, or damages the limbs. if the cure for the fistula, as we have mentioned above.
A gangrene is an abscess that forms under a nail of the hand or foot, or occasionally in other areas.
and when it is neglected and left unattended, an abscess forms, and it oozes and flows below until the root of the nail runs out, or perhaps it oozes everywhere.
and it brings corrosion up to the bone, causing intense foul-smelling pain, and the wound becomes broad and has a purple color.
If, as we have mentioned in the previous discussion, you treat it but the treatment is ineffective, then you must remove any excess debris from under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is uninjured.
and if the nail quickly turns black and begins to prickle, then you must immediately place a stick under the nail that is pricking, lifting it up, and gently squeezing it out, applying burning and corrosive medications on top to remove everything. then treat the wounds as long as they are clean.
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it off and remove it, for as long as the bone is corrupt, it cannot heal.
and if you see both bones corrupted, cut them as described above, and treat them as long as they are clean.
and if it is twisted and contorted, and it causes great pain, then you must treat it first.
then cut the nail with a sharp tool diagonally from above, and be sure that the cut does not reach the skin underneath the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, put something cold on it to soothe the pain.
He who is born without hands, or has them extremely fleshy, and perhaps has part of his bones missing, and never any fingers, and none are born in the root of the jointin such cases, birth must take place elsewhere.
He who is born with no pain should not be silent, and he who is born with pain in the joints may remain silent.
the incision on the fleshy part should be light, in this way: Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if it keeps you covered.
For he who is born with or develops a deformity, it is necessary that you first hold the joint firmly up to the bone, then dislocate the bone to a suitable position, and finally treat it as long as it remains healthy.
The deformities that come at will affect the entire body, either from birth, or from wound healing, or from a burn by fire, or similar conditions.
If it is necessary to cover the closed one, then it must be repaired according to its natural forms; then place between two moistened cloths or sheets soaked in rose oil, so that they do not adhere; You should insert between two delicate pieces of cloth, as long as the wound is sealed properly.
If dislocation occurs at any of its joints with the palm, handle that wound as appropriate.
Their veins are thickly enveloped, filled with melancholy excesses that affect several parts of the body.
And more often occurs in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry things, than with others.
It is necessary for you to administer purging of the bowels, and then clean the wound in the temple.
The treatment for this is according to two manners: one is with cautery, and draw out the black blood. and another way is that you open the vein and draw it out completely.
The procedure is as follows: first, raise the affected leg with hot water, until the pain is subtle, then stretch the sick leg from above the knee to the ankle.
Then open the vein in the arm, or in the leg, or in the thigh, with a wide cut, then carefully and slowly extract the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient can endure.
and then bind it, and command the patient to eat foods that produce dark, black urine.
and repeat the evacuation and washing when the veins are filled, causing harm to the patient.
The treatment of it is according to this manner: Lift the leg of the ailing patient, if there is any hair, then submerge it in water, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell.
and if you have no bath, heat it over the fire, and then apply it to the vein from the top of the thigh or at the ankle, wherever it is most painful.
then open the skin at the point of the pain, and scratch the vein from each side until it appears raw when touched.
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems as if a white string.
then turn the right of the bone, as long as it is raised from the skin, and then bend it gently to the oncine, then cut in another place on the opposite side, above and below.
then scrape the skin over the vein until it opens, then gently raise the edge, as you did before, and bend it to another oncine, as you did first.
then take another size, or as many as you need, then the light one, and cut it with the right sharp tool, then treat and lift until the second size is reached.
then extract it bit by bit, until it comes out completely, then cut it.
and if you cannot pull and lift it, insert a needle through the entire thread twice as thick, tie it and pull, press from one side to another until it comes out. and ensure it does not tear, for if it tears, it cannot be pulled or raised, causing harm to the patient.
and once you have extracted it, place warm, moist wool and rose oil on the wound bed. and dress it until it is healed.
And if the vision is contracted, twisted, and rolled together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it with care but do not tear it. and take it as we have said before.
The way to do it is to make the eye so sharp, and not cut, unless it opens the vein.
and it is very sharp, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but since it is thick, as we have said, and this is its form:
This vein is located in the legs, in hot regions where no herbs or trees grow, and on land where there is no moisture.
and perhaps it occurs in another part, namely the legs, and this happens due to rotting that comes from beneath the skin, as it creeps within the body winding and turning, entwining between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is that there is a very great swelling in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude strongly, as if it were a root of a plant.
When the joint opens, it is necessary that you wrap around with a piece of cloth from one and a half to two fingers thick, and then tie it tight, leaving the cloth on the leg, and every time there is no opening at the wound, if it constricts around the cloth, and the new bandage.
and if it is too long, cut a part of it and wrap the remaining part, without covering its root until it is completely healed. Because if you touch it, it returns to its original state, causing abscesses and corruption in that place, leading to great illness.
For which reason, it is necessary to treat it gently and little by little until the pain disappears entirely from the body.
and it is never this vein when it is treated with long, or very strong, hands; and a great honor came to me, from whom it reached ten palms in length, and if you touch it, it sinks or opens up, and penetrates to the bottom, so that everything comes out.
and empty the matter within, and administer to the place drugs that cause putrefaction for no more than a day, then treat it as with abscesses.
And never touch this vein with raw hands, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or the toe, and much cracking and popping occurs;
treat it as we have said above.
vers that are born between leather and bone. This disease is called the "bull disease" in our land because it often affects bulls, and it is a small worm that appears between the hide and flesh, spreading throughout the body upwards and downwards, and it feels very hot from one limb to another, until it breaks through the hide where it was. It then causes a powerful discharge.
and it is caused by putrefaction of certain humours, as they gather and wind around the intestines, worms, slugs, and ascars in the stomach.
and doubt arises about the nature of his illness, for as it spreads through the body, it ascends to the head, and reaches the brain, perhaps returning and damaging the brain. and this happens many times.
When you see it healing and draining, it cannot be done unless it has passed.
If it is necessary, then you must lie the limb above and below with a strong binding tightly, then cut and pull it out, and turn it inside out in the wound, and do not remove it, if you cauterize it with fire until it heals.
and the greatest harm it does is when it bleeds, as we have said.
and if you see it coming close to the wound, quickly pull the hair forming a curl from below, then cut and pull it out.
and it is necessary for the patient to purify the body with solvent medicines for harmful humours, and to abstain from foods that cause putrefaction.
The pain that comes from flatulence. This disease is called "vakerire" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in no particular member, but can move from one member to another.
and I have seen what I have told you. I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I noticed a small swelling in the vein of the breast.
and then I noticed, the sight rose up in the shoulder just as a worm, more so than anything else, as bright as silver when it cuts into another.
the pain departed from that place and fixed itself in the shoulder, and then after a short while, it spread throughout the body, until it reached the other breast.
then it told me that it twisted around the body again, just as I saw it.
I marvelled much at how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a way. Nevertheless, I wanted to know why the pain moved from one place to another, but I could not understand it, as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, and the veins exposed, and because of this constraint of breath.
and did not seem consistent to those who are delighted, with moist skin and veins concealed.
And when you see this illness heal and the patient feels the pain, if it opens as we have said, then press from above and below firmly, and continue until this constrained breath at the joint leaves. and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it on your own, then treat it with those who expel winds as if they were bad pills, or pills of serapeum, or similar ones.
Arrows vary, according to their appearance and the part of the body they pierce.
Their diversity is such that there are those with great points, and small ones, and curved, and solid; and some with two edges, and others with tongues, and those with pieces.
and those that break in any limb break in two ways: or it breaks in the principal limb, such as the head, body, liver, lung, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it breaks in any part of these members, then you will notice the sign of death, which I will tell you below. you must be careful with the extraction of this arrow, for death comes in many forms afterward. and if this bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not completely extracted, pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of a weak mind when the arrow breaks and pierces the bone, and the swelling appears on the head, is when there is loss of vision, darkness, watering, redness, inflammation, redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion in understanding, and vomiting of bile. and perhaps without feeling in the nostrils or ears; and by chance loses the word and voice; and from the moist wound there springs a white fluid resembling pus, and also as blood from a wound;
and if this sign appears, if you hold to the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not stuck together.
The sign of the arrow when it breaks or withdraws is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in hard, non-empty substance. and by chance, the patient's sitting may become mute like the pulse, and there is sudden black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. so he knows with certainty that death is descending.
And the sign of an arrow wound that never improves is that foam without pain flows from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's skin turns pale, and they breathe heavily and stop moving.
And if the arrow comes out in the cover of night, it leaves small marks. and it causes great pain and great sorrow, and sighing. and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow pierces the stomach, perhaps something from the undigested meat may fall out.
And if the arrow pierces the abdomen, and there is no sign of recovery through the intestines, then there is little hope for treatment or in removing the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder, the urination jumps and comes out, and the patient feels intense pain. you know that the wound is mortal.
The other limbsas they feel and are affected by pain and swelling in the throat, shoulder, and back; as well as in the joints and legsare safe according to various arrangements. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, for this reason, you should do the same.
It happened to a man that an arrow fell or pierced through the root of his nose: I tried it, and I pulled from the other side through the fat of the ear, and it became well without pain.
And take a sharp arrow, that has fallen into the grease of oil on paper, and the arrow is removed, so that only the tip reaches the wood, and it was an arrow large as a bowstring, all blue without ears.
it became healthy, and no ill accidents came upon it.
And take an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
I loosened the beard, and I pulled gently as I took it, and the Christian became healthy.
And pull out an arrow from the body, which had pierced its belly, and thought that he was dying.
and then, after thirty days, if his condition does not improve; I cut the arrow, made an incision, and pulled it out, without any bad outcome.
And if you see a person with an arrow pierced through their back or chest, and the wound is deep;
and hold the arrow inside it, and do not change its natural positions, nor find harm in any of its natural works.
And look at another man, who has an arrow in his face, and the wound is deep. and thus he suffers greatly without pain.
and many others like him.
And remove an arrow from the body of a prince, who had it stuck in his neck, and was slightly inclined to the right side. and this arrow was entirely withdrawn.
I was called to treat it after it had been fallen for three days. I found the wound very deep.
I approached it with great subtlety, and felt nothing. and it felt sharp and painful behind his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow I applied a soothing poultice to the place, because the swelling did not go down. and I saw the arrow's shaft.
and I saw the arrow's shaft. I applied the heat to the wound for a long time, soothing the patient, so that he felt the arrow inside his flesh all day.
and it came out. I applied a strong corrosive medicine to the wound for a long time until it opened, and I tested it, feeling the point of the arrow that was stuck in the flesh.
then adjust the opening of the wound with that medicinal oil until the head of the arrow becomes visibly visible.
and it took more than three months for the wound to heal, and then it became so inflamed that I had to use pincers, pulling from both sides, but it wouldn't come out.
then I did not cease to try and invent new tools until I found a set of well-made pincers, according to the shape that will be described at the end of this chapter, while I worked on it, and kept opening and closing the wound.
And the most skilled judges believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I then restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was entirely cured.
Or, I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you place your care on what I do not say, for the books cannot encompass everything.
but the most skilled surgeons consider even the smallest thing and what is present and lackingcorrectly assessing new works and nine instrumentswhen dealing with strange things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows do not leave the members where they are embedded, but according to two manners: either through the place where they enter, or from another side;
and the one that comes out from the other side where it enters, is an arrow entering into the flesh, and will never come out again.
And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh around it decays and becomes easy to remove;
and also if it is stuck in the bone, it cannot come out, if it is left like that for no days, and moves each day.
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, it pierces around everywhere in a subtle way, until the swelling around the joint is enlarged, and then pull it.
And if the arrow is withdrawn into the limb deeply and one cannot see it, then apply all efforts to extract it. and if you feel it, use any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot open the wound due to its tightness or the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein left, then close it as long as the wound remains large.
and try to extract the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it, remove the charred part from both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow until you can draw it out.
and skillfully, without breaking the arrow, draw it out more forcefully.
And if you cannot at once, pull it until the joint around it becomes loose, then treat it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the symptoms of bloodletting work against you, then administer as we have said about treatment in its chapter;
and guard yourself from incision near nerves and veins, and in any way you can extract the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
and place the patient according to the condition he was in when the arrow entered, for it is the greatest aid, and if you cannot, then follow what the signs show.
The arrow that comes from another direction, where it opens anything within, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it apparently:
then cut around it, as much as the pincers can grasp, and then extract it: if it jumps now.
And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, widening the bone, then pull it out.
and if it cannot be extracted, leave it for now and then try to extract it again until it comes out.
and if the arrowhead is stuck in the flesh, it presses against the entire flesh.
and if the arrowhead is removed, you must apply pressure gently, as if you administer a sharp instrument, so that the tip of the arrow enters the wound of the instrument.
and then press firmly, and if the arrow is embedded, insert the instrument with a pointed end to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you clear all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow comes out in the stomach or bladder or side, and it is close, you may cover over it, if it doesn't hurt.
and guard yourself from sealing the vein and nerve, then extract it, and then sew the wound, it is a skill. and treat it as long as it is healthy.
The shape of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles an eagle's beak, and here is its form:
And there are many ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape [of the arrowhead] pointing downward is like the feather of a bird, to drive to the tip of the arrow, as this is the shape:
There are 31 veins from which one gains health, of which there are 16 main ones, that is to say: II beat the muscles that are after the ears, which are called the "soft" ones. and the second arteries that are in the temples, appearing clearly; and the veins that are in the joints of the limbs, called "aspirations"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is on the back of the head; and the two glands that are in the collar. and the two veins that are on the upper lip of the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich. and the two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins that one commonly sees are 'V' in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, which is located on the left side of the body, and common people call it "vein of the head. and the joint is called "fast", and it is composed of the head and base, and the common people call it "vein of the body". and the base is located on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is below the ribcage, and it is the one that heals, opening clearly on the pulsation.
And the saving vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it rains (i.e., swells).
and in the leg and where the foot are three veins: one is so placed beneath the ribcage on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nesse" is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg, there are three veins beneath these.
The healing of veins located behind the ears is beneficial for old catarrh and migraine.
and the qualities of the healing, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the patient's head and rub the affected area with a rough cloth; then tie the patient's collar tightly, until both veins behind the ears become visible and hang down from the head. take them in your hand, and where you feel the pulse below your thumb, press gently;
then take the lancet, and cut through the vein just below the bone, then gently your hand along all the vein upstream, and open and close it well two or three times, and let out the blood until you see.
then strain and hold it, as long as it is healthy;
and I have already spoken of incision and cauterization in the first book.
The health of the two arteries in the temples is like an old and severe migraine, and the eye accustomed to tears at the corner.
and the quality of a good healer is such as I say: and it is that the patient tightens his collar, as long as both veins are open wide; and feels the coldness beneath both hands, and then presses with a signet.
then gently apply pressure to the vein at the top of your right index finger, insert the lancet beneath, and draw out the blood, first from the vein above, then the vein below, just as you did with the other two veins, and allow the blood to flow according to your need.
then free the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton. and then form a ligature, and leave it until it is healed.
and we have spoken there of their treatment and extraction, as the beginning of this book.
The healing of the vein on the forehead is just as important as the healing of the head in cases of old facial diseases, migraines, and redness.
and its quality is such that the patient tightens his collar, twisting it until the vein opens. then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this form:
and place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, allowing blood to escape according to the amount you see. then gently release the patient's collar, and tie the vein tightly until it is healed and free from any broad opening of a flame.
Nevertheless, one must not let the flames be too fierce. and do not let the healthy one go astray, for the bone is hard, and perhaps it will break the flames when they are subtle.
The healthy of the two veins that are in the arms should be aided with these, and at the wound, and at the itch, and at the redness, and at the swelling in the eye, and the diseases of the face.
and the quality of their health is such that the patient squeezes his neck without twisting any ligament, as before.
then the healthy one, and make the wound heal, slightly longer than the flame, but not too wide, for there is no need. and if the flame is subtle, it may break.
then make the blood flow, as much as needed, and then bind it with cloth, securing it well.
The wound of the vein near the nose is very valuable for colds and sudden illnesses, and facial diseases such as migraines and redness that appear on the face, especially when they are old.
and the quality of the health is such that the patient squeezes their throat, then pulls their nose to your left hand, and takes the fine, long flame and inserts it between the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein will not open well enough, and the blood will begin to flow.
and do not remove it too quickly, and let the blood flow as needed, then bind it for a night, for it is often restored quickly.
The holy water of the two eyes helps in the narrowing of the eyelid, and at the onset of illness, and with many diseases, and inflammation, and corrosion, and herpes, and pimples.
and the quality of the water is such that the patient draws their collar close to each other, as we have said.
and if the master is on top of the patient's head, and the patient sits on a chair, then wash the vein with long water, then treat the blood with temper, or as much as necessary.
then repeat the process on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and gradually tighten the veins to prevent strangulation of the patient. and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
from the healing of the veins The healing of the veins in the lips above helps to open the mouth, and aids in the cure of gum corruption, lip cracks, and pain and swelling around it.
And the quality of healing is such that the patient should sit before you, and tighten his collar as I have said. then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right side of the mouth and the other on the left, and you can recognize them by their black color and the small, black lines around them.
Handle them both then, and if you do not know and are in doubt, take the larger one from each part, and make also two incisions, one above and one below, for it is the same method.
From the cleansing of the tongue The treatment of the veins below the tongue is of great help after treating the neck, and it is for the tightness of the throat, and for eye diseases, and for mouth ailments.
and the quality of healing is such that the patient should bite between your hands facing the sun, and relax the tongue, and look below each side for a dark vein.
Then make both healthy, but do not cut too deeply, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins through which blood flows, commonly healed, are healed in two ways:
you cut through all the inflamed tissue with a wide or thin knife, as you would make incisions, and it is called "aneisil". and they are wide and thin according to the thickness and narrowness of the veins. It takes on the form of a bright flame if it is very renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
And it is necessary to open the clear, broad veins that contain much blood and are filled with pus. and this is the form of olive oil flame:
and it is more delicately pointed, and is for healing the delicate veins where there is subtle citron-colored blood.
The vein from the basilic, which is one of these veins, is very helpful for diseases that are beneath the throat, and the collarbone, and the chest, and the abdomen.
and the healer must carefully clean the vein and wash it with the artery below. And if it affects an artery, and blood flow is disrupted, as I have said, it needs to be stopped. and the flame should not be aggressive, but cut it as gently as possible.
And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and choose another one. or you should not touch any part of it, but heal the vein in place, between the arm and the shoulder. she opens clearly; and apply the flame as we have said.
And if you recognize the place of the wound, it is necessary that you extract the arm, touching the place until you feel the pulse. then mark the place with a sign, then bind the arm, and apply the flame gently. and beware that you do not injure the artery when you see the bone enter, for it is the artery. then avoid it.
And if you see it bulging at the top as well as the urine of a child, and its skin is red and delicate, know that it is an artery. then hurry, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the skin remains intact, as it often does. He lies with his arm outstretched, allowing it to remain thus, and does not move the patient.
and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the wound is not healed, it will decay, and there are no remedies at hand, especially if the artery opens up, as with a retraiment's chief. and heal the wound.
And take a piece of fig bark, cut it, and take one half of it and bind it firmly to the other side.
if it is not attached, that is good. if it is not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that prevent blood clotting.
the clotting is not overly grasped in various arrangements due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The surgeon of the vein should cut it away if it helps to drain blood from the top and inside of it, because it is composed of both basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
and the surgeon should wash for the nerve that lies beneath, and if he does not cut it through completely, and it cuts into the nerve, then it swells and inflicts great pain, and in some cases cannot heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any place due to its subtlety, then you must use a more precise instrument. and avoid using your strength.
And if there is a vein between the two bones, make it open wide.
The treatment for headache involves drawing blood from the head, which helps and eases the pain.
and it is necessary for the healer to prick with olive oil or myrrh fire, because this is the safest of all veins, as it does not disturb any nerve or artery. However, it is necessary to seek the lightest vein, and do not be concerned if it hurts the first time, and repeat the process. and sometimes the eyes swell up in certain people, without any reason, but it causes no pain.
The quality of the wound healing is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about healing is that it is not only a means to restore health but also a way to prevent future illnesses.
and healing should be done through one of the three veins: that is to say, the cephalic vein, the femoral vein, and the basilic vein; and one must heal in the beginning of prayers at dawn, and in the afternoon and in winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears.
and one must heal the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the day.
The healer who is entrusted with illnesses has no fixed time, but whenever it is necessary, day or night, in all seasons and at all times.
and it is not advisable to heal children until they are twelve years old, nor women who have given birth for less than four months up to seven months. One should not consider the old people who have passed sixty years as healed.
And when anyone wishes to become healthy, in any way, it is necessary that he cleanses the bowels with a light enema if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out excess waste harmful to the principal members.
One cannot become healthy who is overly accustomed to eating meats, nor those who are greedy, as long as it persists.
and purifies the patient after colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent defecation, much sexual activity, hard labor, watching, fasting, and this due to a weakness of either the weapon or the body.
then gently draw out the humours, if they are thick, through food and drinks and medicines, if you have such a means.
then enter the bath, if nothing prevents you, to draw out the blood gently, and cleanse the vein from within, as we have said.
and guard yourself from work, and pain, and lust, and similar things that day.
and be calm and joyful, and make sure the wound is healthier than that of anyone else. Rub the arm twice or three times, then gently pull the bandage from above, for if it is too tight or loose, it will not heal properly.
and then rub the limb with both hands until the veins swell and you feel them.
then moisten the wound with a drop of old oil, then place your left-hand finger on the vein below the limb where you want to heal, ensuring the vein does not burst or get injured.
For there are veins that flow like strings when healing, and if they are filled with pus, when you apply the fire, it retracts from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and so one remains in this state. and if it opens a vein, if the wound is too tight, then it is necessary that the healers be aware of these things.
And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, it is necessary to repeat this again from the beginning, close to where it was first done; if the limbs are not swollen.
And if the limb is swollen, and the patient is afraid, let it be for one or two days, and do not bind the arm. perhaps he gets abscesses instead.
he should not bathe again until he feels better; then he can continue the treatment if desired.
and if it is a small opening, he should make it smaller gently and you will doubt that there is not much blood as you see, for the same fire coming out of this very opening goes straight to all parts.
and make it slightly inflamed, so that the veins become swollen. Because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the vein inflating, do not immediately recommence the wound treatment, and apply a little oil, for it lightens the body of the blood, and the oil is moved in this vein along with the blood.
and thus administer the oil in each wound that you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and it also acts as an antidote and draws out evil when applied to the vein. if subtly the bone moves and spreads when it is too thick.
And if there appears a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the opening of the vein is small and you are not skilled in its opening, then quickly place a moistened sponge with hot silk over it and hold for an hour.
and it is necessary that you do this after the discharge of blood from the vein, and if it remains at the site for several days without any black or green color, then it does no harm. and if you see, place on it something cool or cold, such as aloe or myrrh mixed with calamine, shows, or similar.
And many times an abscess and pus appears at the wound of the basilic (nerve).
then place your hand on it, and if you feel the soft place at the compression of the hand, then this is where the appearance (of the abscess) is most severe. So be careful that you do not place anything that we have said, for sometimes it cuts off the artery without notice.
but he makes an embalmment with dry materials to harden the joint, then applies other remedies until it is healed.
And treat each pain according to its quantity and the color of the pain.
For if the skin is pale, let it be left until it turns red. and if it appears thick, leave it until it becomes thin. and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is fat and strong, and needs the extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, with wider incisions.
and to those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is better to heal them slowly and frequently, and one should heal them by cutting across, not puncturing;
and this healing method is free from corruption of blood and nerve damage, and it is more effective to heal from a long way rather than a wide approach.
and for those whose body requires healing, it is necessary to give them a mild pain from the juice of pomegranates; if it is heated, then treat with bloodletting 3 or 4 times, and if it is of cold complexion, before the healing, give them mild pain from syrup made of grapes, or honey syrup infused with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he faints at the sight of blood after drawing much blood, it is necessary that he inhale a broth of horse, and a subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things as we have mentioned in the previous section or chapter on fainting for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to straighten his arm and heal it better later, if it is weakened by much bleeding, he should treat it gently and gradually, according to the amount of its continuous power.
And whoever wishes to straighten his arm after the first dressing and has a strong bruise, he should heal it for seven hours after the first dressing or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to be healed from another side should be healed on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body which has been heated, and it brings fever. if it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and widen the wound as much as possible so that it completely heals. then you must fulfill all the conditions for healing, and place your hand on his pulse when he is well, so that death does not come in its place, which often happens when the healer is negligent.
and it is not appropriate when you see the arm dislocated and make blood come out a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press hard on top. if he is weak, he should stretch the arm slowly, for it would be harmful.
but he should let it be for as long as it heals the second time; or you should apply it to the tip of the flame until the blood clot that blocks the vein is dissolved and removed, then cover it with a small piece of cloth soaked in water, and press gently.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess is calmed.
And if it is necessary to drain the blood a second time, do so either in the same place or in another vein or arm.
The vein in the arm is healthier in place of the vein in the head because it is composed differently.
And the method of healing is that the patient should immerse their hand in hot water until the veins are red.
then bind it gently so that the vein appears well, then immediately through the healthy flesh, neither too narrow nor too wide.
and make the wound wide, and ensure the healthy flesh is close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot flow out, then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow out in the water until you have enough.
and if this does not work, do not immediately push the hand back into hot water, as more heat will only cause further damage.
and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, having neither artery nor nerve.
The health of the saving vein in the right hand is worth against all liver diseases, and this is how it is done:
stretch the hand and immerse it in hot water, as long as the vein is swollen, if you see it; and hold the hand across, and if you grasp it from all sides, there is no pain;
and do not hurt the patient too much, for the nerves are completely bare of flesh, and then apply the hand with hot water, so that the blood vessels become frozen in the wound, and cannot escape.
And when you have treated the blood as best you can, then apply oil and string to seal the wound firmly, and thus do for each person.
The sick person should hold the remedy in their left hand to treat the mouse disease, and do it just as I have told you for the right side.
The remedy for the spleen is effective against all diseases that affect the body, such as diseases of the uterus, retention of fluids, illnesses of the kidneys, and old diseases of the joints and legs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of their health is such that the patient should immerse themselves in hot water and rub the vein until it bursts, and apply pressure over the joint. and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they apply much pressure.
Heal then, where you feel pain, whether it is larger or smaller, at the shoulder, or at the ankle, whatever moves you.
And if you heal it on the foot, be careful with the nerves that are beneath, and also heal it across, as if you were binding it.
and so the flames will subside.
And if the wound will not heal, immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to drain completely.
And if the healing takes place for the first time, then repeat it a second time above, because the wound is salty.
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the wisdom of the other foot equally.
The vein's lion is at the foot's joint, and its purification causes pain in the back when it is hot blood.
And the quality of his health is such that if the patient enters the bath, he should stretch three times above the ankle, otherwise the vein will not open.
and if it opens, stretch the vein in all ways that you can, and pull through. and it is worth that you grasp it, for the vein is safe, and it is much relieved by many hands.
and it is worth that you grasp it, for the vein is safe, and it is much relieved by many hands. And if you do not hold it firm, any healthy thread of the muscle that opens or closes the foot and leg towards the little toe, and be careful with your nails.
and apply pressure firmly against the blood to see how much there is, then loosen the tie, and place cotton on it and tighten it. it is now clean.
Vacuum cups are made of horns, or iron, or glass.
and ventilation is done according to two manners: or by puncturing and drawing out blood, or without puncturing.
And this ventilation without puncturing is according to two manners: or it is with all fire, or without fire;
and the ventilation done by puncturing and drawing out blood is done in twelve to fourteen parts of the body, so that one part remains entirely still at the head. and the others are in the neck. and others on both sides of the neck. and the cup (or suction device) from under the chin. and the cup (or suction device) from both shoulders. and the cup (or suction device) on the knees. and apply leeches to both arms; and leeches on both legs; and leeches on both ankles;
and the leeching does not treat blood, but rather small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken anyone, as is done with vein-sucking. and it is not advisable to apply it, neither hot nor cold, in any disease that arises from excess, as long as the whole body is emptied.
And if, due to necessity or habits, it needs to be vented (i.e., let out), we should do so every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in between each time.
because there are some who, when they need to let out (gas or air), have such a heavy head.
and if it is for those who have a fullness and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkness around the eyes.
and those who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and taste blood. and if there are any who think, see blood, pain, death, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order letting the air in after three hours of the day.
The physician of the museum helps in the great pain of the head ... which come from dislocations, and it does not suit that this be after the evacuation of all the body.
and this application is in the place of the physician of the head, and it does not suit those of a cold disposition, or who have scrofula, for they do much harm.
and for this reason, it does not suit the old or those with cold diseases of the head.
And he who is cured often becomes obtuse, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cup a little lower in doubt of obstruction.
The ventilation of the chest is beneficial for health and life, and because of this, it helps to tighten the muscles, and opens the channel of the womb, and relaxes, and promotes filling.
and it is necessary to know when to stop, because if it grips too tightly, it can cause forgetfulness or stomach and body pain.
The ventilation of the chest, if it causes pains in the head, eyes, and temples, and constriction, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and disrupts the health of the sinew of the basilica.
and it is necessary that you instruct the healthy person to press his hand gently, not to cut the artery, and prevent blood loss.
The evacuation of the jaw is useful for mouth diseases, and for gum corruption, and similar ailments that are in the mouth. and it is in the health of the two lips.
The symptoms in the shoulders indicate a disease that arises from heat and swelling.
The evacuation of the veins is as useful as three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins.
and instruct the healthy one not to cut too deep, for the flesh is bare of bone, and knows veins and arteries.
The cupping glass that is on the nape is worth much for bleeding from the fundament and diseases of the veins, and it should be large, made of iron, and must be used skillfully. and if, by chance, it was too thin, it would break. and it causes great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs should be applied tightly, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and they relieve the long-standing pains of the joints, and of rheumatism, and of the bladder, and restore circulation.
and they affect the second ribs, and the ankles, yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause pain in various ways.
The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you apply it first while it is empty, and then suck firmly, and place it steadily, and move it equally, without stopping, until you see the red and inflamed color of the blood, and open the flow of blood.
Then apply pressure, and remove the suction cups, and take care in the arrangement of the skin, for there are some with such hard flesh and clear pores. if it is necessary to strike only once, then it is necessary to make wide wounds and deep ones. and suck gently.
And if the pain is intense, it is necessary to strike twice: The first time to discover the way to draw out the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike three times.
and when we want to draw out blood little by little, it is enough to strike only once. And if we want much blood, we should begin often.
and if the blood is thick, striking deeply will make it flow, and quickly finishing, the veins will be perceived, especially with those who have tough, hard skin, and are hairy; one must apply oil to the suction cups both for opening and closing. if it is a matter of burning, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil from cucumber seeds;
and if it is in the veins, with watercress oil, or lotus oil, or chamomile oil, or any other similar thing.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take amber oil, or balsam, or donkey oil, and similar substances.
And if the skin is tender and has large pores, it does not require oil to be applied, but rather should be washed after a rinse with rosewater, or cold water, or water from a morelle (a type of berry), or water from a cucumber, or porcelain water, or any other similar liquid.
And those with excessive moisture should rise from it using myrrh water, and sumac, and similar substances.
And those with excessive fluid buildup should drink old wine, or vinegar water, or anet (a type of plant) and chamomile decoction, or other similar things;
and they should not attempt to use the cup (for bloodletting) immediately before or during a bath, but rather after the bath, one hour or two.
and do not sleep after the drainage, and it is necessary that he washes himself, both when he needs to drain and when he has been drained.
and take care that he who is sick has a temper that is neither too cold nor too hot; it is necessary that he applies cold things, such as apples, grapes, endive and lettuce in the heat, and similar things; and eats plums, and juices of chestnuts, and moist meats.
and eats plums, and juices of chestnuts, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, should drink syrup of honey, and moderate perfumed wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat herbs and small birds and pigeons.
and on the day when he drinks more than he eats.
and it is necessary not to give any hot drinks or spices to anyone at any time before or after opening the windpipe, in order to comfort the main limbs. and it should be done carefully, but those who are cold should not drink hot drinks.
The suction cups that are used to harm are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the stomach, and the bowels, and the legs, and the hips, for this member does not tolerate being wounded directly, and it is only done forcefully to draw blood from one member to another, as we do with the nipples when nursing.
to reduce the viscosity in the member, as we apply suction cups to the stomach and bowels to ease the pain.
and relieves the pain when there is compression or stone, perhaps by attracting the compression with its virtue, or by displacing the stone from its place.
and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and intestines when there is wind retention, and these suction cups are emptied to only suck; and never should they be heated together with fire, and never should they be filled with cold water, as in cases where there are abundant tears, and in this way one fills the suction cup with hot water, or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
The shape of the cup (ventouse) administered by fire is as follows:
And it should be two and a half palm lengths wide, with a small hole around the middle as thick as to fit an needle, and it should be made of iron or softened so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb.
and tell him to place a rod of wood or iron across the wound, so that a cloth can be wrapped around it, according to the size and age of those who suffer from them.
for the suckers of children are different from those of the old, and thinner than the fat ones.
and one must thus place this sucker over the limb:
take a cloth of wax or linen, and place it through the sucker across the rod that is inside the sucker, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the sucker, preventing it from burning the patient.
and then place it on the affected member, and your fingers should be over the opening we mentioned, so that when you want to, it goes in and remove the suction cup.
and take up the line as before, and repeat often, if you need to.
In the suction cup, which is used for treating pleurisy, and all acute conditions, there is no opening or gap, and it should not be applied unless it is filled with water, and then placed on the affected member.
and this is the form:
According to their smallness, they are only treated with cups in places where it is not possible to apply suction, such as the lips and gums, and similar areas. and in naked places, such as the groin or nipples, and other similar areas.
and the quality of the cupper is such that when you find veins that are clear, smooth, and without inflammation, they should be taken.
and place a nut in hot water, until they are well-soaked and have no wind or stomach issues; and then make the vein and phlegma (or varicose veins) healthy, and rub the limb until it turns red, and apply bandages.
and if they stop paining and swelling, it is a sign that the vein or place suitable for cupping can be applied, then apply it, as it is very beneficial afterwards.
If that does not work, then gently lift the dislocated limb from the side, and then with water, very well, and then apply pressure.
and hold the eyes steady too long after the operation is complete, if a moist linen cloth in cold water is placed over them, and left there until the wounds are healed.
and if the wounds multiply, apply crushed vinegar, or gall, and similar substances, until they are healed.
or you can place half-peelied beans on the joint and leave them until they adhere to the bone; this will now heal.
and if you need more skill, take other wounds.
And if the roots will not take hold, rub fresh blood into the place, or insert an needle until the root enters, and then place them back, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will sprout.
and when you see that they are sprouting, sprinkle a little aloe and silk dust, or ash, and they will grow now.
Here begins the book on fractures. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear reader, that the foolish eyes shed tears from this chapter, which they have never seen in any of the ancient books, nor read any letters about it.
and for this reason the knowledge is strange in our land, for I never found any good of it.
and I know nothing of it, except for the knowledge from ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have acquired the knowledge, and through experience, and through the habits of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters preceding this one.
Therefore, it is appropriate that we begin this book with a prologue that outlines the essence of the words and chapters where the wise men apply their understanding and focus on truth; so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain comes to any part of the body, it is necessary that you quickly tend to the patient on both sides, if nothing else helps, such as weakness of the body, or fever, or old age. or if it is very close or too cold;
and warm things, such as hot baths, and cloth from silk and chamois, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that clog the veins with blood, until you are certain of the heat of an abscess or the swelling of a member;
if the patient returns to suffering from a previous treatment, as it had been used before.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be given foods that do not cause excessive flatulence, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and peas, and veal, and offal, and ox, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. Because part of the wound's healing causes movement, and more often the fracture.
And know that broken bones from the old and frail cannot be well healed or joined together according to their nature due to the immobility of the members, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of young children.
but there is no cure, reset the broken bone with strong claws that separate and join the member together, as long as it becomes strong again like it was before. and do not touch any part of his body, and for this reason, it is necessary to feed him with nutritious food as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture is of two kinds, one from the upper part, and another from the lower part, and in this chapter I will tell you all manner of fractures. There is also a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, such as the cutting of a quill for writing.
There is also a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, such as the cutting of a quill for writing. And if there is a fracture with a wound, then it is a fracture with a very small split.
And each person has their own way and their own specific tool for recovery, according to the memory that comes to them in their place.
and the fracture of the bone is known because the joint is twisted, and it opens well when pulled outward, and responds to the pressure of the hand.
and when there is no twist or pressure, and the patient feels no great pain, then there is no fracture.
but it can have curvature, or fissures, or small breaks. If you do not need to move it with your hand, but apply medications that will follow, and then gently hold it now.
And know that the break that occurs in an artery, and where the two parts are separated, it is necessary for you to now set them equal, so that abscesses do not form from them.
and if abscesses form from them, if he leaves them for no time, until the abscesses are calmed.
then set it equal to the movement that you can gently and surely make, and know that the restoration of what is whole is easier than the restoration of what has been broken.
then hold steady, as it is needed afterward.
And if there are broken bones, if they are pierced from two sides, whether it is the hand or foot, or at your hand if it is a small member, or at the joints, or at a joint and at your hand;
and place the member according to its natural position, so that when the parts of the broken member are out of alignment, reset them with all your might, and ensure through your skill that no further damage or pain comes to the patient.
and adjust both joints of the bone according to the best shapes.
And if it feels good to the touch, but it seems not properly aligned:
if you dress it well, without straining too much, not pressing as those who cause a hot and contracted abscess in the member through their own will, as we have often seen.
And when the member is at its limit, gently comfort the patient so they do not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, nor turning, or in any other way. and ensure that the limb is securely held so as to feel no pain. For when he feels no pain, except momentarily, and it is important to ensure that he does not feel any pain;
and ensure that the limb is securely held so as to feel no pain. For when he feels no pain, except momentarily, and it is important to ensure that he does not feel any pain; and take care that it is set correctly, so that no crookedness comes when it is healed;
and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I tell you.
Know that the damaged limb can be different in size and shape, and in form.
For it has small limbs, like arms and legs and similar ones. it is necessary to wrap soft and delicate linen cloths around it. and those that are thick, like the soles and legs:
it is necessary to wrap with a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the whole limb and tightens it equally from all sides so that there is no gap.
Then he applies slight pressure, three times or four times according to the limb, and gently holds your hand throughout the joint, then moves upwards over the fracture and exerts less pressure, allowing the fracture to slightly separate.
and softens the joint little by little, pressing deeply into the healthy part of the limb, then takes up another joint and returns to the one above the broken bone.
then goes back to the part below the fracture and holds it gently, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we said in the first line above.
Then place it between the thick strings of linen or cloth, as long as it is entirely even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your carefully made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
If there is an abscess or swelling, apply a hot soothing agent to it, which reduces the swelling, and leave it like that for several days.
then stretch over your stitches, and use a strip of thin material cut from a sharp knife, or from the wood used to make splints, or palm leaves, and conform it to this shape:
but it is necessary that the thread which one places on the break be a little thicker and wider than the others.
and be as long as necessary for the member, whether small or large; then tighten it over the threads as you did in the first chapter on the break, and then tie it with an additional thread, as in the first chapter on the fracture; the tighter it is bound, the less it moves;
and it is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
For if the thread is too thick, as I have seen in works of people who make their threads with twisted linen cords, it is a great error, for the thread cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it is not suitable for there to be less than two threads per inch of space.
And if the patient is angry because of the pain from the stars after dislocating their joints, he should place them in a hot compress of lint or other soft cloth so that they do not get infected.
When the wound is accompanied by fracture, and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
And know that it is not appropriate to dislocate all the broken stars on the first day. Because when the limb is large, it is not suitable to insert threads for more than five or seven days, or as long as the abscess above is healing, according to your judgment.
and now let us consider the ancient methods of splints to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and take flour that clings to the walls of a mill, and mix it with enough egg, and make this paste, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of splints for restoring fractures in various positions, especially among women and small children, as it is neither too hard nor too soft.
Another method of splint for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take some barley meal, and honey, and lupine, and poison-oak, and gum Arabic, and mix them with water; mix it with mirror and aloe, as V suggests. add aloes VIIII as directed. and make it into a powder, and mix it with egg albumen; if the patient's complexion is hot, use this paint, for it is of good composition, and heals broken bones painfully, and benefits many people.
Another method of splinting that is effective for twisting: take a cloth and make it moist with vinegar, and apply it to the wound. use mirrore (a type of medicinal substance) and aloe, as described in chapter nine. use willow (a type of plant) as instructed in chapter six. prepare aromatic Armenian powder (a medicinal compound) as instructed in chapter ten, grind it well, and mix with vinegar or an abundance of egg white, and administer.
Another way to plaster joints and dislocate bones from their sockets, soothing the pain that arises, they use chisels on the bone, and breaks. Take another new cloth, and soak it in hot water and oil, then place it on the wound.
Cyst splints do not restore proper function, but they are good for alleviating hot abscesses and safely extracting bones that cause pain.
Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: Take dry figs leaves and land pavot (opium poppy) leaves, crush them together, and make a plaster.
Another method of plastering for the restoration of broken bones, and to alleviate the return of the abscess. Take the root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, fennel flour, of each part in equal measure.
and grind, and mix with wine, and warm the limbs, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another stronger method of plastering for the restoration of a stubborn, hard-to-heal abscess on the member. Take the roots of vismalve, flaxseed, balsam, melilot, and fennel, and violet and chamomile flowers, of each part in equal measure. and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates writes in his book that to restore a broken member, one should use a mixture of wax and oil, and nothing else, stating it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen suggests that to restore a broken member, one should apply warm, dry substances such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Another method of splinting that is effective for both injury and pain: Take feathers and horsehair from shorn men, or goose down, and silk thread, and cut them equally, and grind them, and make a plaster of it and bind it tightly.
And then, after some time, loosen it slightly and take care that the patient feels no pain, and that the bone has not moved from its place. if it is not loosened by skilled hands. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, with no rest or swelling, then hurry and dislodge it, and remove the plaster immediately.
and take a light cloth, and a sponge with moist sea water, and dip it in water, and raise the limb up until the itching stops and the pain is soothed. then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it up with a bandage until you are certain that the abscess is hot.
and rest the inflamed member, and relieve the bone pain, then resume gently, with a little plaster, and do not strain it as before. as gently as it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is red, swollen, painful, and filled with pus, and you need to apply a poultice and bind it, then repeat as you did at first equally.
And if nothing of what we have said applies to the member, then do not release it until after three, or four, or five, or seven days. and never leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and approaches the adjustment of the bone to the joint.
then you must hold it more tightly than first, and thicken the flesh as I have said before;
and if you see the joint is set firmer than necessary, know that no improvement can come from it. soak the dislocated joint in hot water every time you reset it, and do this three times a day, gradually opening it up.
by this effort, then gently encourage the limb, and patiently wait for what the skilled healers do, who restore the damaged member.
This is evil, and if it causes great fear, I see no other way than to leave it and do it right.
There are many types of fractures, various shapes, and the causes are diverse.
For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the bone splinters completely through to the inside, as if cut with a knife or club. and for this reason, this type of fracture is called "hatchet-like".
Or he strikes the bone with the spear without piercing it, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute";
and this wound is great or small from these two fractures.
And if there is a throbbing, or swelling, or cuts from stone chippings, or blows against stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a recent fracture, which approaches the skin just beneath or on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound that is healed in the bone is as subtle as a hair, and the fissure is small, it is then called this fracture "capillary";
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or an arrow, or any similar object, and the bone fragment enters inward, and the joints are bent as if a blacksmith were forging on a forge; if it enters within the stone.
And this is more common in those who have moist heads, as with infants.
and occurs in all these ways of fracture that small pieces become detached as if they were. and I will speak of it in its place.
And we know all the ways of dislocations caused by traction on them, and the inquiry at close range, and by the corrupt flesh above.
The appearance of the hair is noted because when the bone is discovered and rubbed gently, it opens the dislocation, revealing the black fracture.
In the treatment of a fracture, be wary of accidents with the patient, and if you notice any ill omens, such as vomiting, loss of senses, stiffness, paleness, ague fever, or other symptoms appearing in various combinations, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any alarming accidents and hope for a recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the swelling comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
And if this happens, if you hurry to remove the bone on the seventh day, so that the flesh under the bone is corrupted, then the complications arise that we have mentioned.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches up to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part in this way:
and you should press the patient's head with great pain, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and smooth the wound more gently than you can, and if blood comes out when exposing the bone, or an abscess begins, assist with what is necessary, and fill the space with moist, oil-soaked cloth. and keep the wound at rest until the abscess is calmed and be sure of the absence of blood flow. then begin to separate the bone, and this is done according to two ways of working:
One method is to press against the narrow opening from the front, and this is the shape:
And then I use another treatment even greater than the first one.
And the second method is that you have numerous openings of varying narrowness, some pointed and others wide, and they are made of indurable iron.
and gently open it, so as not to injure the head.
And if the bone is hard and dense, you must drill around it gently, so as to create openings with care, without penetrating too deeply so that the tip does not go beyond the bone. It should have a margin or curve on top to prevent the tip from going through the bone.
and it is necessary to have many, so that each comes back to its place in the expectation of the bone, so you have time for all tests.
and this is the form of the three types of delay:
The quality to perceive around the broken bone is that you apply delay to the bone, and return to your tasks until you know that the bone is perceived.
then apply the delay elsewhere a little later, and do so all around, then make cuts with incisions in the space between the parts of the bone, and do it more subtlety and lightly, as we have said, while you are holding the bone in your hand, or with any of the tools you have such as pliers, pincers.
and remember that you must not touch the brain or the spine.
And when you have pierced the bone with the trepan, it is necessary that you feel the stiffness that is delayed from the bone to all other tools resembling an incisor, but it should be more tense and more subtle than any other incisor.
and if it delays nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, gently remove them with the instrument. then dress the wound with bandages and care as we have said.
And another method of treatment is as follows, which Galen says is safer. and speak very loudly, as he says. It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone, either where the fracture is open, and when you have exposed this part, place the tip of this curved scalpel beneath it, whose shape is as follows:
And do not cut from one side, but the acute part is on the second side, so that the cuts are towards the bone.
then strike gently with a small hammer, so that you lightly knock the bone around, and be very careful of the tissue below.
If it is detached from the bone, gently pull it, for it can be pulled off without pain or harm.
And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the skin, and the bone is cut only from above, leaving small fragments, it is necessary to remove these rough edges with a fine rasper in sufficient quantity to make each part as suitable as possible, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
If you encounter great raspers (tools) and then more subtle ones, never stop doing this until it is done well.
For each of the other hair cuts or subtle breaks, you must treat according to its location.
and this is something that is never fully answered for him who has devoted his study to this art.
And if satisfaction is desired, you must press a linen cloth according to the quantity of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. then take another cloth doubled over two or three times, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. and make it lighter than you can, without burdening the patient, then apply another bandage over it, and do not tighten it too much so as to only touch the wound.
and leave it thus for a day or two until the abscess is calmed down, then untie it and administer medicines such as roots of lily, wheat flour, incense powder, aristol, and similar things.
and from these things make a powder, apply it to the wound, and administer foreign medicines without harm;
and ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any uncleanliness, nor allow it to form bumps, for when a bump forms on the skin, if it breaks open, it brings great harm to the patient.
for when you apply sharp, harmful things to it, they do not heal. Take care therefore, if no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is questionable without doubt.
And if discoloration appears due to the medicine applied to it, that its virtue may take effect, it is necessary that you mix a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and wrap it in a cloth, and apply it to the affected area. then the treatment of manners of healing that are necessary, as long as he is healthy.
Knowing that the two parts of the upper arm are never broken, except one after the other, because they are two bones.
and this bone is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it bends or twists severely, then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should bind your little finger or make a slit in the flesh of the arm, and place the same fracture into your index finger, and by pushing with force, until the bone returns to its natural position. and do this gently, and ensure that the patient feels no pain through your actions.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the bone near the joint, and the bones cannot return to their original position, it is necessary that you place a slightly thicker rule across the top, so that the bones align correctly.
If the fracture is from the second part, and it happens again, then quickly restore the first state on the same day, if you can.
if this is not possible, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling of the abscess is reduced, apply to the wound clean linen bandages, if the fracture is in one part.
or you apply another from another side, if the fracture persists; and make the bandages so thick that they fill the gaps between the stitches.
And they say that no restoration is required if the bandages are soaked in butter, and changed each day. I do not think this is right, but it is necessary that they be moist when preparing bandages of egg whites and mill powder. then remove the bandage until the bone is hard and the cartilage stiffens.
And never use goose feathers or other materials in place of bandages, and if the wound is filled with pus, it holds the rupture, and the breeze blows the patient's pain away. or make sure you see well.
And if abscesses appear at the wound while you are treating it, apply a poultice or moist cotton in olive oil or in a small container of eagle's blood.
And if abscesses do not come out, apply a poultice from the outside with flour of cumin and incense powder, preserved with honey and egg yolk, then place light bandages on top, without tying them.
and if the broken bone is small and broken into small pieces, extract it with suitable instruments, then clean the fracture and treat it with hot things like poultices and applications of heat, as appropriate.
and if he does not have a wound deep within the nose, then treat it with care, and insert wooden splints until it heals.
When the mandible is dislocated and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only slightly displaced, and it is not broken into two pieces, but only out of place, then if you gently know how to handle it, it can be reset.
If the fracture is in the right side, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient with the malady. and if the fracture is in the left mandible, insert your index finger of your right hand, gently push the fracture back into place, and use your left hand to pull it out, equally.
And if the fracture of the mandible is severe in two parts, you must administer an extension to both parts, as long as they are even.
And if the movement of the teeth causes a rupture, then tie them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and apply a plaster to the broken jaw, and cover it with a double cloth; and place a large, well-made cloth or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw upon it, secure it with whatever means you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light meats.
And if you see that the shape changes, untie it after three days and then reset it as it was before. and apply a plaster on it, with a powder from fine grinding or flour of chamomile, after you have removed the cautery.
and apply a lighter new plaster, and if the plaster becomes hard, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed. often it heals in three weeks.
And if an abscess appears, it is necessary to do as we have said many times.
And if there is both fracture and wound together, it is not necessary to remove any piece of the bone that has been broken. if subtly from the opening as suitable instruments to this.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
And once you have removed all these pieces and it does not delay, immediately close the wound if it is wide, and place suitable bands on it to prevent infection, until it heals.
The force breaks many times, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners:
or it is broken and dislocated in two parts, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore;
or there is fracture with a wound.
And the work is as follows when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the aid that is broken with force. and the others stretch the collar towards the affected area;
then make the fracture even on both sides, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no apparent deformity or movement.
And if you need to extend it further, place a round, thick cloth or woolen spear under the shoulder of the patient, as needed. and gently stretch the limb, extending the spear with your hand, so that you evenly align the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the bandage away from the wound because it is stuck, then it is necessary that the patient lies on his side, and places a medium pillow under his shoulder, and asks his attendants to lift the bandage towards the back, until the bone in the bandage is raised.
And then address the fracture with your hands, and if you feel the bone fragment, it is necessary that you cut through it.
and gently try to realign the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined together in any way, then remove one of the incisions you have. but apply the full strength of this instrument to achieve satisfaction:
and it should resemble a spoon, and not be too thin, and also as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
and he should say to the patient, as you see, one shoulder should be wide and the other narrow, just as the opening of the wound that you made when you treated the bone;
and when you are sure of the hot abscess, if you cut the wound, and if its opening is small, then you doubt the hot abscess, if you use cloth and bandages for the wound, according to their quantity.
And if an abscess forms, take a cloth dipped in rose oil, or aloe, or wine, and apply it.
The straining of the bone, when it is sensitive to touch and has no dressing, is that you place on the bone a thin paste of finely ground powder and egg yolk, and then put light stops over it, and insert a spear under the joint if needed. then take a very wide bandage, one palm length wide, then place two layers on top of each other over the joint, and wrap it. then take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage extends beyond the joint. and place the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the collarbone, and remove the healthy armpit, and the painful armpit. and reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the stick does not move on the broken bone, tighten it each day, and when the ties loosen, then release it.
and make the patient lie down on his side, and place a small pillow under his armpit when he is asleep, to lift the dislocated joint up. if you align the shoulder and lighten the fracture with the positioning of the arm at the collarbone, and do not unlock it until after a malicious accident does not occur for 20 days.
then resume the plastering if you see that it needs to be done again, tighten it and leave it thus until it is healed.
and it is restored in no more than 28 days, and to no one less.
from the dislocation of the shoulder
It is often the case that a broken or dislocated shoulder does not heal well and remains unstable, unless it is properly aligned by touch.
if it is aligned according to the shape of the break and restored to its natural position in every way you can.
then lay the shoulder gently on a soft, thin cloth, and cover it with a double cloth. Then place a wide and delicate blade, slightly larger than the shoulder, and dislocate the blade at no specific point on the shoulder, using the sharp edge of linen cloth so that the blade cuts evenly.
and then tighten it with a great tight band firmly, so that the blade does not move from its place, and inspect it each day.
and whenever it loosens, tighten it again and realign the blade if it is out of place, and lay the patient on their side.
and the shoulder is healed in 10 or 25 days.
And when these numbers are completed, if you loosen it and be sure, for this is not an oss that will easily set itself.
And if a piece of the bone sticks out and is not removed from the inside, it pierces and causes inflammation in the abscess, so do as we have said to soothe the heat of the abscess.
from the fracture do worse
The skin is never completely broken in the middle, but this happens rarely. but it often breaks from the heat.
And when it is broken in the middle, it declines to the inside, and the patient feels great pain, and there is no improvement, and sometimes blood oozes out, and it opens up the openings in the broken bone, and everything feels good.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on their back, and places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and aligns the ribs to the two hands, and subtly adjusts it equally in all ways so that the bone figure is as it should be.
Then place on it plasters and compresses over the delicate salt or other light bandage, wrap it in a drape, and secure it to the broken bone so that it does not move. and straighten the ligament back to its original position, tighten it gradually, and check the freedom of movement every hour, relaxing it if it becomes tight.
and if it needs to be released due to rust or itching that appears on the skin, or pain or abscess, act quickly, release it, remove the plaster, and treat what has come about in a curative manner.
then reset the splint and hold it tightly until it is healed.
from the breakage of ribs
You know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in the upper back and at the top, and they do not bend unless they are broken. and feel the patient well at the examination.
And the restoration is such that you put the break back in place as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a board, if you have such a need.
And if the breaking of ribs is internal, the patient feels very great pain and a stabbing sensation, as well as weeping, because the bone punctures the tissue. and he holds the fingers, and touches and vomits much blood, which is of great illness, and the ancients have put great effort into it.
And if it is of those who say that it is appropriate to administer foods that cause bloating in the stomach to push out the fracture inward.
We do not pretend that abscesses will not form if they have not come. And if it comes back, healthy.
And they say that none of us should use cupping glasses on the shoulder to draw blood, as it is useless; it seems reasonable. Nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw away the excess blood from the shoulder according to the arrangement of weakness.
And they say none of you should cover the wound with moist wool and oil, and put tents between the ribs to equalize the space around it, then be cured of pleurisy, flesh, and medicine.
And if the patients feel great pain that they cannot bear through the bone where the cloth is applied, there is doubt in the patient, and it is necessary to cut into the broken rib cage and place instruments to preserve the satisfaction.
and then one must cut the bone, pull gently, and stitch the two edges of the wound together, if it is large, and treat it with bandages, until it is healed.
and if abscesses occur, place moist, oil-soaked rags on them and cover with a cloth.
and treat while the cloth over the abscess is still fresh, and place warm compresses on the affected side or where it is needed, until it heals.
and also to the sharp pain in the back.
And when this happens to a person, and you want to know if they will recover, be wary if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and unable to move or stretch them, and if you pierce them with an needle, they do not feel it.
Knowing that it is deadly in many ways, if they are silent and feel well when you squeeze them and they do not hurt, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and the patient will be cured if proper treatment is given.
And if similar things occur to the sharp pain in the back, you must know if it is sane (curable) or not, if you notice whether the feet are weakened, and if there are accidents in the hands, and on the back, sudden vomiting and expulsion without will.
and when it is remembered on the stomach, sudden vomiting without will. And when it is recalled to its back and wants to move, it cannot. Knowing that it is mortal: if one does not work diligently on its cure.
And if this accident does not come to pass, then it is a lighter matter.
And the treatment is that if there is a hot abscess, you apply rose oil or egg yolk oil to it until it is soothed.
then place a comforting and drying poultice on it, secure it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as he is alive.
and if any bone becomes detached, it is necessary to cover it with gauze; and then take the bone, and afterwards close the two edges of the wound with stitches if it is large, then apply a dressing with hot compresses as long as it is alive.
and if the bone fragments are broken, which is called "shattered limbs," press your thumb of your left hand into them and place it level with the other hand, then apply plaster and bandages as needed.
then hold it firm, and if there is a bone out of place, pull it back into position, and set the fracture, and treat the wound until it heals.
From the fracture of the bone of the spine.
First, note that the bone in the neck (hainche) is broken, and if so, it should not have much diminution at the top. it extends down, curves towards the back, and brings pain to the patient in place of the break, causing swelling where it is broken.
And the healing is such that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the break. and such are the fracture and form of it;
and if the fracture is only at the head, then make all such fractures even, as long as they are in their natural form.
And if the fracture is long, it inclines inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture appears. And when you have made it even, then place an splint over it, and then put a stick or rod of wood across it, and hold the fracture still so that it does not move.
and secure the limb against the ribs on the inside, as long as the ligaments are even. Instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
And if an abscess appears and is not touched, it should be left until the abscess below is calmed, and apply what we have previously mentioned. and then return to restoration, and tighten as appropriate, if there is no adverse event.
dislocation of the shoulder joint
The aid (or support) is between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of the two methods:
Don't do it unless you take a thick piece of wood, according to this form:
and bind the two pieces together, twist them upwards, and place the patient on a seat;
then pour the patient's broken arm over the wood, until it is straight, and have them hold a wooden splint in place, then twist it downwards to any heavy object or have the attendants pull it down further.
then place the splint against the break, equal to the patient's hand together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And another method is that we place the patient on his back and tie his hands to his neck, then instruct those assisting to apply pressure over the break in each hand, and extend them all equally.
And if you see that extraction is too violent, hold the broken part firmly in place, and on the break, stretch each of the assistants to their side.
And if the fracture is close to the top of the shoulder, you should place a moderate ligature under the bone, and another around the neck, below the fracture.
and also if the fracture is on the side of the neck, you should apply a light ligature without effort, as long as the fracture is even on both sides, on the bone and on the neck.
then even out the fracture, as appropriate, and tighten it, if abscesses form or pain persists.
And if an abscess appears, do not press it for seven days, and apply a moist cloth dipped in rose oil until the abscess at the base is calmed.
then press it, and the method of pressing is that you apply a splint to the dislocation, then raise the arm above the affected joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast.
and apply the bandage, press on the affected joint and the arm so that the arm is raised, perpendicular to the body, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place a wider and stronger stick across the break, and leave two spaces between each stick, and let each stick be so large that it extends beyond the break on each side.
then tighten the sticks, as I said at the beginning of this chapter about the break, stronger and less distant.
And if you observe the position of the sticks and their tightening, as we said, when you return the broken limb, and you doubt whether the abscess is hot, leave it bound for up to seven days, as we said.
then examine each of the three days the wound, that itching does not swell or come to the surface, or the healing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. If it is appropriate, as we have said.
And if no such accident occurs, then the dislocation should only be corrected after three or more days, and the patient should sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach.
and place the dislocated joint in a soft cushion made of equal parts wool, and every hour during the day or night observe whether the limb's shape is restored and its joints are not too tight.
if the treatment is by the virtue of medicine, and he gives the patient the food that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is first subtle. and when he begins to recover, it is often severe.
and it is customary that the aid and leg must be reset after forty days from the beginning. and then he must be dislocated and treated with baths and specific remedies to correct the position.
And if the contraction is severe and painful, it may take up to ten days or two months to release it.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossa," one smaller and the other following the direction of the hand.
and the other is larger, and it is the one that is located below, towards the smaller bone.
should the larger fossa break only, or both, and they become disjoined.
When the smaller fossae break, their healing is light and swift.
and when the bones are broken, if healing is poor, it is more painful than when they are broken together.
If it is only the small bones that are broken, then a little gentle stretching and positioning them equally is sufficient.
And if it is a large, deep wound, then it needs to be tightened more strongly.
and extend it on the cushion, placing the palm higher than the other hand, and the small fingers lower, crossing the patient over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any pain.
Then extend the attending physicians their hands to the distant part of his arm, or to the joint, and other ministers to the others above.
And then set it even with the eyes, according to its best form.
And if, in the fracture, each piece is set in its place, and if there is none that holds the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place by doing as we have said before, then it must be cut off and the bone healed.
And if with the wound rupture, I have spoken of it in the specific chapter; then takes the cure.
And if, at the beginning of restoration, abscesses occur, I wrap them with a bandage made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard or too soft. and I wrap it gently, as long as the abscess is calmed.
Then remove the bandage and apply the plaster of fine-milled powder with plenty of egg, then place the nails, making sure the nail from the break is stronger and a bit wider than the others.
and know that it must have 6 nails or arms in different positions: so that the break is in one of the bones, or in two;
and it holds faster over the fracture than elsewhere, and for a longer time as it moves away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. and the bandages that are over the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough.
and the bandages that are over the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough. and the thread, from which it is held, should be linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said.
And reward the member and the ligament after no days. And if no harm comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you apply hot water to the limb until the itching is soothed.
and let the member not be squeezed too tightly at rest.
And then repeat the stretching, and if the ligaments loosen and the bones deviate, or similar things, address it accordingly.
And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then you should soften it slightly, and leave it for a few days until the swelling goes down, and then stretch it again.
And if none of these things that we have said help the patient, then he should be loose for up to 20 days.
if uneasy, then bind his hands to his chest, and make sure his collarbones are even, and guard against movement and reaching, and have him sleep on his back.
and know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 45 days, and perhaps in 10 days, according to the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
You know that on the back of the hand and at the joints there are often small fractures, and it brings only pain many times over.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient cuts a cross and holds it straight before him equally.
then places his hand on the extended board, extends the broken bones of the limb, and aligns them properly, until they are well joined.
and applies poultices and heat, if an abscess forms, then he places a piece of salt according to the size of the wound. and is wrapped in a cloth drape.
And if the fracture is near the abdomen around the root of the plant, make a ball of cloth and command the patient to press it against his swollen limb. and then apply a long strip of cloth, and make the bandage as soft as possible, as large as the palm of the hand, and tighten it, as needed.
And if the fracture is in the open air, it is necessary that you place a stick above and another below on the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly all around the hand, and seal the gap between them.
If any fracture occurs among us in the hand, it is the joints that are affected, so we must set them even as they should be. and tighten with the palm, and if you notice a small, straight bandage that raises the fracture without moving it, use that.
and if the fracture is in another finger, just as it was described or indicated by one of the others, set them even and bind it with the healthy finger afterward. You should hold them all in place until they grow out, or put a splint over them as you would a broken bone.
and take care in the restoration and placement of hot abscesses, and protect those who come near them, as I have said.
The foot bones are often broken, and one can clearly see them when the foot returns to its normal position both in front and behind.
and the restoration is when one binds them together over the break, and another from below. And the patient lies on their face, then extends each limb equally to their side.
and this is when the fracture is through the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the hipbone, one of the ligaments should be bound towards the knee, and others should be bound below the break.
And also if it is near the knee, then the ligaments around the knee should be relaxed and the leg bent downward.
then place the splint with both hands, equally according to its natural shape, and then apply the bandage, binding it tightly around the injury so that it does not move.
And if there is a hot abscess, leave it to calm down before returning to your work and treatment. The bandage is made in this manner.
You should wrap around the fracture a bandage hard and doubled in two or three layers, remove the excess, then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the toe, and pass a long thread between the calf and the leg, beneath the knee joint, and bring the end up over the top.
Then turn the bandage to the leg and thigh, then place the splint on top, and put a stick across the bone of the leg.
Then use the eighth part of a soft cloth between the leg and thigh to even out the pressure, then begin to tie three or four loops around the splint. and as you go higher on the splint, it should become less tight.
then take the two threads that you have threaded between the leg and thigh, and tie three loops underneath, then return to the other side at the top with the thread, as you work towards the foot.
and hold them still, if they do not move from their place, then leave it so, and there is no abscess or swelling or any other sign. And if it happens that it becomes dislocated again, and you notice it, then correct it as we have said many times before.
and if there are fragments of bone that stick, it is appropriate to remove them, if possible. and if it is not possible to remove them, then it is appropriate to break the joint and pull strongly. and the treatment is as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
And never should the foot be broken in this way with stars, as is done in the case of aid or the arm;
However, this carefully performed restoration does not please the patients.
And know that the foot is restored in 7 days, or fewer or more, according to the diversity of dispositions.
You know that in the alley of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, even if it is only a crack or an opening, it affects every wound, and feels painful, and everyone feels well.
And the restoration is when everything is put back in its place as it was before, as long as it can be moved together.
Then apply the plaster, and place a round stick, if needed, and tighten it appropriately, then repeat all the arrangements we have mentioned in other fractures, as for a hot abscess or anything similar. if one is involved in such an accident as it suits them, as long as they remain healthy.
from the fracture of the leg
Knowing that the leg has two bones, of which one is called "right" and not "mustelz", and the others are called "foscile";
and it continues to break all the way to the arm, and because of this comes the restoration as with the equal arm, and all the work is complete. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg moves from every side.
And if the thin bones are broken, they bend forward.
and if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it clearly. and it turns inside out.
then apply extension, and set it equal, and tie the stars equally.
but nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, and there are several pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter. and light according to your strength.
And when you have completed your task, take two strips of cloth as thick as a finger, that cover the leg on both sides, and are long enough to reach from the knee to the sole.
then wrap it in two strips of cloth around the leg both above and below, and tie it tightly in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is good.
and no one should administer any medicine to the long bones of the leg, especially if it is broken, and he places the leg to prevent movement, and properly does this at the fracture where there is pain.
and each day he moves the leg to see if there is an abscess or any other complication; if he treats it while it is healthy.
from the fracture of bones in the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones in the foot can be fractured and the toes can be dislocated, and there is no cure except in various positions.
And if a foot bone is broken and you see the bones pushing against each other, the patient lies with his bad leg on the ground as if he wanted to walk, then place your foot on top of his, holding where the bones are lifted, and press until they return to their places.
Then apply the plaster and stop it up, and place beneath the belly, at the pit of both groins, a small table with two flat sides, then tighten it at the most recent healing, after you have wrapped them in drapes and other things that you need.
And after three days or four have passed, if he loosens the bandage, for you will find the bones even, either broken or discolored.
And if either of the bones is not broken, but restored, as we have said regarding the bones of the hand; then place on the broken bone a steel according to the length of the bone, and be a little wider, then beneath the foot place the table I mentioned, and tighten it firmly.
and if there are two or three (or more), break them, and place on each finger a stone according to their quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the table from under the foot. and if it is on the top of the table, towards the stomach of the foot, make sure it holds it well.
And it is important that you do not forget the other things I have mentioned about other breaks, when we have said this. and protect each case as it should be.
On the fracture of the bone of the hand
When the bones of a woman's natural structure are broken, if she lets the swelling increase, then she inclines her body to one side, and it is held from behind.
then fill the swelling with cotton, and also put in large amounts of it as needed.
then stand the woman up, gently pressing her back little by little, and then remove the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the bone structure, and return the bones with the filling.
and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or so. if the fracture is to be healed, and you see, take a bladder of a goat, and tie a cane to the wound, and squeeze all the bladder back into its natural shape; then blow into the cane until the bladder is fully inflated inside. its natural shape will return to the fracture.
then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for several days until it is healed.
And when a bone of the man or woman is broken, it should be restored as we have said for the hip bone;
and these fractures should not be hidden from him who applies his study and skill, and listens to my book.
For the fracture indicates various dispositions for the right way of restoration: then understand.
On a broken arrow, take a goose throat and insert it into the shaft. Then wrap it with cloth, leaving it for three days or until it heals completely.
from fracture with wound
It is important for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bones of the leg or shoulder or similar, to be healed immediately, so that the healing which we have mentioned serves as testimony.
And if the wound heals, but there is still a fracture from poison, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or on the same day, before abscesses form.
And if the abscess increases, leave the healing until it is completely healed, as long as the abscess is calm, and do not touch it for at least a day or two, otherwise you would cause a bad outcome.
And if the broken bone is visible through the opened heart, it is necessary that you place it gently with your hands, slightly extended.
And if the extension does not appear to be even in your hands, rearrange this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and its width should be according to the size of the wound. and because it is an art to be precise, it should soak for three or four times, depending on what is required in each case of fracture.
and it should be round and slightly thicker, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb in your work, and is firm in front, and thick from the middle towards the front, thus:
and it is called "palainche", so the curved bones should be placed on top of the visible joint. and twist it once, as it returns, and let them be even one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, you must hold the head of the bone until the instrument has a firm grip.
And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, take a suitable instrument, such as a knife or scissors, in your power.
then remove whoever is delayed in the bone due to stiffness and small cuts.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
if you do such that it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with astringent black wine, and wrap it carefully around it; and do not place any bandage or other substance on the wound that has oil, so as not to cause putrefaction and corruption.
then administer heat as you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and clean the covering around it entirely according to the amount of the wound, and be well careful that the wound is not strained with the fracture.
and often they have done this foolishly, and brought upon the patient either death or corruption many times. and so the tightenings should be milder and more gentle than with other breaks.
And if the wound is severe or extensive, and you doubt that a bad outcome may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, if it is not suitable to put pressure on it; but envelop it around, instead of pressure, with hard bandages, and bind them.
And when you see after one or two days that the wound is beginning to close, then remove whatever you have placed over it, and apply healing ointment to the wound, such as a four-ingredient ointment and similar remedies.
And it is necessary that you loosen the member twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it remains swollen and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be dislocated in such a way that the bowstring moves gently downward.
And if it persists for a long time, and it cannot heal but keeps returning to the bowed state, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, then you must clean the wound thoroughly and remove all these misplaced fragments that cause pain.
And if a fistula occurs in the place or any other form of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in the chapter above.
And when a bone is broken and open on the member, like the bone of the leg or the shoulder, or other similar bones of the large limbs, do not pull it, for many times death results, but let it heal until it rots.
if, after twenty or thirty days, the wound has healed, then treat it if you can.
and if you cannot, then leave it.
We often encounter after the healing of the break, especially when it is near a joint, and the sight of the misaligned limb is a painful thing to behold. and by chance cannot perform the natural functions of its members.
Beware therefore, if it happens to us: if we administer astringent medicines, such as aloe, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, sumac, and similar others, without pressing any of these things, or all together, and confide them with astringent wine, or with abundance of honey, or with ash; and place them on the wound in compresses, tighten them well, and do not remove them for several days;
and place them on the wound in compresses, tighten them well, and do not remove them for several days; and then dislocate it, and begin again with another, until the nodes are healed.
or stretch it on a well-made plank; because the property of the plank is such that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
and if the node has already become hard like stone, it must be removed, cutting off the upper part and exposing the excess. You should shave it with no razor while it is infected, and treat it until it is healed.
The weak member after treatment.
When the fracture of the bone is healed and the limb remains weak and delicate, it occurs for many reasons: due to which one was tied too tightly and not tied as it should be; or because it had too many bindings, and cannot restore blood flow to the limb; or because of the abundance of inflammation; or due to excessive and sudden movements, not staying in place at the appropriate time; or because the patient has little blood in their body, making them weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and make the body firm, until the blood increases within them. and administer baths, giving joy and comfort;
then place the poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and rise it often with cold water, until the nourishment reaches the member. and returns to its natural shape.
Both members twisted after the dislocation. When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the member is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural strength.
nor believe the foolish who say one must break off the member from the very beginning, and many foolish people have done this in our land.
and this work is blamed, and it brings great harm, and perhaps death;
However, if inflammation and pain are severe, it is necessary to use hot water or cook gentle herbs such as fennel, roots, melilot, and similar things.
and apply the gentle plaster, well-made as a decocion, and take the mucilaginous part of fennel, and preserve it with gelatin fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster from it.
You take fat figures (or perhaps fatty substances), grind them finely with a pestle, and mix them with similar remedies that soften the hardening.
And never should the dislocation be subjected to continuous and prolonged friction with moist hands. And allow the affected limb to move every hour.
If the stiffness is due to inflammation and hardness, similar to stone, then it must be cut open with iron, if necessary reaching up to the bone, using a delicate incision. and apply compression and study the treatment.
Dislocations result from a joint moving out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs due to no apparent reason, it is necessary to attempt to bring the limb back to its normal position immediately.
For if treatment is delayed, the swelling may increase, and in some cases, it might be necessary to forcefully reset the joint back into place.
for this reason, it is not necessary to move it as soon as it swells. often causing fatigue and other pains;
nevertheless, when this happens, if it makes the patient healthier, then leave it until the abscess is completely healed.
then raise the affected limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as the cure comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the upper limbs from the wrist to the shoulder.
Soon, it happens that the jaws become dislocated, and the dislocation of both occurs in two ways: when they are slightly out of their sockets and softens a little; or they are entirely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part, and draining saliva from the mouth that he cannot hold, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue moves with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself through various dispositions.
And if it is entirely and completely dislocated, then it is necessary that you reset it immediately, without delay;
and in such a way that the physician places his hand on the patient's head, and pulls it toward him with gentle pressure at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, so that the dislocation is from two parts. and the other two hands should be prepared, making them equal.
and instructs the patient to soften his jaws and move them from all sides. And he adjusts the mirrors equally until they return to their place.
And if they return to their place, especially when both jaws are together, then apply hot water and oil gently, until they align slightly.
Do not hesitate to bring it back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back equally, and the mouth of the ill person closes well without softening, place moistened cloth bands covered in a mixture of rose oil and wax on them, then gently bind them with soft strings.
and make the patient sleep on their back, with their legs between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor should they strive for more, but gently press down on the flesh until the pain is gone and the jaws are relaxed.
and then massage what he wants to move lightly, and do not strain to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well closed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be properly aligned within an hour and do not return to their normal position, then fever and persistent aches may occur, along with abdominal pain, or vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is destruction; and often it kills those who have it, within seven days.
The fork cannot dislocate from either side in the continuity of it, and from the worst side, it is never healed properly outside, and it causes great pain.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, extends their arms; and then press the joint firmly into your palm, and it will return.
then place the splint and bandage, and tighten it;
and the joint which is towards the neck cannot be dislocated. if it does not dislocate, and if it never dislocates, then return it to its place, as we have said.
then place the splint and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
and thus, itself is brought back to the shoulder joint, when it is dislocated from its place.
**Shoulder Dislocation**
Know that the shoulder is damaged in three ways:
one is that it damages the part of the shoulder at the base; and the second is at the part where there is most pain; and by chance, it damages the part above, and this happens seldom.
and do not dislocate it behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate it inside for the nerves.
and often dislocate it towards the armpit, especially those with little strength, for these leap strongly.
for those with enough strength, it leaps slightly, and returns slightly.
And sometimes it happens to no one that they feel a sharp pain or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
You should therefore test it, as long as you are certain. and then begin treatment.
And the dislocation is recognized when it moves towards the joint, and it makes a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and by pressing on the joint, the top of the shoulder feels as if it were one. and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its normal position, nor make any movement.
and also, if it is dislocated at the top and not properly concealed, for you will feel it clearly when touching;
and this method of dislocation is not to be used unless it is fresh, or if the patient is ill.
And the method is that the healer places his hand on top of the patient's shoulder, then places his palm beneath the joint, and pulls the joint upwards with force towards the bone. and the healer lifts his hand and extends it upwards, then places it beneath. if he comes to illness.
And if it does not come as we have said, within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water. and apply gently softening and soothing treatments, such as an infusion of aloe vera, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and let it be applied.
then the patient should be placed on his back, and a soft cloth of equal thickness should be placed under him, neither too loose nor too tight, then place his heel on the cloth, and gently lift the head from the shoulder, and stretch the hand of the ill person.
and other ministers tie the patient's head so it does not move below. the shoulder now returns, and if it is dislocated, reset it according to this manner:
and make sure that the person at home is stronger than the patient. and be straight towards the side, and pull the patient's shoulder away from the body, lifting the shoulder up so that the patient hangs on the opposite side. and other assistants take hold of the patient's hand, lowering it towards the abdomen. And if the patient is too light, so that anything heavy causes him trouble, then the dislocation returns now.
And it is also done in another way:
and insert a long stick into the ground, making the end as sharp as a pistol, neither too thick nor too thin. then place the patient below, but with soft cloth above, and the pain should be from the long of the leg.
then his hand should be extended downwards from another direction, and the joint will return to its place gently;
and if it does not want to return for all the things we have said, then do this treatment: take a strip of cloth wide and long enough to cover the entire wound, and cut it in such a way that the edge can fully enter under the stitch.
then lay two cloth strips over the wound to prevent further pain for the patient, and insert them under the wound of the sick person.
and extends one arm over the leg along its length, and fastens the aid to the leg, and places the arm at the top of the hand, then puts the arm on the broad edge of a shovel, and lets the hand hang down, and leaves the body dangling from the other side: the joint moves now.
And when it is dislocated in any way, it is necessary to put under the joint a thread of equal wool, then apply the plaster with a mixture of powder from the mill, with incense and egg yolk, over all the shoulder and around, then pull the joint back into place, and tie the bandage again on the plaster, and press the hand against the collarbone, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he moves little, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster.
and then move more after a few days or seven, and move it. and if (it) is closed and (the patient) cannot relax it, then (it) is healed.
And if the joint is firmly stuck due to moisture or any other cause, it is necessary that you apply cautery in three places, as it is described in the chapter of cautery or treatment.
And if you do all this, and after seven days (the joint) becomes loose, and does not hold its place, and the patient cannot raise their arm above their head, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either compressed, stretched, or softened. and know that the joint will never return to its proper place.
The dislocation that is toward the worst side, and the joints, either in front or behind, are caused by a sudden movement, stretching of the hands, and (the patient) should be given another treatment.
and cure as long as he is healthy.
And after healing, cracking occurs in the member, and delayed movement, if the patient uses it many times, until the cracking is relieved, and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation cost
Knowing that the dislocated joint is weakened at the edges and returns to its place;
and is weakened from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not fully corrected, as we can clearly see it and feel it; and is weakened according to each shape. And when you join the dislocated part with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. Because the joint is dislocated, preventing the arm from bending or touching the shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it so that the abscess closes and does not reappear, because if the abscess reappears, it would be difficult to reset it.
and by chance it cannot be brought back to its original state completely, especially when it is at the rear. it is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and if left untreated, it may lead to death.
And for the restoration, when it is possible to bring it back, you extend your hand with both of yours. and the arms should be extended, and the hands turned toward the side opposite the joint, pressing and stretching it together with the palm's base, until it returns to its original position.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to its original position, and bring the base of the palm with the joint that is misaligned.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer a strong extension;
and this involves extending the arm, and the physician should hold it firm, so that it does not move during the extension.
then turn the arm in each direction, after you have wrapped it with a long and wide cloth;
and when you observe the joint at the hand's junction, if it is not lubricated with any oil to soften the joint, then press the swollen joint firmly, until it returns to its normal position.
and when it is in place, apply dry plaster with heat, form a strain, and stretch the arm to the collarbone of the suffering patient, and do not leave it for any days, then release it.
and if the joint is firmly in its place, loosen the ligament, and release it.
and if you see that the joint is not tightly held, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for no days until it is firmly set. then release it.
And if the patient feels pain after resetting the joint and it becomes silent, then bathe and gently rub it, pressing until it is relieved. or place the greasy sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and immerse it in the bath. and when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then replace the fat and then immerse in the bath again. and do this twice or three times, as long as it is healthy;
and if you see, place a fine cloth dipped in warm butter over it and hold it on;
it will return to its original position.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is misaligned, and its return to position is lighter than other joints. However, it is necessary to bring it back to its original position carefully, at the same time that it is misaligned, so that the joint does not swell or an abscess forms hot.
And the re-location is such that you place the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the patient's limbs, and look to ensure they are even, so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns.
However, it is important that you check if it is well-positioned. then place the patient's back of his hand on a table, extending and relocating it. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on a table, and look to see where the joint appears.
If it returns now, it is good. If, however, the strain of soothing treatments does not cease for abscesses, it leaves him thus without wanting to recommence.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place for any number of days, then the joint remains dislocated.
and causes no harm to the patient as long as their hands are relaxed and cannot tighten anything at all: so you know that the nerve or artery is cut,
If there is no other remedy but to extract the case by delicate cautery, then it may be worth trying something else.
And when the hand is dislocated, if you place on it the splint that we have said, then pull and hold it for a day, then release it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well and there is no fracture, then apply hot water moistened cloth and rub it until it is healed.
On the dislocation of the two joints of the hand
Never should the palms be massaged on either side, or the back of the hand or the belly.
then they should be pressed, and the dislocation reduced with gentle movements until it returns, then support the head with both hands, and pull it towards the part where it is dislocated.
and leave it for two days, then set it even with the other hand on that same day.
and bind it with a thread, as we have said, and loosen it by day, and make it move, and replace it to the bone;
and do this often, while it is tight, and do the same if it becomes unwell in the palm of the hand, and proceed as you have done before, until it is healed;
and do the same when it becomes unwell on another side.
dislocation of the spine
When the spine or the collarbone is dislocated and there is no cure, the patient's condition worsens rapidly and death may ensue.
And the signs are that the contractions suddenly leave without will, unable to hold it, and often a limb becomes weak, either both legs or both arms or one.
And often the elderly person becomes mute from the third part onwards;
The one that becomes mute at the back is called 'gibbousness'.
The treatment is that if the gibbousness has come from childhood, you must reward it. If there is no cure or recovery from it at all.
And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, they speak of old ways of treatment with great words, but it brings no real benefit at all.
but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the hardness that comes at the root of the hair, no one has any knowledge of it.
and also those that come straight in the second side, and one cannot cure from outside unless the one that comes to the back is properly treated, as I say.
and it is that the patient should be extended on their face in the first position evenly, and have pressure from beneath so they do not move.
then I insert a stick into the hollow of the earth-formed head, and another through the soft parts, and tie a strong cord around the afflicted's arms, legs, hips, and ankles.
and the two assistants know the positions of the cords, one for the head and others for the soft parts, among the two sticks;
and they should be tightly held, the sticks as we have said, and the patient places his palms on the formed spike until it returns.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table three feet long, cut a slot in the wall behind it, place the patient on their side, and turn the head of the table away from the wall, then put the middle of the table over the spine. and place the mirrors on the other side of the table's head, and press firmly until it returns to its place.
and if you see, do it with the turner that turns in your hand. And you should insert two splints into the head of the patient's ailing arm, and towards the feet, two others, with a space of about the length of a palm between each splint.
and each splint should have an opening or a hole, through which you can insert a thread and tighten it firmly in place so that the splints do not move.
and between each pair of splints, there should be a connecting thread, which tightens the splints together, and this thread should be as thin as the length of a palm.
and then take the ligament that is among the muscles towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other turn, and each of the assistants turns their turn to the entire ligament, and the master makes the spike even as we have said.
And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with plenty of heat, then the stoppers, and then the steel of a tablet three fingers long, which should hold the joint of the stiffness and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a ligament, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle relief, until they are healed.
and if any condition arises at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the intent that we have said before. and never should one administer a plug, and never should the appearance arise in the lower spine of the back, and it is believed to be dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, so one must not have any presumption; in case death were to come.
You know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only cause dislocations, unlike other joints.
and the hip joint is misaligned according to three parts. inside and outside, and front and back;
and deeper inside, then less misaligned front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is such that when you join the affected leg with the healthy one, if it is longer, and opens the sick knee more than the healthy ones, and the sick cannot double their knee at the fire. and it is the leg that is severely inflamed with hot abscess, because the joint of the thigh comes here.
And the sign of him who is about to die is that this event is contrary to what has happened before.
And the signs of one who has it in front, so it is that they have a well-aligned leg according to its completion; nevertheless, do not bend the knee without pain, and if one wishes to make it move, it cannot do so before, and it retains urine, and swells the leg, and as it moves, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of someone who is about to die from behind include: they cannot spread or bend their knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the angle of the limb becomes soft, and the foot is in a different position compared to the hip, towards the ribs.
They must reset this appearance of dislocation if it is an old dislocation that persists according to its nature, as there is no cure for it. and it is not appropriate that he should have any presumption.
And for the one whose dislocation is recent, and it's of the four types of dislocationif you act quickly and reduce the joint to its proper place, both inside and aligned, and then move it to the right or left. so that if it returns, there is no need for any other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support, and stretch the leg strongly with both hands, or bind it to the knee joint. and other helpers extend their hand over it in such a way that they bend their fingers towards the sole of the foot, then tightly hold it with a gentle grip on the calf. and another holds the head with a firm grip.
and they extend it upwards and downwards several times, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, and remains still.
This method of extension is common to all four parts, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If this is not treated, it is necessary to take care of its appearance.
When dislocation is in the shoulder, it is necessary to have the patient lie on their healthy side, then apply a bandage at the base of the thigh, and the joint that is above the angle, then stretch the bandage towards the angle and towards the strength.
then apply pressure with other assistants on the patient's arms, embrace the large joint of the injured thigh, and extend it to a wider opening. if it returns to its place now;
and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot tighten it in the manner we have said, then you should bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligature on both heels and both knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the others.
then it should be hung from the top of a post, and two long arms should be above the ground.
Then instruct the healer to embrace the top of the thigh, and have other assistants with the patient, who also embrace the thigh, for the joint now moves gently.
And when the dislocation is in the exterior, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of kyphosis, then tighten the ligaments on the affected leg properly, and also on the opposite side.
then place two pins, one at the top and another at the bottom, then insert a pin between the thighs of the patient in the shape. and he should surround it with moist flags, so that he does not harm the patient, and then extend each limb towards him, and with your eyes make the dislocation equal in his hand.
If it returns, that's good.
If it does not return, put it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous section, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is present, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg forcibly, as I have said; and place the mirror to his pain of being on the diseased angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch it downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is external, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downwards, nor raise him up from the ground, but rather he should be kept in a position as if his hip was dislocated downward, just as we have said gently on both hips. and place it on his face, with the ligament extended as we have said before, and he must press down on the joint on the table; and will be at the point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even. then fasten the thighs, and apply the plaster, and wrap a bandage tightly so that the hip does not move. and rest for three or four days, then untie it, and apply the plaster again.
and if you see them grow even, stretch them as they were before, and leave it for three days.
then release it, and make it go smoothly, as long as the limb is comfortable.
From the dislocation of the knee.
The patient is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, internally and externally, and behind.
and do not dislocate in front.
And the signs are such that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if they cannot straighten it at the knee, know that they are dislocated.
and the restoration of all is such that you make the patient sit straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place them face down on your lap, and place their foot on top of yours.
then take their knee in your palms, and draw it between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee forming an 'L'. and other assistants stretch his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has safely freed his leg slightly.
and apply a poultice, and make the leg move at the knee, and hold it together strongly for three or four days, then loosen it.
and the patient should not move about until the limb is healed.
And if the limb is not straight, apply firm extension as we have said in the treatment of the neck, as long as it is healed.
On the dislocation of the heel.
The heel is neither completely dislocated nor fully healed, both inside and out.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and it feels tense in the area where it is dislocated.
We reset it if it is light, and one must gently extend their hands when they are slightly stunned.
And when it is dislocated completely, one must then ensure the patient lies straight and holds the limb firmly above the ankle with a helper.
then take the foot in your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and gently bend the foot upwards.
and do this twice as we have said, both bending and stretching the foot.
If it returns, that's good.
If it does not return, the work must be recommenced, for it will;
and if it cannot return in that way, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and insert a stick firmly into the earth between their legs, binding the blankets around them to prevent injury to the patient.
then attend to the patient's leg, and have other assistants stretch the foot or hold it in place, securing it to the collar of the bed. then extend each limb equally, and let them move repeatedly between the legs of the patient to hold the patient still when they are stretched.
then place the mirrors equally on the dislocated joint in both hands, and another helper holds the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return to its place firmly.
And when it stops bleeding, apply a poultice and compress above, and strain the limb, fasten the foot to the leg, and secure the stirrups behind the ankle, ensuring the bindings are not too tight.
then let it be for two or three days, and gently move it if it is tight.
then on the third or fourth day, gently release it, and make the patient walk for three days. and if it goes beyond this limit, it is not fortunate that it does not dislocate further.
And if an abscess forms, it is necessary to soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, while it remains healthy.
Of the two (parts/sides). When the two (parts/sides) are disaligned, if they need to be properly aligned without strain, it is a light matter.
And if the dislocation is in any other part of the foot or leg, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back or on a table straight, and place your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot firmly until it returns.
and when it is even, and it opens nothing, he places the sole of the foot on a table with two joints, then strains it firmly, and leaves it for three days, then loosens it. and makes it rest, as long as it is healthy.
from wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, often the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in treatment, since you are ignorant of the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not patient and merciful and slow, do not be bold.
and at the beginning of things, apply hot poultices to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you have no hope for recovery; and if you see hope, then immediately reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess does not form again;
and when the limb is in place, apply hot poultices to the abscess and treat the wound as necessary with dried herbs;
and if there is a dislocation with broken bones and small fragments, then as we have said in simple diseases;
and keep yourself from entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, for it is your movement according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arms and body.
