You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine, its fulfillment, and have finished it through its explanations and statements. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this for you with this treatise, which is the beginning of the work of hands, namely "surgery.
And since the work of hands is treated differently in our region and is strange to all, the science is lost and cut off, and there is nothing left from its roots except for small descriptions in books by the ancients about what the hands have done. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and knowledge is distant.
I believe I want to revive it by organizing this treatise according to the method of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation. and I will bring together the shapes of cautery instruments and other tools for the work with their appropriate adjustments, as needed.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has languished. And he who wishes to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the members, their shapes and connections, and the separations of parts; he should have knowledge of bones, nerves, blood vessels, and the number of organs, and understand the functions of moving and resting veins.
And Hippocrates says that the name without meaning is empty, and the work with it is little. and especially in the art of the hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, will surely fall into error and harm others.
since I have often seen many of those who undertake this science and abandon themselves without knowledge or experience.
For I have seen a foolish craze that seizes the scrotum or neck of a woman and affects the arteries of the neck. because so much blood comes out that the woman dies in his hands.
And see another wonder where a stone is treated from a man's eye, and the stone was large. if it carries with it a piece of the bladder, and he was bitten inside three days.
And I had already been called to treat him; I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if it were not removed, he would surely die.
And see another wonder where he took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound.
and the ignorant doctors tighten the break on the wound as if by strong force, and leave no room for the wound to heal, and they leave it thus at the end.
and he commands that he does not dislocate it at all;
and waits until the leg is completely swollen and sore, and it comes to destruction.
I am called to come to him, and I hasten to go and dislocate the leg; and when I saw it dislocated, it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But any attempt to correct it was already confirmed as corrupted or the member could not be healed.
and does not cease the corruption of pain through the member until the limb is completely lost.
And I also saw another wonder: the abscess became worse, and then it was inflamed due to the evil nature of its mastery.
For the chancre, when it is free of melancholic humor, one should not use iron to treat it unless it is in a part that can be entirely removed, so as to eliminate what is corrupt.
And for this reason, gentle reader, it is necessary that you know that the art of healing is divided into two parts: that is to say, work where there is danger in many ways;
and I will show, in each part of this book, where there is fear and danger.
For this reason, it is important for you to guard yourself, so that the foolish eye cannot speak ill of you.
If you take up your weapons in courage, and approach your sick gently yet firmly, and use the best method, through the grace of God, you will come to salvation and be saved.
and let go of the fearful diseases of sorrow, healthily.
and remove your weapons of doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other, gloriously.
Galen does not speak in any of his warnings: Do not take any ill disease too much to heart, unless you are called a fool.
I have devised this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cautery and the use of harsh medicines, and they are ordered from the head down to the feet.
and the shapes of instruments, the tools for cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
The second chapter deals with cutting and piercing, and the use of suckers and incisions, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar procedures.
and it describes the chapters arranged and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar conditions.
and it is ordered from the greatest pain down to minor discomfort, and describes the forms of instruments.
Therefore, remembering the work, it is necessary that I mention the quality of the aid and the harm of each condition.
I say that the qualities of help, and its harmful effects, are the longest discourse and most subtle science, and secret answers.
and about these things, many of the wise spoke, and agreed upon this.
and I will be satisfied with few of my words, for I fear the length.
I say that fire cautery universally helps every complexion where it has substance, whether it be of two complexes. This is to know: a hot complexion with material cause, and a dry complexion with material cause.
In a hot and dry complexion, combining material causes, they devised something and said that fire treatment is great aid. and the other ones said the opposite: that fire treatment is not useful for a disease that comes from heat and dryness. Because nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for a disease caused by heat, nor by dryness.
and he who does the opposite of cautery provides great help for hot and dry disease that comes upon the body of men. For when you compare the body of a man and its moisture with the heat of fire, you perceive that the flesh is fresh.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found it to be true through experience.
And in every case, no one should intervene unless they have tested it themselves, and who knows through long experience the chapter of cautery, and the diversity of the constitutions of men, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and the time and space.
we have no fear, especially of cold and moist diseases. And all agreed and were convinced about the cautery.
And know, child, that cautery joins fire, which is a secret of healing, and indeed it is much gentler than burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and brings no harm but to the member that is afflicted, and does not affect any other member.
Burning medicines pass from one part to another by separation, and bring to the member painful diseases with no healing. and perhaps the patient recovers.
He does not waste it for its nobility and the goodness of its nature, if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experience and through the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it was about the truth of things.
and therefore I excuse the length of my words, for I do not like to deprive you of the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives diseases from the body, as the philosopher demonstrates. or consider it in your thoughts.
And know this, my son, that there is agreement among them as to when cauterization should be performed and the appropriate tools chosen.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmful substances causing pain are removed by the help of cautery. and indeed, cautery itself is necessary for pains that cannot wait for the time when greater harm does not come to the member.
And never think, dear child, as do the foolish people; for the illness that is cured by cautery has no recurrence; and thus it is done;
and thus it is done; but it is not at all as they should take care, because cautery is only a remedy that alters the complexion, dries up the humors that cause pain, and acts more quickly than other medicines because of its virtue and authority.
And it is possible for the illness to come, sometimes according to the temperament of the patient and the place where the illness resides and its nature.
and in him are accumulated excesses through the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cautery is administered to remove these excesses and moisture, as with cautery for pain and similar conditions, and such pain does not return. but this rarely happens.
And many people do not understand at all why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is indeed so.
but they do not believe that cautery is valid after medicine; their intentions are false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer treatments in any disease and they do not work, then let us use cautery, and it is effective.
Then it becomes clear that cautery is indeed the last of medicine, not according to the opinions of ignorant people.
The ancients said that gold cautery instruments are better than iron ones, and they did not consider fire to be hot enough except for the quality of gold and the high value of its substance.
and they said that the fire of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true, as I have tested it, and I have found that it is indeed harmful to no men.
and fire cautery is more valuable than metal, as they say. However, when you heat gold instruments, you are not sure if they are heated through due to the color of the gold, and once heated, they quickly cool down.
and if they are heated too much; they turn black from the fire. and thus, there is enough hindrance.
You have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the path may be lighter to follow.
Fire cautery is useful for moisture and cold on the head, and it is effective in cases of disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and for numerous dreams, toothaches, throat pains, and especially in all diseases caused by cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine that cleanses the third or fourth (nerve) channel, according to the virtue and age, and the habituation of the patient to pain. and then make the patient's head comfortable.
and then make the patient lie with their head between your hands, and place their hands on some weight.
after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes. and when your two tools have come, take the blood from the wound and heat the cautery called "olive" (olivare), of which this is the form: and place the sign (or mark) of ink on the dislocated joint, and move your hand down and pull it in, repeatedly disturbing it. then gently release your hand, and if you see the bone move slightly, and if you do not see it move, repeat the cautery until you can see the bone as I have told you.
After taking a little silk thread, wrap it around and make it soft cotton, place it on the wound, and leave it for three days.
After that, place the moist cotton on it. and leave it until the burning is gone. Afterward, treat the wound with the dressing called "tetrarmation" as long as it remains healthy.
And the ancients said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purifies itself. and for this reason, help is sought.
And they say that one must not leave the cautery so long that the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it will heal.
And he should be told to leave the cautery alone and press so hard against the bone that it opens as wide as women do when they give birth so that the humors can escape.
and the wound should remain open for a long time. After the operation, one must cure and dress.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in every way, except for those who have no other choice.
and it seems to me that I must leave this;
for the tissue is weakened by continuous solutions of moisture, as we testify in other members;
and also when the joint of the patient is weak by nature, and the initial appearance of cautery is safer and more mobile for me, from which I derive great benefit.
When chronic pain persists for a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie", as well as purgatives for the head and eyes, and poultices. and if one performs the cautery as we have said above, it is ineffective. Beware that the patient's joint is of strong nature, and that it is not too sharp. Then cauterize deeply, as we have said above. After that, cauterize each corn of the shoulder just below the bone, as we have said above, and cauterize the one called "vasselz". and hold the limbs where vents (suction cups) are placed. and gently hold the hand so that you do not see the bone. The sick person feels too much great pain in this cautery more than in others, and I will speak of that later.
and it is necessary that the cautery of the horns be more subtle than that which cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is its form:
For fire cautery, instruct the patient When there is sudden pain in a part of the head and the illness extends to the oil (or possibly referring to swelling or inflammation), and the condition is purged with various medications, and other treatments as I have mentioned in the division of illnesses, and none of these help: Then he performs cauterization according to two manners, that is to say, with hot medicated herbs and with fire.
He performs cauterization with hot medicated herbs if he presses a sweet almond, removes the skin and wraps it in cloth, then makes an incision at the site of the pain in such a way that you can reposition the almond under the skin.
and when it is repositioned, if he holds it well and tightens it, leaving it that way for twelve hours. and then free it and treat with honey for the wound, leaving it thus for two or three days. then place a cotton cloth soaked in butter over the wound until it heals.
After the treatment, as long as it is healed;
and if you find yourself in need of any of the burning medications that I have written about or the proper treatment of burning medications.
The fire cautery is done according to this manner. Heat the fire cautery with this form:
And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a clasp where there is a little curve, and has a small appearance.
and place it on the painful joint, hold your hand and gently turn it, until half of the thickness of the heart is burned.
and let go of your hand so the artery does not burn, which is depleted, and allows abundant blood to flow.
After applying cotton wrapped in string, place it on the joint for three days; then I cover it with moistened butter, and then treat the wound of the limb until it is healed;
and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare" (scalpel), be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine that is not ancient.
migraine
When you treat a migraine as we have previously said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery mentioned above (scalpel) is dirty and does not serve its purpose, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
and thus, by the joint that causes pain, draw a line half as long as a finger, and once your hand is in place, hold it so you do not touch the artery and do not go past the bone.
and guard the jaw that stops when chewing, so the nerves are only focused on the quiet and no spasms come to the patient, and beware of blood flow from the artery once it is cut, as cutting it carries great fear and especially for one who does not know how, or has no experience. and leave the wound halfway healed;
but I will tell you how to retain blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it clots in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient suffers, cauterize both joints as we have said, and treat the wound until it is clean.
and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in this chapter for the extraction of the artery, using a cauterization tool with two blades. and this is the best cautery of them all and most helpful.
about the pain of ears due to cold.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and various solutions and other remedies as we have mentioned in the previous section have been tried without relief, then apply this cautery called "point," which is shaped as follows:
After puncturing around the painful ear or both ears, hold them slightly apart and tilt them upwards from the root of the ear, having marked the place of the joint. and make X punctures around each ear;
afterward, treat the joint while it is healthy.
Of mouth torture" translates roughly to "Du torture de la bouche" in
The torture that must be cured by cautery is limited to those that move with fluid, as we have said in the sections about illness.
and do not perform cautery on conditions that resemble dryness and pain from nerves.
When you cure this resemblance of torture that moves with fluid from dry spells and purging in the head and gargling, and it is not effective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries. one at the base of the ear, another slightly above the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips.
and place the cautery instrument on the part that opens up clean, and make a burn in the top of the ear just below the edge of the skull, and another one on the forehead at about the same distance; and leave the cautery on until half of the heart is burned;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it resembles the knife that we have placed in front, but this one is a bit more subtle, and it is necessary for the knife to be slightly thicker.
After healing, reset it as I have previously said, while it remains healthy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it as we have said, but the patient does not benefit, and has no fever, then make four cauterizations. On the two horns of the head, I apply heat to the head, and I treat the limb called "vessel" as we have previously said, and do no cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
and so be healed as we have said before.
The word "de litargie" appears to be related
For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of herbal remedies to purify the mind;
after washing the head of the patient thoroughly, place the plaster made from naphtha on the occipital region as described in the treatise on plasters;
and this is the method of cauterization: if you do as I have said.
If it is healthy thus, it is good. and if it is not, perform three cauterizations with hot iron on the head down to the collarbone, and leave two large spaces between each cauterization.
and treat it as the others, and if you see it tighten, and the patient suffers, perform a cauterization in the middle. and it is necessary, to the others on both horns, and cure as long as it is healed;
and let the cautery be called "olive," as I have said before.
The head should be cleaned with earth and water as we have said before.
after cleaning the head of the patient, then apply the cautery to the head and each horn, and behind, and three times on the spine of the neck.
and if you have more skill, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back. and leave it until the most intense heat is burned, and then lift your hand; after the treatment until it is healed, and then apply the cauterization known as 'olivare' that we have mentioned before.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should only use fire cautery for those who are phlegmatic; it is first necessary to purify the brain with years and other remedies as we have mentioned in the section on the treatment of great pain and suffering from medicinal errors.
And if it is a young child who cannot bear the pain, give them gargles and chewing, often cleansing the brain with good meats;
After the king has entered the chamber, and we have done the cautery as we have said before, and cauterized on the vessel, and on each corn. and if the patient suffers greatly and is in pain, we do cautery as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the limbs, on the spine of the back and neck, and cauterize them with an olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is afflicted, perform a delicate cautery according to this manner:
When, due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupt moisture and a thick flux, then perform cauterization with hot irons as we have said for those with paralysis.
And if, due to melancholy, the excessive fluids decline into melancholy and the body of the afflicted patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain is purified, as is appropriate according to the rules of division.
After the king has entered with the patient; After making the twist of the bandage well done, just as if you draw a circle, place it on the head.
and the patient should be crossed, held firmly from all sides.
after applying the poultice, rub it with butter from old bees. and heat it gently over fire, so that the patient can bear it. after emptying the circle inside out around the head, and leaving it to cool down;
and do this for the patient each week once with another good method, as long as they are healthy.
Or, if you need to cauterize it, make several incisions across the cautery.
this method of cautery moistens the brain increasingly;
and then place a moist cotton ball in butter and goose fat.
of the eyes When the eyes come first under the signs I mentioned in the previous section, then begin and give to the patient something to drink, a purifying medicine for the head, and protect from all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath while fasting.
afterward, he commands the patient to raise their head, and performs cautery around the head, and does two cauteries on both temples if the downward flow of blood from the nose is in both directions together, or in one, if it is only in one.
and cut with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, making the cautery long according to the width of the forehead.
and guard against the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it with a cloth as you know how.
And I will teach you, in the extraction of arteries and the cauterization of incisions, how to stop it.
and never should one cauterize or burn the skin between the two rear bones.
and we see that it is cold, phlegmatic surplus, so apply the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter to the eyes: I apply the cautery to the head, and I cauterize both temples, and I cauterize below the bones of both eyes. and if it requires more, cauterize carefully above the eyebrow with all the small cautery.
When you medicate it according to what we have said in the previous discussion, but it does not benefit, then give the patient three doses of bitter cochineal. After the king (or the doctor), apply the fire cautery with olive oil as its medium. and perform two cauterizations with the "clavalis" cautery on both sides of the teeth, slightly removing the hair.
and be careful of the artery, do not cover it.
And this is the form of cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil (maybe referring to skin or a wound) is softened by illness and moisture, then use this cautery which is called "olive. Due to which the shape is:
And if you see that it is necessary to perform cautery on both sides of the wound, make them as long as the hairs;
and do not remove your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
the hair that is not yet oil (i.e., unripe or not fully developed) Never does it happen that the hairs of the wound are turned to ash, and they prick the skin; and cautery is performed according to these two manners: that is to say, with fire or burning medicine.
Or fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even. and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow even and aligned, then place the patient into sound health. after signing on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as strong as it fills with wonder, and be it the beginnings of the sign among the hairs.
then I mix moist cotton with egg glue and musk from the iris in oil, then heat the fire cautery with which this form is made:
After cauterizing the shape you have marked several times, burn the affected area gently.
and the signs of the work's healthiness are that you see the skin retracting and the hairs standing on end at the tip of the oil.
then hold your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then I apply moist cotton in butter until the scorch is healed. After the healing treatment as long as it is clean.
And after that come the hairs, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on the same place, just as you did before.
and if the hairs are singed, cauterize it while the paper is raised to its natural state and even, and do not allow the hairs to prick the oil.
The medicinal burning cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
then take French soap and sharp knife, each one, and grind them together well; and do it carefully, if it does not cool down, then apply it to the shape you have made like a leaf from nature, and cover with paper of the eyes. and if the disease persists only in one place, then surgery should be done there, and also in both places. and place cotton oil moistened with egg beneath.
and the patient's joint should be in your healthy hand and place your finger over it, pressing gently and moving it every time the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, for it also stings like fire.
As you have done this for a long time, if medicine fails, resort to surgery. And once the stinging has passed, if you notice the limb raising on its own, and see the paper raised as it would be raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good.
If no, then apply more of the medicine to the limb or the medicine has not opened up, as long as your work is even and your joints are in place;
then place a moist cotton cloth on it in butter until the burning of the colors is extinguished, after treating the wound with the 'diaphena' and other remedies, as long as it is healed.
And if you have to take care of yourself, watch over your work carefully so that it does not stray from the medicine at all.
And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the oil, then repeat the treatment on that wound which has been softened with the paper, just as you did before. after the treatment, as long as it is healed;
and this is the form of the wound with great care:
And know that the bones of humans vary in size and shape, and according to these constraints.
and do not deviate from the correct path for him who has studied this art.
On the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have explained in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are of no benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery on it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position. and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor do they wiggle their head.
after moistening a cloth with wine or juice of parsley on oil;
after heating the cautery instrument that is sharp:
and it should be shaped like the head of a quill, assembling the tip to be the cautery.
if you look, it is pointed from one side to the other, and if you look, it is also like a tent.
but nevertheless, this baldness is worth moving for your work.
After pressing the fistula, it opens, and drains the pus and dries it up. and if it closes again, if the treatment is effective, it draws out the bowel.
after applying the hot cautery, hold the hot iron over the affected area of the body, keeping your hand steady above it so as not to cause any movement. and apply the cautery to the fat of the oil, and the corruption.
If you start the cauterization close to the bone, that would be good. If this does not help, apply the cautery again, and if you need to, do so multiple times, and leave it for three days.
after which he applies moist cotton soaked in butter, and treats the wound until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply a corrosive medicinal ague as long as the bone is exposed. and the treatment according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that no one from the past spoke of. Cut open the fistula and expose the place; after inserting into the opening, take a fine instrument with which there is this form: and it makes the quantity of a drop of blood; and hold your hand firm or the instrument tightly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the blood does not flow to its place.
and it is necessary to put cotton soaked in oil on the patient's wound so that it heals well:
He plunges deeply into the wound with his finger, and it heals through a wonderful cure.
And if the ulcer is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If this is not the case, it is necessary to administer heat or cold, and bring the ulcer back into the body according to what is appropriate for its own place.
cracks in the lips Many times, cracks appear in the lips, known as 'poil', especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these wounds as we have discussed in the previous sections, and the treatment does not benefit, then use a small surgical knife according to this form:
and places the hospital in those crevices until it reaches the source.
after treatment, cover it with wax until it is healed.
When an abscess forms in the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of teeth, after putrefaction and rot, it becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula. and you treat it as we have said before, but it does not benefit. then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the extraction or perforation of the fistula, hold your hand tightly until the heat from the iron reaches the bottom, and do not release it.
and do so once or twice after the treatment of what we have said before, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if that does not help, it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medications is ineffective, then place the patient's infected tooth in a healthy mouth. after applying the heat for cauterization, watch for the following signs: in this manner, you place a bandage over the tooth.
and then apply the hot cautery to the patient gently, holding the hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
after releasing the hand, repeat the cautery according to your wish;
after filling the patient's mouth with salt water, leave it for an hour and rinse with hot fire.
And in this manner, the teeth that were moving are fixed firmly, and the gums softened and restrained, and the moisture corrupted and dried up.
of the pain of teeth
When dental pain comes from coldness or frostbite, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cautery is required according to the following two methods: and with butter cautery and fire cautery.
The butter cautery is such that you press butter into the wound, and then end it with a metal spoon, either of iron or gold. after taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a stick, dip it into melted butter, apply to the painful tooth gently, and hold until it cools.
and thus do this often until the virtue of the butter reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that the moistened wool and cotton in the melted butter is effective, apply to the aching tooth, and hold over a hot iron until the heat reaches the elevation of the painful tooth.
He uses fire cautery if it is such that you insert a iron or steel needle into it, and it is hot enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
After heating the cautery, from which the shape is formed, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down.
Do this often, because the pain will be most intense that day or the next.
And it is important that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of that cautery, and then quickly removes it.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And perform the cautery on the part of the body that you wish, according to what you are able to do;
and this is the form of the cautery tool:
Of scrofula When the scrofula is of cold moisture and is not obedient to medication, then heat the cautery iron with this, after which it will have openings for the smoke to escape from the cautery to the other part.
and then apply hot cautery to the abscess once, as is required, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
and if the abscess is small due to applying cautery according to its quantity, leave it thus for three days. and then apply moist cotton with butter until the burning is healed.
after healing, bandage the limb with linen and tents until it is healed.
When moisture conquers the channels of the body, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be emptied first by solvent medicines.
After the fire cautery at the root of the throat, be sure not to go near the throat, and do not swallow any strong tastes but a little.
After that, perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone and spine, and it is this cautery called 'clavicle' from which we get the form beforehand.
and treat the joint as we have said above, as long as it is healthy.
When all and every illness of the промon (a term for a specific body part, likely referring to the joints or muscles) are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or stiffness, and it is an old illness, then make .II cauteries (two types of treatments) on the affected areas. and another cautery apply between the two joints.
and this cautery, called "clavile" according to the shape mentioned above, should be performed.
And if you see, perform cautery by pricking all the cautery that is called 'points' from which the shape is as it is in the ear disease;
and the points should be just XXX, or as deep as necessary.
After the treatment, reset the limb according to what is mentioned above, and make the cauterization in three stages according to this form:
And because cautery is lighter, because you do it three times.
of the dislocation of the joint
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, remember the patient on their back and on their side; after that, open the channel that is within the abscess with your left hand's fingers;
and if the joint is disaligned within, then apply the fire cautery gently so that it takes on the right form.
and cauterize the heart as much as it feels, and the figure of the cautery should be three cauterizations together.
and for this reason, the cautery is made with a cautery having three prongs, so that the figure of cauterization consists of six cauterizations.
and the nerves vary according to the fineness of the wound, and this is the shape of the cautery with three prongs.
And never adjust this nerve, for which there are eight burns.
After applying the fire cautery, place crushed herbs on it with a string. After resting the patient, do not move the limbs for a long time until they are completely healed.
And if it is dislocated from above, this happens rarely, then apply cautery to the thick part with a hot iron, or use many cauterizations by pricking.
Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach, causing it to lose its color, and catarrh multiplies within it, and usual treatments do not help, then the patient should be careful on his back, extending his legs and arms. Then, afterward, perform three cauterizations. First, remove the skin with a knife, taking care to cut along the entire length of the cautery. Second, make incisions on both sides in such a way that the cauterized marks form at three angles, and there is enough space between each mark so they do not stick together when healing.
and they should burn so that they impress both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the burns be according to this form without adjustment:
and if you have a large burn in the stomach according to this form;
and whoever is afraid of this burn, burn by pricking and signing on the stomach in a point according to the quantity that you see fit; then burn it all over the burn that is called "point".
After the treatment we have previously discussed, as long as he is healthy.
As for the liver, it suffers from sharp pain and moisture and a great deal of phlegm, as long as it is strongly deviated from its natural condition due to excesses. and the patient is treated as we have said in sections, but it does not benefit them; it is necessary that the patient be mindful of their condition. and the signs of three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, driving out the vapors, opening where the pain in the side comes from;
and let there be enough space between each cautery, the thickness of a finger. and the cautery should be as long as the body, and do not apply too much pressure with your hand on the entire cautery.
and burn only the middle part of the heart, and the patient should be upright on their feet.
and if he cannot, lie down, extend his legs, and ease his pains.
And if you wish to cauterize these wounds with a knife, being subtle and skilled in the art, be careful not to burn the entire heart, for you would cause great harm to the whole body. and that it does not come to a boil, for the heart is very delicate in this place, and the knowledgeable ones to see it.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you must know if it is within the tissue of the liver or in the gallbladder: If he is on the bed, the patient feels great pain.
And if he is in distress (or "in the throes"), he feels an extreme pain.
And during this treatment when the pain suddenly increases, it is necessary for the patient to rest on his head.
and then apply pressure around the vein or abscess, and then heat the iron cautery which is similar to a flame, so this is the shape: And cauterize with a hot iron until the colors are burned, and come just to the point of syphilis, as long as the pus is still burning.
after the cure according to the treatment of the flux until it is healed.
and it is not advisable for this cautery to be used by anyone who has not studied deeply the art of medicine, and whose hands have never successfully treated these illnesses.
Then he can move it boldly, but I still think it is better to leave it.
The "discation" or "dislocation" treatment of tears (pleursin
The ancients said that one should make cauterizations with the roots of aristologue, and in this manner: Take a long root of aristologe (a medicinal plant), the largest you can find, dry it, and make it as thick and as long as your arm. and soak it in oil, then hold it over the fire, and cauterize between the shoulderblade and the collarbone, and make smaller cauterizations slightly descending in the part below the beard.
and make cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly behind. and cauterize the heel, and another one on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and along both sides of the lower heels, removing the cauterization between the shoulders.
and do not press my hand, but hold it open as if smelling something.
And they say that no ancient tells of any man using fire cautery resembling a razor, heating it, and placing it between the ribs, as it comes to this abscess. and suddenly the pain increases, as we have said about the severe liver abscess.
But in this work, there is great fear, or the sick die now, or a fistula appears that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mouse according to the divisions of treatment we have mentioned, and it does not benefit, then they (the healers) resort to three ways of cauterization that are all good.
Dislocate the bone in such a way that you make three cauteries, or four, following the length of the bone, according to the shape of the liver cautery we have mentioned above.
and do not press my hand firmly to all the cautery, and let the patient be careful on his back;
and another method of cauterization is to heat the iron with hot coals, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
and take care to remove the splint that is placed over the fracture, or where the patient feels pain moving from left to right, and make sure the elevation matches the direction of the bone's length, and the cauterization according to the width of the body.
After burning the two nerves, make sure the colors are pierced on both sides, then apply hot cautery, and thus you will have three.
And if you see, cauterize all the cautery at three nerves.
After the treatment when it has festered for a long time, this is more difficult to treat than other treatments mentioned before.
Cauterization is not effective for edema, except in the manner known as "asclytes".
When you cure it according to the ways we have said in divisions, and your treatment is not beneficial, then you must make four cauterizations around the wound, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the heart, two behind the back on the spine, and one at the anus. and so the cauterization should be close to the specific heart beat.
After leaving the cauterization open for a long time to allow pus to drain, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cauterization. and healing would be hastened, and the two intentions would be aligned with the help of God.
The form of the cauterization for the abdomen should be like the nail that we have shown before. and if it is for the back to be olive-shaped, according to what it has been previously placed.
When the feet are swollen in a hydroptic patient, filled with yellow pus, it is necessary to cauterize on the back between the little finger and the ring finger. and hold your hand with the cautery without turning it.
And do not enter too deeply, so as to close the citrus wound, and be the cautery according to this form:
After that, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip with the point of the knife; and make the cautery long, one on either side of the knee and the other on the leg.
and leave the cauteries to grow long without dressing them, so that they heal from within.
after the dressing of the other wounds that we have mentioned.
When abdominal pain arises from cold and moisture, the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any means. and you see the patient in great pain and of strong virtue, so make a great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken beforehand or cautery of the stomach, to the circulating cautery; and I cauterize around the anus gently with a subtle cautery, and I cauterize on the thighs.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each place, and three small cauteries on the stomach to lessen the great pain, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the foundation or in one or more places, and they are old and composed of corrupt cold and moist humors, and they are treated as we have said in the divisions, but it does not help, then make cauterization: On the spine of the back, whoever is completely devoid of strength, gradually and carefully moves in a triangular motion, and with two incisions from the side, he should cauterize the wound.
and if you think his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and you see the face swelling, then great cautery should be applied to the stomach, as it is said above, and another on the liver, and another across all the organs with cautery nails. and leave the cautery open for a long time. After treatment, reset the joint while it is still healthy.
When you have finished everything, if you feel the heat of the cautery that seems too sharp, and then apply it thoroughly to that entire wound; and let your hand be still so that the cautery reaches the vein's origin, from which comes health.
do this once or twice, and if there is much heat in the wound, cauterize each one as we have said. after the beneficial treatment of wounds while they are clean;
and if you use a large hot cautery on it, it will have greater help.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we shall relate in its place, such a disease arises that can only be healed by cautery.
When a vein becomes fistulated, and is inflamed, filled with putridity and corrupt moisture, you must try every subtle remedy, and ensure that you know the full strength of each attempt.
After heating the cautery until it seems sharp, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered, and repeat the cauterization as many times as necessary until the dead and corrupted tissue is completely burned, once or twice or three times, depending on the amount required.
and be careful not to burn the sensitive nerves and large veins.
if the fistula is in the wall of the bladder and the intestine, be careful of these joints, and make no fires except on fat flesh, and consider that it is not permanent.
After healing the limb as long as it is healthy, and if the joints are loose, and the bones have been pulled apart for a long time, then know that the joint is completely healed.
and if the bones have not been pulled apart, know that the joint is broken and the bone is crushed at its base. and thus, as one of these things we would say in its place.
When sharp pain and great swelling come, and it does not respond to treatment for women, then you must perform a cauterization on the affected area on both sides, using the cautery iron that we have previously mentioned.
and so we cauterize it in the middle, if there are three cauterizations in a row, and they will bring greater aid.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then it should be cauterized in the upper part, where the urethra begins, and this on both the right and left sides, making each cauterization as long as our thumb.
and then cauterize behind the back, as needed.
and let the cautery be done according to the shape mentioned above.
When the weather is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are withered and their ends delay; and when they come, great pain is felt; then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the anus, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back;
and let the cautery burn, as we have said.
When sticky moisture descends to the chest cavity and for this reason it becomes mute in its place, and the sign is that the affected limb appears longer than the other when measured together.
and it is found that the internal organs move, so it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the chest at the cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the organ around the chest as it returns, so that the chest is within the circle.
and if they are cauterized like those with which the stomach is cauterized.
And if this cautery is not present, make three cauterizations from the large olive tree, and let these cauterizations be just as effective as all the others.
and treat it as long as it is healthy.
of the pain of the back When pain arises in the chest due to cold and moisture, and the patient suffers from great discomfort, treatment as described in the previous section is not effective, and the illness is chronic: Then it is necessary for you to cleanse the patient of bad humours, such as foul pills or other good-looking pills. After that, he performs cautery;
and the method of cautery is according to two manners: this is to say, burning medicines and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which some are as follows:
that you cauterize on the wound of the hamstring in three places, cauterizing them triangularly according to this form, and make them deeply and widely, and allow between each cautery a distance equal to that of two fingers, and let them be olive-colored.
never should one cauterize in the middle of the hamstring, which is why there are three according to this form.
and if you see that the cautery is like a circle as we have said before in the dislocation of the hamstring;
but make it in such a way that the circles hold all the hair, and every little part of the heart is burned.
And this is the method used for sciatica, when the pain persists in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
And if it extends to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations here where the patient feels the most pain, and one cauterization on top of the ankle, slightly to the left side.
and it should be a cutting cauterization, and the thickness of the heart should be burned.
and if the patient feels the pain extending up to the two bones of the foot or near the ankle, cauterize that area in three spots or four, and this cauterization is called "point. And if it happens again, it must be done more carefully;
And if the pain is in the knee towards the thigh, it is done with a sharp or circular cautery; and be very careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery too long, burning the nerves and large arteries, and causing the patient greater harm and contraction.
I myself have seen many who had cauterized the ankle of the foot, and left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the ankle as well, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the entire foot. After an abdominal solution, he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and to the other in this manner.
And the wise ones say about the cauterization of the spine: this is how it should be done, take a hot iron as thick as a finger and make incisions, either crossed or one after the other, with a distance between them equal to the thickness of a fingernail.
and intertwine them across both parts, and they should also be equal, and have one well-made iron;
and this is the form:
and heat it until it is entirely red and oozes pus, then place it on the diseased joint of the patient, and turn to the healthy side.
and cauterize it once the cautery is dry, and leave it for three days. and then apply a paste of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment of dressing, as long as it is healed.
Albuscasim says that we use this cautery little because of the fear of its regard, and we see few who use it.
and yet these are good cauteries, which a strong person can endure, and the place where it is done.
He uses the cautery of burning medicine if you make an instrument to intertwine with which you lower the edge of the door, and it is either of iron or steel on a long wall, and at the top there are two of us, and between each one has the quantity of thickness of a finger. and they should be open above and below, and join together according to this form:
After that, place the board of the chair on the sick person lying on their side, and quickly put your hand most over the board of the chair. After pouring between the two circles of hot awes (a type of iron) heated over fire, leave it for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and burn from it.
Because it has the same effect as fire;
and when the burn has passed, take a clean hand with the instrument and raise the limb with the soft awes, leaving it thus for three days, and apply butter until the black from the burn is removed; and let it remain three days in purification;
and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as it is healthy.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, apply the instrument as it has been done in the hip, accordingly.
and this is the way of hot water, and I have written it in treating for rectifying medicine. Take alkali and hot ashes, as much of one as of the other, crush them together, and put them in a new pot. if he has a small opening, deflect it so that the tip of a tool can enter.
if he has a small opening, deflect it so that the tip of a tool can enter. and place it in another well-sealed pot, and add alkali and salt, and gently heat it until there are two layers of powder on top, as you would carefully press it into your hand.
and leave it until all the water and liquid have evaporated from the sealed pot, then take all that remains of the liquid, and pour it onto salt and alkali as before.
And thus, it will be a great aid and comforting in many works of medicine and other cauterizations on other parts of the body.
For it performs the same work as fire, and is useful in other medications where cauterization is applied well to the wound, such as honey, anacardium, and chalk with soap; all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure for which a nobleman was freed from the pain of chest and sciatic vein, and he said that no other cure was done, and he was completely healed once this treatment was carried out, and he bathed as he teaches below.
And it is prepared in such a way that you press fresh and dry laurel leaves, grind them finely with some fat, and apply it to the wound and on the thigh and leg where the pain persists, and bind it.
and leave it for three hours, or as long as the patient no longer feels the pain.
Then make the patient take a bath or a warm drink until the body is slightly warmed, and make them lie down, and the pain will disappear completely and they will be cured.
And know that no one should use fire treatments with such remedies, except after the evacuation of blood.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it provides great relief.
and the cautery must be performed in this way. Take another cloth and grease it with old oil, and place it in the hollow between the big toe and the other one called the fossa.
After taking dried goat's dung, set it alight until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the wool, leaving it until it is stained.
and repeat this process again, and do not stop doing so as long as you think the pain has ceased;
and this method of cauterization is called "keyhole cautery.
Of the great pain in the back.
When great pain comes to the back, whether from strain or impact, or due to excessive evacuation, or from some similar matter that appears expanded and cold, no cautery is valuable against these symptoms other than for those who suffer from the infusion of cold matter.
After the patient has been voided of foul pills or other similar substances, one should apply this on the back, where the pain resides, three lines marked with a sign of a cross, and in each line, V cauterizations or more, according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
and the cauterization is done according to the cautery which is called "points";
and if you see, make three cauterizations or four at the middle of the bone according to this form:
This illness often comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight and painful throat when they swallow, and they feel weak. and you feel the last, deep pain in the back and, appearing differently from the other pains.
When you see this (condition) and you observe it being cured, cauterize it with a hot iron according to this form. The cauterization should penetrate each part of the pain equally.
And if you see, cauterize around the pain with a hot iron that pierces two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
After treatment, keep the limb healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply heat to any stiffness that is nerve-related.
of joint pain
When the pain of joints is caused by moisture that spreads through each member of the body, and when the pain comes suddenly, they call it "podagra" properly, and when it is due to cold and can't be cured with medicines, it is cured by cautery in this manner:
Make a burn around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary to press on the face with your foot, make a cautery all around with something called "point. And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, make cautery on each knee with three or four cauteries from every side, making all cauteries olive-shaped.
and if you have more skill, do more, but don't hold your hand too tightly until the specific heat is burned in.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
and if the pains are in the hands, then do less around the bones, two lines at most.
and if no pain remains, do less on each joint and on the skin of the hand;
and if the pains come up to the waist or shoulders, cauterize each part and do good governance for the patient, taking medications.
For if you apply good care and purge the fluides, it will be healed by God's help.
When a rupture occurs in the legs, and the bows descend to the knees, it is new, so when you see it healing, do not interfere with that day. and it uses things that cause the stomach to relax, so that the intestines descend from the stomach.
after making it lie on its back between your hands, instruct it to hold its breath until the bowels are repaired, and arrange them in your palms, and sign with your fingers across the rupture on the bone of the wrist, and mark it at every joint as if it were half a circle above the body.
then heat up the cautery with which is this form:
as long as it is white and exudes tendrils. then reset the bones to their place; and the healers should place their hands on it so that they do not return to the previous state;
and open well the thighs of the patient, and place beneath him cushions and supports on the thighs, and others on the bed which hold his hands;
then place the cautery iron on the affected area with your entire hand, and hold it straight until you reach the bone. If you do not touch the bone the first time, repeat this process several times until you do. and be careful that the boil does not burst when you apply the cautery. so that you do not burn it. and so that the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain.
And it is necessary that the cauterizer of children be subtle according to their size, and for grown people as great according to their measure;
after three days, cure the shoulder with butter until the burn is healed;
after the treatment with other remedies until it is healed, and lay the patient on his back for forty days until the wound is completely sealed;
and it is necessary that these movements be left for a long time, so that the boils do not appear when he goes to other rooms.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, a well-made bandage should be applied to him and left for another forty days.
and he should have good rest, work little, and guard against excessive drinking and eating, as well as too much noise.
and when he follows this teaching, he will be completely healed.
And I will now describe the treatment for cutting in its chapter.
When ruptures occur in other parts of the body and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow any more, apply cautery to them from cautery according to their quantity, and burn one-third of the depth. after the cure according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients said that one should cauterize with a three-angled iron according to this form:
but first mark the site of the hernia with a sign, and make a line across the width above the rupture; then another from below, and hold your hand firm over all the cautery.
But the first cautery is lighter and easier.
of ancient pain in any limb When pain arises in any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medicinal cure is ineffective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery known as "the point," and the cauterization must be done according to the length of the limb and its smallness and fragility, and its twist, and its pain.
if it is healthy from the first cauterization, that is good;
if that does not work, repeat the cauterization on another part, because such is the custom that it should move to the neighboring limb, so you must perform the cauterizations until the patient is healthy.
The wounds are aided in no way by cautery, especially the illness that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
You should cauterize the wound, be careful if the illness is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, without delay or staying, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make cautery on the head. I apply the heat to the head at noon, and to the other side towards the forehead at the end of the hair. and then on both sides, and behind on the scalp.
and leave it long enough for the cautery to reach the bone, and until the scabs come off so that the vapor of the thick humors can escape.
and cauterize the mouse according to what is before it.
and if the infection is scattered everywhere; and it is clearly evident, so you must cauterize these wounds with the cautery we have mentioned above, and cauterize them deeply, and cauterize on the spine of the neck, and cauterize on the spine of the back, and greatly on the groin and another delicate place, and on both shoulders. and on the sides, and on the tendons of the legs, and on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the pits of the hands.
and guard the nerves that are on the bottom of the foot from burning.
and never perform cauterization on the bones of the hand or other bones, such as those of the stomach or liver.
And know that the more cauterization is performed, the greater the help it provides and the better the outcome.
and know that the patient feels no pain from cauterization, as the healthy one does, because the body is already corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterization be great and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the ways of iron.
After treatment, apply wheat flour with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
When swelling appears in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and bandages, but there is no improvement, then the doctor should perform cautery on the affected member according to its size.
and the cautery should be performed slightly inside the heart's chamber. then treat the wound as long as it is not healed.
And never should cautery be performed on the hand, foot, or back, at the point where the nerve controls the member, and thus if the swelling is removed.
and nevertheless, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the passages of the moving nerves in the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is raging, and the medical arts are of no avail, then cauterize with a hot iron a little bit, according to the amount of danger present, until the white is removed, and it changes color.
then apply a cure of meal and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and collick sap and alder sap, each in its own portion. and mix all together, bind them with a cloth, and keep them elevated until they are healed.
The treatment of a cancer (chancre) by cauterization.
When a wound appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with a cautery that seems to form a circle, around the entire wound.
Nevertheless, the wise say that one should also perform cautery in the middle of the chancre;
However, this does not seem good to me, as I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never had any success with it before;
and the more appropriate thing is that it be cauterized around, in the cautery called a "circle," as we have said in many cauterizations.
When anyone has a disease called "adubelati," and it does not end in death or because of the excess it creates, or due to the severe pain of the illness when the patient is aged (i.e., too much), and there is little blood, or because of time. and you see it hasten to death: then cauterize around with small cauterizations by pricking: afterward leave it thus: Because it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing through all the cautery, make the cautery so hot that this is its form:
And place your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" until the cauterization has reached the heart, and it is done in such a way that the patient feels relief in this manner so that the flow of putrefaction is stopped.
After the treatment, until it is completely healed.
Another type of illness is called "corrodens," which is nothing other than a corruption of the member, as it attacks the members just as fire does the dry wood.
If you see this disease in a limb that can be treated with fire cautery, then heat the cautery nails slightly and greatly, according to what is suitable for the limb or the disease.
After cauterizing all parts until you eliminate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, everything that is corrupted must be removed.
Then leave it for three days, and apply oil to the cauterized limb suffering from broiling due to fire until all burns from the fire are eliminated, and all corruption.
After the treatment of wounds that cause pain.
And if after three days, healthy hair does not grow, that is good.
and if that is not the case, then repeat the cautery on what is remaining of the corrupted limb.
And this mixture is sometimes treated with a hot liquid instead of fire cautery.
but fire cautery is nevertheless of greater help, and I have already described the treatment for the hot liquid mixture in the previous section. take as much as you need.
of the vessels that come as pieces Many times it happens that a pain arises from a defect which we call "close" according to our intention, and it is a great fault which wounds the foot.
And the cautery for this disease is according to two manners. That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
For fire cautery, heat the instrument like a shear, as hot as it can go, made of good iron to hold the nail from all sides, and have sharp edges.
After heating everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail. and leave it thus for three days until it begins to fester. then make a poultice of wild sage leaves ground with rope, leave it on all night, and the nail will come out and be pulled from its roots.
Then treat the shoulder with a warm compress until it is healed.
And if they are burned by fire, and many times it happens on hands and feet, then you must apply hot water cautery. and it is in this way: Take a needle of iron or gold, or a quill from a raven's wing, and place the nail and the thread on it, that is, the pliers for warts. and place the needle around it so that it surrounds everything, then apply a little hot wax, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the needle reaches the root of the nail, and can find the hot water channel all the way to the root.
and the patient suffers a little the biting of hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will pull out at the root entirely.
First, do one after another, until you have eased all those that are in the body, then treat the injuries which cause pain.
When anyone shivers from cold or has a fever, it is necessary to make four cauterizations on the spine at the back, or three cauterizations between each spine. and make one cauterization on the foot, and another on the stomach with an olive cautery.
if he lets it shake, and hastens the health of the cold illness.
Never is it apparent through external defects or pus-filled blisters that come from highly corruptive matter.
it is necessary at first, when they appear, to perform cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery with a stick of myrtle, whereby the point is seized by fire, or with the root of an aromatic plant distant, or with lenticular cautery.
And never should one cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse in advance, but are healed of the excesses from which they come.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times, severe consequences arise from the blood of an artery that is cut at the wound, or during the incision of an abscess, or the cauterization of a member, and similar things. and it is a very serious matter to stink.
And yet if this happens to anyone, hasten to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and pull very strongly until the pain subsides completely under your finger, and no more blood flows.
then place over the fire various olive oil cautery, small and large, until they are all red;
then take, according to the size of the wound and the place where the artery is visible, a great or small amount of salt, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood stops flowing.
And if a sudden burning occurs while you are lying with your arm above the vein and the cauterization is complete, quickly take another cautery from the fire.
and do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood stops flowing;
and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and do not let any further harm come to the patient;
and know that when there is no bleeding from the artery, one cannot properly feel it, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not properly treated, or by a strong thread, or by medications placed on it that have the power to stop bleeding. and it becomes locked and stretched.
Whoever administers relief tightly binding them with cloth or placing hot things on them, or similar, will not benefit unless he does it properly.
And if this happens to none and he has no medication at hand, he should place his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is felt over the wound and the vein. and do not move it, but apply cold moisture often as it is very cold until the flesh is frozen and swollen and numb.
and prepare remedies in advance for those who need cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter all about diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicines, and we have explained their purposes, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
and I have placed this chapter on the most common diseases, and I will follow the same path in this chapter so that those who wish to find it more easily may do so.
And so, before we begin, it is important for you to know that this chapter involves greater risk and fear than the first one on cauterization, and therefore requires more caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things. where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. Because many ways of people come for treatment. if they come from those who were so afflicted by their illness that they died gently due to the severity of their condition and the great torment of their suffering. And from these one must be afraid.
And of these there are some who give up hope, and say: Wait, I am weak. and the illness is cruel.
You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great care in your honor than in your greed. Do not act rashly but wisely regarding what is certain and what you can safely acquire.
and use divination and indication for the cure of your sick patients so that health may be restored.
and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and long-lasting fame.
Very dear child, our lords give you good understanding and rectitude, and if you desire the holy inspiration from his hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter for you, in considering by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery that I have devised from the head down to the foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the head is squeezed too tightly.
and it never comes from a known cause that one cannot explain.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and to all those that I have seen, death has hastened. and for this reason, it seems to me that I must give up the work in part, in some treatments.
And I saw children whose joints were filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could not be supported.
and the moisture was so great that it became a wound, and this moisture is gathered underneath the bone near the lymphatic vessel between the heart and the bone.
and if the work is such that moisture is between the heart and bone, and the abscess is small, you must make a wide cut in the middle of the head.
and it should be as long as the moisture runs.
and here, the form of the sharp instrument:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the openings of the skull comming apart in each part, and there is a sharp, strong pain when you press your hand inside, and it does not return to its place. If it is necessary for you to cut into the head, make three cuts according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture completely. After making the cuts, tighten them with bandages and powders, and then apply wine and oil, leaving it thus for up to five days.
then untie it and dress the wound with bandages and compresses, leaving the head equally tightened, and provide the patient with dry meat from a pouch of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another method of incision is to observe the size of the abscess and the collection of pus.
because never is it before; never behind never on the right and never on the left.
Then cut open the abscess deeply, and drain the pus, and make an incision according to your ability.
and be sure not to cover the artery; and draw out the blood flow, so that the patients die from the rapid onset of bloodletting and moisture evacuation.
When it happens to anyone a disease called "cataract" as some call it or worse, and the illness is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the last remedy is the cautery with which one severs both arteries.
Therefore, when you see them cover their eyes, the patient must turn his head back. after rubbing the shoulder with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then gently pull the patient's collar to its full extent. then look at where the vein is located, and the joints on both sides are behind the ears, and they are properly positioned.
then mark the joints with a signet ring, and cut one and both with a sharp scalpel, reaching as close to the bone as possible, and do this from the wide end upwards.
And if you see, remove the spatule from beneath the artery and cut above it, also cutting as it should go through.
And when the vein is cut, it bleeds continuously unless something holds it shut from above.
and if the artery does not open when pressed, it is necessary to measure the distance of three fingers, then mark with a signet ring and cut through to the bone.
and that one should apply heat to the wound if it is necessary, perhaps 6 parts, or possibly a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery.
then examine the wound: if it remains on the bone with a sharp tip without pus forming, and if no abscesses appear, then strain the wound and bind it, and apply treatment as necessary until it is healthy.
from migraine headache When old migraine headaches come with catarrh due to moisture in the eyes and sockets, and cold perspiration, and other similar symptoms, and all medical treatments are ineffective, then we should drain the arteries of the eyes and apply cautery, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient pulls out the hairs from their temples, and locates the artery which opens in the temple, as it opens well due to its pulsation, and is hardly closed outside, for there is no man too strong.
and if it is reduced, pull the collar tightly from any rough fabrics, then rub the limb with a coarse cloth and immerse it in hot water until the artery appears clearly visible. then take the spatula with its curved shape: then gently scrape the skin until you feel the artery, then hold it with pincers and carefully remove the strings that adhere to each part.
and if the artery is thin, return it to the tip of the hook and cut off that part according to the quantity of the two joints. For if it is not cut, it does not heal without great pain throughout.
And draw out blood from the vein of six parts, just to three.
and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you bind it in two parts with a strong double thread of silk, so that putrefaction does not come before the healing of the wound and prevents complications from blood.
then cut off the excess between the two threads at that very moment, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a cutting cautery tool just to the bone, as long as the chips are removed.
and this is the mother task, if the patient has fever and is of hot complexion. Because cautery is helpful in ending moisture: for this is of greater help with moisture.
Or, for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the wound with dry cotton and apply tightly fitted bandages.
and when they are unbound, it is necessary to use dry medicines that produce heat and tightly fitted bandages until the wound is healed.
and without any delay from the artery as you do it, if you hasten to cover with cautery, or employ the juice of vitriol and press it in your hand so that the wound is immediately cleansed; and if you do not have this at hand, place a cold compress on the wound until it is frozen, and then apply hot water as needed to ensure proper healing.
And it must have between the two knives a space of sufficient width, and then when you have marked with the tongue both sides, and put the hot iron upon it until it reaches the bone, cut the vein in two places. and they must be separated between the two parts, for this cautery is not fully fused from one end to the other.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
and the one that is more mobile and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery from both sides, but the cuts should be well-spaced to preserve their heat for a longer time. Because when the instruments are too tight, they hold back their heat.
tears When the tears from the eyes flow into the veins that are on top of the head, and no benefit comes from the medicines used, and you see the face of the patient becoming round, and feel their forehead trembling as if from chills. and its oil is hot and moist so that the hairs of the skin fall out, and the skin is scorched by the heat of the tears, for this treatment is necessary. And they called it the "contused cure," and this is what you do for the patient who has this illness: he lets his hairs grow on his forehead, then you make three cuts on his forehead equally according to its length.
And they called it the "contused cure," and this is what you do for the patient who has this illness: he lets his hairs grow on his forehead, then you make three cuts on his forehead equally according to its length. and one of the cuts should be also deep as two others across the forehead, extending down to the nose, and the other two should be made along the sides over the skin, and beware of incising the arteries that are on the sides over the skin.
And move your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and each wound should have the quantity of three fingers in width across.
and take a piece of sponge and cloth to wipe the blood, then use the sharp spatula with two parts from which this shape is:
from the incision that is made on the forehead, just below the second incision; and scrape all the flesh that is between the two cuts to the entire satisfaction that is on the bone, then make another cut from this one until the other second, and then extract this spatula forcefully. if you insert the instrument called "cultellaire" (a type of scalpel) into the first incision, it should be very sharp on one side and soft on the other; its shape is as follows:
and place the sharp side of the instrument towards the opposite edge at the center, and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle incision.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to their roots until the incision is continuous up to where it opens the heart, and then make another slit in the middle until it reaches the other side.
and then extract the blood equally, and press the wound to express the blood taken.
then place a strip of fine cotton in each slit, and cover it with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil and wool, and ensure that no pus comes out.
and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a strong infusion of sage in olive oil, then use a basic dressing with rose oil, and other remedies to heal wounds, until they are healed.
When a person has acute catarrh habitually, and you see the eyes become cloudy and small, weakening vision, and the eyelids burnt, and the hair falls out, and the head becomes painfully hot, and the patient sneezes; Then understand these accidents that these matters and this cleansing come only from many veins, and the moving cure that is, it is thus.
And instruct the patient to press their forehead, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another one very wide. And begin from the split in the left temple to the right temple, and make the cut up to the bone. and move your hand away from the nails of the temples that move when squeezed.
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate the two edges of the split and place old cotton and linen on it. then lay him on a blanket moistened with wine and oil, and guard against hot pus.
When it is removed, it is necessary to rub the bone until it begins to heal, then apply drying remedies that help healing.
In the same manner: Take two parts of wheat flower and three parts of cologne, mix them to make an emberment. and administer these remedies to heal the wounds thoroughly.
From ear discomfort
Everything that breaks off inside the ears is one of the four things: or seeds, or animals, or stone from the mine, or similar things as to make: or seeds, such as beans, peas; or things that flow away like water, smooth and clear, and similar things.
If anything, such as a stone or any other object that does not fit properly in the ear, causes pain or does not grow inside the ear, place the affected ear in the sun.
If you see a stone, and it exudes a little drop of dark or yellow oil, then proceed to extract it. and it causes sneezing from congestion, and it stops up the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and place pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear. and stretch the ear above.
Often, this treatment brings about fever.
and if it does not come out, apply gentle extracts with small pincers, which is its form:
If it jumps out with the pincers, that is good;
if it does not, apply an extract with a delicate, small-toothed instrument;
and if it still does not come out, make a wire hook and bend the tip of the hook towards the ear canal, and stuff the area around the hook with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the hook. then mold it to its proper form, for often it comes out as we have said;
and if it does not come out in that way, take a sharp instrument and carefully make an incision, and insert some cotton inside. then press the lump against the stone or anything else, and pull it out.
And if none of the things we have said work, hurry to split the ear so that the abscess hardens and does not move.
and the method of the cut is that you first make the patient safe from the pain in the head, and extract blood according to its strength, then place the patient between your hands and restore the ear to its original position, and make a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat or tissue is attached. and make the cut as thin as a moon, until you reach the bone, then remove it according to your skill, and suck on it gently with your mouth.
and treat it while it is healthy.
And if it is a grain that is embedded and swollen, then administer extraction.
and if it cannot be extracted, then administer the delicate scraping according to this form: and perform an incision of that grain.
But do not attempt this if you think the grain is moist from earwax, as long as you have made many attempts.
then extract it gently with pincers and suck, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
In the case where something breaks off in the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing to expel the foreign object, and to open the ear with old cotton. And lay something on that same ear, whether there is a foreign body or water. If she jumps through fire, it is good.
If this is not done, take many pins according to the length of your thumb and fingers, and warm them slightly in the fire. and insert a plug into the patient's ear, and try from another side, and place another stone on top of the stone in the ear. and continue this process of stone against stone until the pain completely subsides, and thus it will completely disappear.
and if you see, take a thin wire, and insert one end into the ear, and heat the other end with fire until the thinner wire is burned.
Then make other adjustments of other joints until the pain completely disappears, as we have said before.
When extracting a small foreign body, such as a tiny bug or similar object, treat it as we have described in the previous section.
but if it is large and can be felt, use tweezers for its careful extraction. and it is the easiest thing to remove, which is in the ear.
When extracting worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section and how to deal with distensions, the treatment is not effective; it is therefore necessary that you examine the ear in sunlight. If no worms are opened, but they are treated with fine pliers, and if they do not open, take the cane from which their form is as follows:
And it should be tightened from below and widened from above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suction along the entire cane. Make sure often until all the veins are open.
And if they do not obey to come out, then cauterize around the cotton thread as I said before;
and if they do not protrude as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have tried in incision of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations;
and if distill your oils and medications into the ear with all these instruments, in such a way as you see: And whether it is of silver or golden threads, remove them from small incisions and above others to distill;
and to press from below the distillation with a well-made silver instrument, and if you see it, take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip carefully. then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medications in the cauldron, and the cauldron be in the ear.
then put the razor completely into the cotton and press your damp hand firmly until the oil is distilled or slightly from the ear. and it makes the patient feel deep pain, and so the distillations are heated in the fire just as they are in the ear. and ensure it is not too cold, for the medicine would then be ineffective.
From ear discomfort
No child is born with any perforation of the eardrum.
and the same thing happens to adults due to sudden injury or a foreign object in the ear, and this blockage never fully clears in the ear unless one can see it.
and never let the wound become infected, and the sight be good.
When this happens, and it cannot be seen, the lack of proper treatment leads to more harm. In such a case, it is necessary to place the patient's ear in the sun. and look inside: if you see the swelling clearly, where this tissue has formed:
And make cuts both before and behind, all around, so that it does not damage the ear.
if the operation is on a new or old part of the ear, and you have fine pincers, hold it gently and cut slightly until that part is completely severed.
If the inflammation is deep in the ear, take a fine, sharp razor, warm it slightly over the fire, and insert it into the ear.
If you feel the operation is causing great pain in the ear, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
then place in the ear a band according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Make sure no day passes until the wound is clean, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it.
and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you take the tent and move another tent moistened in cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone. then dress it until it is healed.
And if the occurrence of blood comes, soak a sponge and drape it with cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that remove the flow of blood, which are treated through distillation.
Make sure that when they come off in papers, the roots are moist and dry, it is necessary that you extend them with pliers and tongs, and cut the top with a spatula from its roots. then place the hot glass on the affected area.
And if, after removing the outer skin with a delicate lenticular cauterization, the cauterizer makes another incision, he must be moved.
and often they heal, but nothing remains of their roots. and when they are cauterized with fire, their roots are burned and do not grow back.
from the gravel Many times come to paper certain things that appear twisted in their form and hardness, and for this reason, this disease is called "grapes," and it is a gathering of great moisture on the paper above and below. The work is as follows:
The work is as follows: take care so that the grapes do not move from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know;
make the incision deeply, then carefully peel from each part slightly, then take it with pincers and cut.
if you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, so as not to disturb the patient;
and if the fracture is large, and it has a joint, treat it until it heals.
and if it is small, do not use excessive force, because the joints will soon restore it and cause harm.
And if the pain descends within the ear towards the top, turn the paper against it, and grasp the pain with tweezers, then cut and press from both sides.
and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not matter.
and when the ice is broken, leave the salt water oil to heal the vein of the one who has been wounded until the patient is healed.
from the fat of the eyes Xerophtalmia is a fat that is deposited on the surfaces of paper, and this occurs more often in children than in adults, causing them great distress, leading to morning cataracts, and preventing them from looking at the light of the sun because tears flow to their eyes.
and for this reason they close their eyes again, and sleep upon them, and their cheeks become moist beneath the hair that has grown out of the skin and appears covered with the oil from within. And when you press the limb with your hands and feel the extreme pain between them.
and the manner of the procedure is that the patient places their head in the hands of the healthy person.
and then take the linen cloth, and prepare a tent in such a way that it forms a circle according to the quantity of the discharge from each part, and then place it over them. and press your hands on both sides so that the bones meet within the circle.
then make a groove in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula, not wider than the wound made in the vein.
and cut the skin perfectly until you reach the bones. and in different positions, pull out from the groove, according to the shape of a white fatty piece.
Take then from there a whole piece of cloth torn between your fingers over the fire, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is even.
and ensure that you do not adjust the gap, that you reach all the space up to the oil, and do not blow on it.
And if the gap does not open at the beginning, gently widen the gap a little bit if it starts to open.
then extract it as we have said, then moisten the cloth with oil and water, apply it to the limb, and gently stretch it.
And if with such people who grind and apply something to corrupt the moisture that is stuck.
Then treat it as long as it is healthy.
And if it comes to the hot abscess, treat it with external soothing as long as it is healthy.
hairs of paper When papers (skin) grow hairs that are not natural, they become inflamed, causing just as much harm, and lead to types of illnesses such as rashes and softening of the papers, and scaling, due to the destruction of the hairs.
and the cure is according to four manners: or by cauterization with fire, or by using medicines according to what is presented in this chapter of cauterization, and it is done through incision and stitching, or by using bands, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient with the illness in your healthy hand, then turn the paper from the oil to your left hand.
if it turns out well if it does not turn out well, then pierce it with a needle through all the threads above it. and be sure to remove the edge of the paper where the hairs grow, and pull out the threads above all the paper, and turn it over to the razor.
Then, making an incision in the skin, they remove the hairs, adjusting them from root to tip, cleaning all the mucus, from the large tear to the small.
Then, extract the thread and place beneath the paper a small piece of cotton and cloth, then mark on the paper a shape like a mitre, but it must be according to the amount that you see the paper rise, which is measured in all directions.
And if, at the part where one has to cut, they need to use a great deal of paper, according to how soft the paper is.
then making a cut across the entire surface of the two lines that you have marked, begin with a large tear from the outside to a small one. and let one of the cracks be near the natural hairs, in thickness like a root, then bend the knife into one of the two angles towards the heart, and then peel it all off.
then bring the two lips together with a stitch from a fine needle and all of the blood, and dry the excess of the fabrics on both edges without any sticky substances, if you are able to do this.
and if this does not help, then after some time, leave the stitches and threads for three or four days.
then dress the wound without stitches or constricting things, for the paper becomes loosened at the healing of the wound and the gathering of it, but stitches are moved (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear. and if in another way:
and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure which is also like the shape of mint leaves, as we have described, at three points according to the form below:
Then take hold of what overcomes the small muscles equally according to the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the pincers firmly, and the matter is not even, take a needle where there is thread, and tie it around the shape. and twist another thread through the large tear, and the second thread through the small one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers.
then gently hold your hand equally, and press all the skin where you have marked it, as we have said, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
and if an abscess forms at your incision, apply wax and similar medicaments to soothe it;
and never should the hairs of the paper (skin) be cut:
it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision;
but stitching one to the other is more artificial.
The treatment of dogs is as follows: and you should convert the paper and make it inside according to what I have said, then make two chains by art, and two fine liens as long as the paper and wide with the spatule. and cut as the parts of the thread where you hold the threads;
then carefully join each other over the top of the paper from the oil, and pull the two chains from the two parts formed. and leave it thus for no days, and the skin that is pulled will die and wither and heal, as long as it remains like this.
If it is delayed, if the fever takes hold with great strength, then cure it as soon as possible while it is healthy.
and when the wound is deeply infected, and if it opens up and the pus comes out, and the hair cannot grow back.
and this is the shape of the two threads that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
the work involves piercing the skin with a fine needle, threading a soft and thin silk thread through it. then join the bones together subtly, and make sure the length of the fils is a palm's breadth.
then arrange in the wound another thin thread of silk briefly, and tie the ends tightly with the main thread.
then place the patient's head in a healthy position.
and make sure the sun is removed so that the work is revealed, for it is a delicate and small task. Then insert the needle into the entire wound at the root of the hair gently, piercing it into the paper slowly as you draw it along the natural hair.
then extract the hair up to the root, and push the hair back into the root if there is one or two or three or more.
then extend your hand until the hairs grow fully out through all the root in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the root is treated and the hair does not grow out with it, then pull the root from the inside out along the entire thread that you had ordered, until the root comes out completely through the opening above and you see it with your eye's vision.
So then, if you remove the chase and the thread, and close the wound and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows back into its place and the scar heals.
and if the hairs are small, then accompany them with the long hairs of natural growth, and raise it along with that or leave it, as long as it elongates and then lift it.
regarding the inflammation of the wound When this disease called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes to the wound, it has two manners:
one is natural, and the other is unnatural.
And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
And the method of working in it is that you split open the wound, separate the lips of it, and put linen strips inside, binding it until it is healed.
and it is not advisable that you use drying and constricting things in the treatment of it. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than before;
but I work with softening things, such as fennel. and the rose water or other and flax seed are cooked, and the diluted vinegar in neither of the eyes, and it wraps a bandage, and treats this one.
And the true treasure of your remedy is that you take care not to let it harden according to its former shape.
and these works that we have spoken are not only remedies for this illness, but also to prevent it from returning according to its former shape.
This disease which is a dislocation, truly called "fracture," is both natural and accidental.
The accident arises from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things.
and the way of the procedure is such that if you pierce a needle with a double thread, and insert it into the wound, and make it enter from the left side near the right eye, so that the thread comes out in two parts on both sides of the wound.
then the wound is covered with cloth, and the patch is large enough to cover it. And if the shape of the paper returns to what is appropriate, it is good.
If this is not done, take a razor and place it in the fissure, turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side inside the paper.
and the cuts of the two fissures at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make them form one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter "I Greek".
then cut that one, according to the thickness of its edges, from the paper, then adjust the two parts carefully, and sew them with a thread of wool.
then apply the remedy we have mentioned about soothing and softening medications, as long as he is healthy.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a clean split beneath the skin and flesh, according to what is mentioned above. then separate between the two parts of a tent, as I have said;
then separate between the two parts of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the skilled masters have devised many devices from all sorts of means to restore the natural shape.
and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the work and the use of various instruments in many arrangements.
When this sewing is done by inexperienced hands in such a way that the paper on top is smooth with white oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it slightly from below.
and stretch it with clamps, as you carefully handle the fine spatula, neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient does not suffer from the excessively sharp spatula and the oil is not damaged.
and make your cut, from which you scalpel the affected part, gently, so that the skin regains its natural shape.
and is healthy the entire affected area, and never immerse it in dirty water, but rather use clear, clean water, and raise it with sweet water and a collar.
then place a layer of linen cloth between the skin and oil, and cover the oil with wet wool in abundance. and after the third day, use a soft collar and sudden applications until it is healed.
You know that the fingernail grows according to two manners: It is nerve-related and appears hard and satisfying to touch, while another type is not nerve-related but seems like white, frozen moisture that, when touched with iron and treated like pincers, cannot be moved by anyone.
and both appearances begin towards the large tear duct, growing smaller and smaller until they cover all sight and all light and the movements of the eye.
And the method of incision is such that the patient places his head on a healthy surface, then opens the eyes. and hold the paper in your hand, then curl the finger like a small pair of pincers, and stretch it upwards. then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or a hen's feather, or cow hair, and tie a strong thread to it. and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it through the nail, piercing the entire length of the needle, and tie the nail with thread, stretching it upwards, and scrape all the hair around the edge of the nail with a thin blade, immediately after applying the prune and silk to the hair root up to the head, then cut the remaining part at the base of the nail with a delicate spatula, leaving the nail in its natural state without any cuts.
and never extend the nails to the bone, only with the file, as we have said. then the skin is scraped off the entire soft part, which takes the shape of:
and be sure that the soft part does not touch the thin flesh and tear it, and that the instrument is not pierced.
and after the incision, pour a little crushed serpent's stone (brojed seil) into the oil, and make a collar of lightning stone, and leave it until the next day. then focus on the treatment of it, as long as it is healthy.
If the nail is not well attached to the nerve, and you cannot insert the needle, many times this type of fingernail issue requires medication treatment.
and they grow as I have described in the dissection; and if you see it covered, open gently the wound of the sick person, and take a light spatula according to this form. And gently lift the nail from above, and if you see that it turns white and the pain increases quickly, then distil some saliva into a collar made of litargire (a type of mineral) and red dye, and apply the mixture to the wound until the next day.
If nothing contradicts you in the oil, such as a hot abscess, then apply it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is completely cured.
Then recommence the other work according to this same operation, until it is entirely healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh causes pain in the eye due to great damage, suspend it at the corner and cut off only a part, not all of it, so that no more tears come.
then distill into the eye red collar made of litharge.
Some men's eyes never turn red, they cover the pupil and rest on paper, twisting them into a blackness that resembles a balm rose.
and the work is such that the patient places their head on the healthy one, then opens them up, and pulls together all the parts with suitable hooks, and supports it with strength.
then take the first part, and go all the way to the end with the razor, being careful not to cut into the skin during the work.
and let the incision be careful and precise as we have said in cutting the nail, and with small movements, one removes the nail, as the form demonstrates after this chapter.
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh cut away, apply oil from crushed silk or distil a red collaret and similar corrosive medicines, and place on top of it a hot compress with wool to ensure the abscess is warm.
and if it does not improve and the pain intensifies, and you doubt that the abscess is hot, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedies to ensure the hot abscess.
then return to your work as long as it is healed, and thus make similar cuts adjusted to the oil by this manner.
But nevertheless, it is necessary that you attend to each weak part of the natural way. and of the unnatural way, in the act of doing;
and do not put your hand to any of these acts until you see that this member suffers from the act.
These are red veins that are covered over the eye, they steal from the sight their work and weaken the eye every day.
The first task is to observe which part is affected, whether it is a bone, muscle, or joint, and there is no other disease outside the swelling. then take hold of it in this manner:
instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position, then suspend the veins at every point according to his wisdom, and let the veins be delicate and doubled according to this form.
And they should be two incisions by degrees within the body according to this form:
then gently press the veins, and wash out the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins disappear from the flesh.
and be careful not to puncture the skin with the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your task so that you only succeed in removing the veins.
and when you have done this, distil in the oil a mixture of green and red to corrupt that which is stuck in the sebaceous glands.
And if you cannot gather all of these at that hour, make a poultice over the oil with soothing things for the pain of the joints, and leave it for no days until the pain is eased and the fever is certain, then continue in this manner as before until it is healed.
and this is the form of strength:
It considers those as "fistules" named:
As you treat it with cautery and medicine for the burning pain as I have previously said, and it remains unhealthy, there is a danger within it if you pierce the abscess, leaving him to die there, and remove all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the instruments mentioned here to shape it.
and it is called the "hardest point," and it should be made from fire to the very tip of the hardest point, and it should be pointed like a limet in this present shape:
And place the corrupted bone on your palm, then twist it between your fingers, and press with your hand for as long as you know that corruption is removed;
and do this once, then return the limb to the use of drying medicines.
if the joints are healed and firm, and the inner part of the bone is healed and remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew or become abscessed, and no bad accidents come to it, then you know it is healthy.
If there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula back to the opening of the new wound according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone a second time by iron or medicine, and when it is exposed, take the forecast according to this form, and let the iron have three angles, and the point be thinned up to the top as you see here:
then place it on the deltoid bone, move your hand away from the wound, and repeat the entire process until it pierces through the bone and causes the patient pain when they keep their hand on it;
and then restore the joint with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh hardens around the joint, if you see the matter in the new tissue; if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
When the joints open widely and cause no disturbance or reduction in strength, it is necessary to keep the patient still.
then apply the healthy treatment, then put on suction cups without causing harm to suck, then place oil made from acacia, aloe, and incense and saffron on it, and then strain the oil and apply the poultice over bandages and cloth.
and the way of the bandages is such that you should press the bandages sufficiently soft and double each one in four (IIII), and then place them one upon another according to the quantity needed by the limb.
then stretch from above with a firm bandage, and recommence the applications of suction cups to suck without causing harm;
then remove the suction cups and leave the limb stretched day and night, and if it becomes stiff, it is good to stretch it much.
then dislocate it after the day and night have passed, and if you see the oil repairing, that is good.
if not, then if the splint, cloth, bandage, and leeches are reapplied while he is healthy.
disruption of the woven fabric When the veil or cloth covering is torn, it should be opened up and filled with papers as if with resin grains, which is encouraging to see.
So if you see it, the work is such that you push a needle into the root of the part as far up as this, then push another needle where it has a double thread from the part of the arm. and pierce it, leaving the first needle according to the position.
then cut the thread with the double thread and tie a part of the wound around it, and tighten it well, then pull out the needle and apply the other moist lint in abundance.
and let it grow until the hair is long with the root, then treat the wound with comforting things until it is healed.
and never should the wound be restrained with any part of a cloth circle until it is healed.
And if the pain is greatly apparent, if you pierce it with a thin spatula that comes from oil, and draw out the albugineous moisture and straighten the joint, and enter again soon.
then extract it until it is healed.
This disease called "alcunnati" is only due to a gathering in the blood, resembling swift water flowing down, but it is not true water.
and the manner of performing the operation is that you place the patient in a sitting position with the affected part elevated and straight, then take the head in both hands, and move it until you see the gathering of blood rising towards your fingers. then it should be completely sealed, and the light should not descend or recede, so the patient can see things as they normally would.
and if it does not descend on its own, know that it is acute, and the descent from the bowel is not prepared as we have said.
if you delay the patient in your hands, then take the delicate spatula and make incisions on the corny tissue following the continuity of the conjunctive with the corny tissue and the crown, as long as the bowel persists.
and when it is removed, distill it in hot acute oil mixed with honey, or boil fennel and honey, then apply another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil" translates to "water from oil" in English We have experienced the forms of cuts in division, and what is necessary to pierce; if in work according to health.
It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands crossed, away from the light for the sun, and tie the healthy oil tightly.
then place the paper of the oil in your left hand if the limbs are on the left, or in your right hand if the limbs are on the right.
then take in your right hand, if the joints are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the joints are on the right.
then take the tip of the instrument and cut through the crown with a single, swift movement, starting from the thickest part towards the smaller end of the canal, then twist the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, and turn your hand as it pierces the inner layer of oil, and feel that the "almagda" reaches the empty space.
and it is necessary that the length of the "almagda" be precisely equal to the distance from the tip of the prune to the end of the darkness. and this is the crown of oil;
if you see the bone on this paper due to the clarity of the cornea, then place the instrument directly on it or in the water, and express it from one side to the other.
If he feels a sharp descent now, if he sees the patient before him and the instrument in his hand.
After resting for a little while, and if the water has risen through the second passage, place force with the instrument, and when it is firmly inserted and does not rise, gently extract it by turning your hand back and forth.
and then put back in sharp a little piece of silk thread, and remove from these oils inside. Then apply hot oil or any other moist oil, rosin, and an abundance of wax, and wrap with healthy oil.
We, and those of our time, put a fine cloth over with much heat.
And if the mixture cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are many people with too hard eyes, it is necessary that you press the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
And then pierce only the joint tightly, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then apply almagda as we have said.
and upon completion of the work, prepare for the patient a comfortable bed, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark place.
and he must be careful with all movements, consume light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition for three days.
then release it in the same dark place, test its sight, and make it see nothing, and then put back the bandage for seven days.
and it is not advisable that you do this during the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary to lighten it, because acute pain rises suddenly.
if an abscess forms after seven days, then release the oil in front of the seventh day and follow the treatment for those who soothe the abscess.
and when he is calmed, if he loses vision and puts on his face an eyelid to cover any light, and is thus in that dark house.
Then he goes out of the house little by little, and returns to his own affairs.
and he knows that no disciple should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from Iran, who told us that in their peaceful lands they make an instrument that extracts water, but I never saw anyone like it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients. and perhaps it's a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of magic, for those who do not know them will see them as different.
and they should be properly arranged: And let the center of this same subtlety be in one place, and the rear in three corners acute.
No creature ever born or formed with diverse joints will seem to be a scorpion made of pieces.
and if it has such as he has charmed with fox-like coloring, and if the charm is of good color. In this case, where the wound is sore and not yet healed, you should make the patient rest their afflicted part between your hands, facing the sun.
In this case, where the wound is sore and not yet healed, you should make the patient rest their afflicted part between your hands, facing the sun. and open the patient's nostrils, and apply the warmth to those wounds, and treat them fiercely. then hold what you can bear of the thin, sharp spatula on one side, as long as you know that wound is entirely healed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open it with all the delicate, light instruments until nothing remains. and without worrying, or an abscess forming, if it is cut as necessary;
and if these are malignant abscesses, act quickly and cauterize until the pus is drained and all openings are healed, then apply new ash and wine. If the wound opens again and moisture reaches the mouth, knowing that it is clean;
and if the moisture does not pierce as necessary, knowing that there is an obstruction in the bone above, which prevents the tools from cutting.
Then you must insert a thread slightly thick, and be careful with your hands, and leave enough space between each one, either more or less. and place the patient's teeth with the thread in their mouth, drawing gently until it comes out through the breath.
and often children learn this practice, and it is easy for whoever wishes to do so.
then hold the head with one hand coming through the breath at one side, and the other hand holding the opposite side of the head coming through the mouth, alternating between them as we do with thread.
Do as much as you know to purify the wound, then treat the child, wipe away the blood, and moisten the wound with Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the body as before.
Apply the ointment for three days or more, until the ointments have penetrated all that is still stuck to the wound.
and then put on a clean bandage for no more than a few days until it is healed, and if it needs further treatment with medicated ointments, do so.
and this is the shape of the instrument to purge the head, from which the oils and medicines are distilled:
and it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a candle, and lead it thither.
and if you make a closed candle, and it is the instrument full of medicine for purging the head;
and it has many parts on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
Of the pain near the nose
Many times a pain appears in the head due to a sickness called "telis," which swells and grows worse, as long as it is a visible thing to look at.
and for this reason, it is necessary that you grasp it firmly at the beginning, and remove all bones, then apply the burning cautery or medicinal fire.
and if it is delayed in grasping it as it swells, take care if it becomes hard, of a poor color, or lacks sensation.
do not touch it with iron, as it is an enhanced abscess, for when you grasp it, great harm comes to the patient.
and if the abscess is of a soft consistency, not filled with pus, and you can completely drain it without pain, then dry the wound thoroughly and treat it with things that heal and soothe.
Know that when the flow of continuity comes to one of these powerful cartilages, it benefits little, indeed, for no man.
It is therefore necessary to pay attention when this occurs, so that if the wound is fresh and filled with blood, and then tighten the two lips with a stitch, and treat it until it is healed.
and if the lips are separated on both sides, it is necessary that you cut away all parts of their core while they are healing, then sew together the two lips with a stitch and tighten it, and apply powdered dragon's blood and crushed incense. and place a piece of plaster, strong or other plaster that binds, on it and leave until it falls off by itself, then treat the wound as long as it is healed.
The method of stitching is as follows: you assemble the parts together. or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the stomach; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
abscesses of the lips
At first, the abscesses in the veins appear hard, similar to grains of various sizes, both small and large.
then you must turn the abscesses and cut into each one, taking them with pliers and cutting into each part.
then apply the leu (a healing agent) after the cut with vitriole (a caustic substance), until the wound is cleansed.
and then apply the living oil of asil, and heal the wound with dry things until it is clean.
Many times a growth appears on the gums, tightly attached, which the ancients call "albus".
it is necessary that you hold it with pincers, cut off at the base, and let flow the pus or blood;
then place on it vitriol powder, or other restrictive and desiccant powders;
and if it returns after the incision, this happens many times, if the wound is opened a second time, and cauterized. if it does not return after the cautery;
Never should they be assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, the edges of which are ugly and rough; and never should the tooth be black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption comes to the gums, and it stinks.
If it is necessary that you hold the patient in your hands, and his feet be in yours, and you remove any bones or scars visible, until nothing remains. and thus do with blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other hues, as long as they are fresh.
and if one removes what is at the first cause, it is good. if not, then read again the second time and the third, until everything is removed.
and know that the tooth requires diverse tools to extract, according as the work shows, for the saw used to cut out the teeth has different shapes from those used between them. and these shapes and others should be with you prepared.
It is important when treating a tooth causing pain to take your time and apply gentle pressure as much as possible, for one should never do otherwise. for it is a hot substance, so one should have no excuse for applying too much pressure.
Then, when the patient is constrained from drawing out the pain, it is necessary that you be certain about the aching tooth. Many times the patient suffers great pain, and believes it to be from a tooth or gum infection, and has the good tooth pulled. and yet the pain does not leave them for this reason, until the evil is completely extracted, as we have already tried on these patients.
and when you are certain of the tooth's pain, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth very strongly with a tool to protect the gums from all sides.
then move your hands or the subtle pliers bit by bit, as long as they are well positioned, and then firmly tighten the pliers. and place the patient's dislocated joint in your hands between his knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take none of these instruments and push it gently from each side, and move it as you have done before.
and if the bone is broken and disintegrated, it is necessary that you fill the space with cloth, either at the wound or the opening. and if it is squeezed gently with pincers, so that it does not break when squeezed.
and it is necessary to carefully cut around the gum to remove the tooth.
Be very careful not to break it, and if a part breaks off, return the fragment to the patient; due to the evil of the root, he will experience greater pain than before.
And be wary that you do not act like the ignorant healers who, through their haste and boldness, break the body's balance, and do not heed what we have said.
but they bring about this great illness due to the roots that remain, or because of the imbalances that they create, as we have often seen.
and when the swelling is severe, wash the affected area with wine or vinegar and salt.
and the bleeding that ensues, which often occurs, can be alleviated by applying the juice of crushed vitriol.
and if this does not help, then cauterize him.
The shape of the instruments, with which you will first mute the teeth, should be long and sharp with thick handles, so that they do not bend when pulling the tooth.
and these are the shapes: And let the tools be of good quality, so that they do not bend when pulling, and made of iron well-forged, and toothed for secure grip.
from the root of the teeth When the root persists when pulling, it is necessary to place a moistened cotton ball or butter (on the day or the second day), until the swelling subsides, then apply pliers called "algefri," which give the tooth the appearance of being cared for.
and they should be made inside as if with a chisel, and this is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out of these claws, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put the instrument called "althali", which is a plier, whose form is as follows:
and it should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out, that is good.
if not, with all the tools, the shapes come as follows:
And if one uses this instrument with two prongs, its form is as follows: and other tools that are used in the treatment of teeth, and this instrument that resembles large pincers, whose shape is as follows:
and this tool should be strong so that it does not break, and remember that many tools are inside. and also other instruments, which are not mentioned;
and the most skilled surgeons create their own instruments, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are certain diseases that the ancients did not teach any instruments for, and if one breaks a bone or other part, and it becomes stuck, and he seeks the instruments that I told you about, with gestures that help form this:
and they should be large and well-fitting to hold the bone, so it does not escape, but can be held and removed;
and then restore the limb to suitable medicine for this, and if there is decay in the bone, even if it is small, use all these instruments:
When the tooth does not appear according to the body's natural course, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the other teeth, and is not in the correct position, and cannot be filed or polished.
then the tooth should be extracted; and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument whose form resembles a small beak, and make sure it is very sharp.
And take a small knife and hold it in your hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it from one side as the shape allows.
and it is also like the limb from which they make arrows;
and the tooth, little by little, gently in his hand, so that it does not move until it is completely healed;
then at the end, there is no cutting, and the teeth are too sharp and damage the tongue, so it must be leveled until it is even, so that it does not damage or impair speech.
When the teeth loosen, either through hammering or pulling, and the patient cannot chew what they want to eat, they should be treated with restrictive medications, but that is not effective.
If they need to restrain it with a thread of gold, for the silver's thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes.
and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the amount of space between the bones.
and if you need to align the bones, take the thread and loop it twice between the two healthy bones, then place the dislocated parts between the healthier bone, as many times as there are (dislocated) parts, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side firmly. then recommence the covering up to the part where you instruct, hold your hand gently and firmly, until it does not move.
and let your finger be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
then cut the pieces of thread with pliers, assemble them, and insert them between the healthy tooth and the one with the abscess, so that it does not damage the tongue.
and then leave it so tight as it can stay, and if it loosens, the threads will come out, if released from another thread.
If it were to stay still and serve thus all its time, and that's the shape of the teeth and the figure of the correct arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two muscles, as you see:
And when the tooth is dislodged, it must be gently put back in its place, one by one, as we have said.
and do not allow anyone inexperienced and frightened to intervene; never should the shape of a tooth from a dead animal be used, and it is placed in the missing position, and held tight as we have said, and stays still and serves thus for a long time.
No illness is this one that comes from beneath the tongue or its origin, except thus. or due to a deep wound.
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient with difficulty, place his head in your hands, and extract his tongue.
then cut the large nerve, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or pain, and it's a sudden wound, pull the hook and cut through that ligament.
and ensure that the cut is not too deep, for the artery below.
and when you have done this, lift the arm with the red and swollen liquid, or cold water, and then place a cloth under the limb.
and cover it each night so that the limbs cannot heal.
And if blood poisoning occurs, then apply a poultice of crushed vitriol to the limb. and if it hurts him, if he is cauterized with slow fire, which is good for him. then apply other remedies as long as he is healthy,
and if you see it is red or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
and if it turns pale and there is moisture, then dip the spike in, and with a thin spatula, remove it from both sides. and if it does not give way under your work, pour vinegar ground into a paste until it is stained, then return to your work until you have treated everything thoroughly.
then lift the limb from rest and relax it, and treat other treatments as long as it is healed.
From the abscesses of the throat Never does a hole open up inside the throat called "godath", and these are properly called "laryngitis", and when you treat them, as we have said in the previous section, and they remain unhealthy, be careful.
If it is an abscess hard with a small, dark colour, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the prevention of pus. but leave it until it turns black, and then remove it, or it would break on its own.
and if it is of white colour with thin roots, then have ready the instrument to cut it, but first ensure that the abscess is cool and at ease.
Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and stretch his legs to their full extent, opening his mouth wide and gripping the lower jaw between his hands, pressing the tongue down with all the instrument's force, from which comes its shape.
and be of silver or subtle gold, just like fine knives:
Cannot you press the tongue down with all this instrument, and see the abscess, take the awl and screw it into the gum, pulling it upwards as much as possible.
and do not try anything with threads, then cut it with the instrument, from which there arises a form resembling strength; but nevertheless the instrument is curved in one place and another, very sharp, made of iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if it is like pliers, then this is its form: and it has notches on one side and is smooth on the other.
and when you have cut one of the strings, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, rinse the patient's wound with hot water, cold water, and clean air. The discharge of pus occurs if the wound is rinsed with hot water, or cooked pomegranate skins, or mint leaves, or similar things, until the infection has been washed away. then treat it as long as it is sound;
and never does it produce other abscesses in the throat than the two mandibles, so treat them accordingly as the two teeth are attached.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was new inside her throat, that is to say, a small abscess.
and had a great deal of swelling closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained in that state for one or two days.
And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed two ribs through the two openings in the throat.
I hastened to do so, and inserted one needle, then drove it through with force, and extracted a great portion of bowel.
then repeated the process on the other side through the opening with another needle, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue.
after inserting the needle into these abscesses, and extracting a portion, only a little blood came out. and thus the airway of the woman was opened from the throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time.
and it made the abscess reopen again, and filled back up the vein I had drained, as long as it was very large.
then I secured it and cauterized it inside the throat. so it took time without growth.
and I withdrew from these parts, and only God be the judge after me.
of the eye
When the eye returns to its socket, and it is swollen and distant, it is called "perpendicular".
and if it is removed from a large and round object, it is called "uve".
When it is treated as we have said in the previous section, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess has subsided, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to drain it.
and the one that is round and compact is not too distant. and it is red or of a dark color, then it is necessary to carefully make the incision on it. For there is great danger for the ill patient.
It is necessary, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, of cleansing and lengthening, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we spoke earlier. then insert the hook into the eye, remove it from inside, and cut with the first of the two instruments I spoke of during the incision of the two stones.
And it is necessary that you do not cut off more than the excess beyond the natural limit.
because if you do not handle it well, it will cause pain to the voice and speech.
and after the incision, use the same method we described for incising the second mandible, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you use a tool for cauterizing the sensitive parts.
The method of cauterization is very hot. And it is that the patient places his head in a healthy position, and then presses his tongue with the instrument described in the chapter on cautery (fire treatment), using sharp live coals, so that they are neither too thick nor too thin. and in using this instrument, by which there is formed:
And let the patient have a mirror or some object to apply the medicine, as if it were the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye.
and the patient should lie on their side, so that the saliva and mucus from their mouth can drain the medicine, without it going down to the throat, and it remains clean.
then take your hand, holding all the medicine, and press it onto the eye for a quarter of an hour, until you see it relax and the pain from the medicine is soothed.
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument entirely into the wound over the cotton until the cotton is saturated with the fluid.
and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and after three or four days.
And if you need to redo the cauterization with the medicine, when you redo it, after the cauterization, wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in butter and change anything around the medicine.
and let him be raised from cold water, and cure him with gargles until he is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, rather than cauterization.
if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take plenty of calament and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them in a pot, add water, and boil.
and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and into the pot put a shovel-like instrument according to this manner: And whether it is of silver or gold, and if one of the joints is squeezed in the mouth of the patient until the vapour rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye becomes numb.
after the swelling often recurs, while the eye is dry, and be sure not to do this at the beginning of the formation of the abscess, as many complications can arise. and do not make any movements except during the decline of the hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not available, take a straw and insert it into the patient's mouth with a piece of cold cloth, so that the mouth does not get too hot. Because the heat of fire does not allow moisture to accumulate in the mouth, it is a good cure that brings overall healing.
Often, it causes a burning sensation in the throat from bone or fish spine, or any other thing.
So it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you may observe the thing moving.
And if it does not open and is withdrawn into the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit so that the food may be cooked in the stomach. in case the thing goes the other way through vomiting;
or the patients swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of cauliflower, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread; and it passes through the sponge, and then it is regurgitated; and when it reaches its place, if it is stuck, then it should be pulled forcefully;
and if it does not come from what we have said, take a plunger tool according to this form:
and the tool should be curved at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and hold the head slightly elevated. and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so that all parts do not come together, and do not push any bones inside.
and it is important that the patient pushes on the tool, because if he does not, the object inside will be stuck. If the bottle is swallowed, pull it out with all the instruments equally as far as possible.
of the mucus in the throat
Never should medicine be given without examining it, as I said in the previous section, through the treatment of medicines. and if it does not help, then look in the throat of the sick person towards the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument I told you.
And if you see the wound, pull it with all the small hooks or subtle pincers that are suitable for it.
And if these are not suitable, take a horsehair and insert it into the throat of the patient, then pull or gently tug on the hair; do this often. And if the patient has fever all day.
then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in slowly, moving the tongue with your hand frequently. and if he feels a sudden cold, then it is certain.
And if it does not give way as we have said, then the patient should be given the instrument used in fumigating the eye.
Do this many times, for it will become easier without targeting.
And the method of fumigation is that you heat a pot with hot coals, place a perforated cover over it, and in this opening, insert the instrument.
then he applies the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes it, so that no smoke comes out, but only the steam.
and the steam will now separate, and if it does not, the fumigation should be repeated many times.
and the patient will suffer from thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, but not drink water.
and then it is better for him/her not to speak against this governance.
And the shape of the instrument with which the blood is treated, if it can be seen, resembles curved pliers for entering the throat. and it resembles the beak of a bird of prey, and has the hardness of lime, so that whatever it takes hold of, it cannot let go.
Many signs of an abscess are, as the memory comes to us from one side or the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision.
and this is in two ways; one is by its own likeness, and from that which holds moisture.
And the second method is for the joints where they are in the body.
For the abscess of the upper part is different from that of the lower, and the abscess of the fleshy part of the limb is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if at abscesses one must not pierce while the bowel is still alive according to its completion;
and if of such (abscesses) it is necessary to pierce when they are hardened and do not die according to their completion, as with abscesses that are in delicate joints.
Because when an abscess comes from damaged joints, and it is left as long as it is rotten around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Or, if the abscess is in the principal member, and you delay piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member.
if you remove the foundation, so that it is pierced in such a way that it dies.
and it is not advisable that you pierce an abscess without completing the healing process, otherwise, if the one who removes the foundation does not heal completely and remains inside, a fistula will develop. and it will not heal completely.
And it is necessary that you know the right time for piercing an abscess when it has healed completely; this is when the pain is relieved, and the fever departs, and the pain and redness diminish, and there is a smooth recovery, and other signs.
and it is necessary that you make the incision sit more dependent on the abscess, and there where it opens movement.
and the incision should be deep into the flesh, and if the abscess is near the surface or in the joints and tendons and arteries, and everywhere it is even, without any curvature. In these cases, according to that member.
And for abscesses that are in soft flesh, it is better to leave the incision until it is completely healed, as we have said.
For if you pierce it in front of that, the flesh around the vein will become stretched and filled with a lot of filth. and by chance, the edges may harden and become deeply embedded within it.
And if at any abscess that is pierced according to the thickness of the flesh, as needed by the member.
And you must treat them with small incisions, small openings. and in large incisions, large openings, and many cracks according to the size of the abscess.
and if with such abscesses it is necessary to pierce the heart, then cover it. when it has become dry like the skin, and is stiffened, then it must be treated like the buboes:
and if they are of such a nature that they are cut in three angles, and if they are of such as are also cured with myrrh, like abscesses from attacks;
and if they are of such as require a large incision, or other sized cuts and similar treatments.
Those that have no head, like a superficial sore, it is necessary that you pierce it deeply;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has great tension, and you pierce it, if you do not draw out all the tension at once, but only a part; then stop the abscess until the other day, then draw something from it; do this many times gradually until the bowel releases entirely;
most often the patients are of weak spirit, or pregnant women, or small children, or old, frail people. For sometimes the spirit jumps at the outcome of the bow, which might cause the patient to die, and you should not be alarmed by this.
therefore avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have perceived your abscess, if the wound is clean, and check if the abscess wound is small; and if it is a clean cut, apply these attempts of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, you should insert a tent into each one so that they come together.
and if you have managed to remove a part of the abscessed skin and close it, you should fill it with old cotton or dried linen rags without moisture and bind it for three days.
then the bone, and the treatment of healing as long as it is healthy.
And if the infection spreads to your work, then apply cold water and ice, moisten the bandage, and lay it on the affected area repeatedly.
And if the bleeding persists, apply government and cure, and the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter or the veins and abscesses are very nervous, then you should place these moistened cloths of wine and hot oil upon them.
and if it is in such a state, and the vein is fleshy, then you should place moistened cloths of water and oil, or wine and fresh oil, up to the third day, as we have said.
and then release the abscess and wipe it clean and treat it as necessary, so long as it is healthy.
And it is necessary to know this universally in the treatment of abscesses:
for it has been said to you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and now let us consider this chapter.
Or there are many small abscesses that come from the heat of the head, and they are like threads, as well as the sinew of a chicken, and they have many similar appearances.
There are some that are thick and such, where there is also moisture as well as pulsation;
and if it is of such that are hard and difficult to cut, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary.
And the work of the thigh is such that you should test all instruments called "intrusive" with which the following form is obtained, something it contains.
For if it contains moisture, they make a hole from above down long.
And when the moisture is drained, if nothing remains in the skin that contains the moisture, because it repeatedly returns when nothing is left.
then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, with water and rope, and apply to the wound, and leave until the other day; and they will correct those who are delayed in healing.
And then begin the bandage again, as before, on the second day, and third, as long as you know that it does not delay healing.
then treat the wound with healing remedies as appropriate, as long as it is clean.
And if the abscess remains firm, as per this form, for a long time; and immerse them in water, and scrape them from all sides, and put all your effort into drawing out the pus from the wound where it lies.
and if it causes him pain, do as I have told you.
Also, treat an abscess that is painful, and cut it and cure it as I have told you.
And cut the abscess first and moisten it if necessary; for it is filled with little blood. And if none of these abscesses or joints have moisture, and it is one of these deep abscesses that I found on the shoulder of an old woman;
and I found the abscess as hard, sharp, and white stone that cannot be broken. and if none of these helps, one should also make a wound as if from a stone.
In other cases of abscesses occurring in the head or neck, those who come as leaders of children and affect the roots of the ears, the opening should be kept completely open for as long as possible to allow the pus to drain.
and treat it as appropriate.
Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and it discharges pus, and causes pain, and never comes elsewhere on the body, and it is full, and twisted together.
And each ulcer is properly within its cavity, just as the neck and abscess in the head, as we have said. and the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others of a malicious nature that do not want to obey health.
in that one which you see of good disposition when touched, and resembles the color of healthy flesh, is quiet from every side and has no signs of inflammation in the collarbone or in the artery or in the duct, and is not too deep.
it is necessary that you cover it from above, and strip off the skin from every part, and the two lips of the heart be opened at the same time, if you need to, as we have said in the chapters on the head.
And move it little by little, and be sure not to touch the nerve or vein, and do not cut with the spatula or saw, so that the hand does not slip, and do not look too far ahead, lest you touch something you should not.
And if you touch the vein or artery and it does not allow you to act, then apply vitriole (a caustic substance) ground into a powder that stops blood, or any other powders that prevent clotting, and close the wound. and leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound is softened, and begin to heal.
And when the patient is stained with blood, he returns to your work, as long as you complete it.
then seek your finger's sign if there remain no small bumps, if they are clean and smooth.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the bump, it is not enough that you only remove this bump at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and leave it to fall without harm.
then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.
And if you clean the entire scab, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no delay due to the size of the scab. If you need to understand how to deal with the root of it, and pull it out, and cut it as we have said.
If you need to understand how to deal with the root of it, and pull it out, and cut it as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold an excess, cut there where it appears to die.
and the cutting should be done as previously mentioned, depending on the situation, then it is administered with bandaging and similar things, so that it corrupts none of what remains from the corruption. and when the wound is clean and free of infection, if the healing bandage causes pain, as long as it remains healthy.
The ancients spoke and discussed about the incision of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their words.
For those with a squint, it is necessary that the fold in the throat, called the epiglottis, be avoided. and no help is done through them, because all the veins and the pores of the sick are hot in those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both jaws.
When the disease is in the urethra's channel, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss caused by strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it in three or four small slits diagonally, between the two circles, or according to the size of the slit, not into the cartilage.
and if these muscles are suitable for cutting the epiglottis, so that there is no scar, and the vessels are long and thin.
And if the master is timid, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to the entire bone, and then cuts the heart until it reaches the chain. and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the tissue as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the throat's blood vessel that jumps out from the place which is broken, and by the loss of voice.
and keep the wound open for a time.
And when the hour has passed and there is doubt about the strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound together with care, and cut through just beyond the cartilage.
then administer medicines that promote healing as long as they are clean.
Albucasis says: One should not proceed with this until the throat is completely closed, and the patient is considered dead, lacking all breath. Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
and for this reason, the ancients instruct to keep the wound open until the ill will of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they command to sew up the wound and treat, as long as it was cured.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a damsel took a knife, and inserted it into her throat, cutting part of the tongue from the side of the mouth.
and I was called to heal her, and I found her also as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was coming from it, and realized that it had no power or passage to the outside other than through the throat, and the veins were emerging from the wound.
I hurried, and stitched the wound, and treated it until it was clean.
and having no further use for the damsel until her voice had returned, she later resumed her proper position.
because I say that in the operation of the epiglottis, one should not be afraid.
A cystic abscess is called a "neck hernia," and it is a large abscess with the color of an arrow, and it occurs mostly in women.
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental;
naturally, it has no engine.
And the accidental is according to two manners: one is similar to a tumor, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that arises from an artery. and fear is present, and one should not attempt to make fire outside in the open, but rather in a small space, testing and examining every opening. if you let it grow out as much as a new grass, and it does not give way to any force, if the bone breaks, just as we break bones of others, and treat it with all care, if there is no pain. surround it closely, and treat it as appropriate, as long as it is completely healed.
There are many ways of doing this, which I will describe in detail.
and it is necessary that I explain the distinction between our methods and those that come from elsewhere.
I say that it is caused by heat and fever as long as the ebullition has not passed and the putrefaction is complete. then rest the fever and the heat.
With no new heat, fever, or pain, and it retains satisfaction, which is its own sac and is according to the condition of the body, and begins also like a wound, and becomes large.
and they are according to their appearances, whether fat, moist, or of a certain color, as I have said in the division.
You should, when you approach the treatment of a new patient, that you test and inquire first about all the instrument called "entangling" (entromissoire), according to its form as it appears in this chapter or the following one.
And the method of inquiring into abscesses is that you press more or less moistly on the abscess, and move your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the center, then according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the instrument, and be careful that no part remains inside.
If moisture is running across the wound, what color it is, then do as I have said for other abscesses;
and after the insertion of the probe, no moisture enters, knowing that it is full, so make it cross-shaped, and take it as pincers, and gently scrape each side and protect the wound where it lies so that you heal it sound with new tissue.
and if you cannot heal it sound, then take it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Because if nothing remains, it will return to the body many times.
and if a little remains and does not cause you harm, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, tighten it, place hot soothing poultices on top, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
and if it happens to us, when we cut both lips of the wound, and the treatment of those who cause harm.
and if the pain is intense and other remedies fail, use the juice of vitriol ground, leave it on for two or three days until the wound pus forms, and let the fever of the blood subside. then return to cover what has been exposed from the wound.
See here the shapes of the instruments used, which are of three kinds: great and strong and small;
and there are three quarters which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three ways: great, strong, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like needles used to pierce sorceries, made of gold, or iron, or silver, and the ones that are yellow are more effective at encircling fistula abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the opening's size.
The shapes of the incisions are very similar, as you can see here:
and if the incisions have two curves in three ways as well;
and if there are those who have three curves, and they are also of three kinds;
and if there are others who have two curves, and some with only one curve, and they are of three kinds;
and all of this is necessary for their place.
The leader of these, which are made to be sharp, and there are some that do not cut well from both sides, which scrape the skin, so that one cannot cut into the vein or nerve.
and from these intrusions, the stitches are removed in several places, so that the patient does not lose them when opening the abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see;
and do not use them on any part of the body that is not muscular, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas.
and never does one use another small instrument, resembling the soles of hands, according to this form, to stop the blood: and it never rests in its place which is beneficial for veins, arteries, and always returns according to this great form:
Never do the breasts of any man swell when they begin to be corrupt, as long as they appear like a woman's breasts.
and remain idle and weak, and anyone who wants to cure them should be careful according to this form in this line b until g: then scrape off the fat, and apply medicinal fire, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healthy;
and hold the eyes steady, relaxing them due to their great weight, as it happens with women, making a kind of split in two ribs, through these similar openings; so that one holds the other at the end of each, ensuring the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g. then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned about stitching and powders, as well as anything necessary for the treatment, while it is still healthy;
and if he is not healthy, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive dressing. and leave it until it absorbs the moisture and fat, then treat it as soon as it is healed.
Abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are hard scrofula or have nodules, and if they contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G. And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply old cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with suitable dressing until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then do as we have said for cutting out scrofula, and if the wound sinks in, apply cautery as we have mentioned before.
When the artery is bloated and the skin above it is closed, this often leads to abscesses, and likewise occurs in the swollen vein with an abscess.
and if you recognize it thus, as it is for an artery, then cut the abscess long enough to open it; and when you feel it with your hands, if it feels strange;
and when it is for the vein, there will be red swelling visible;
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is deep in the flesh and full of anger and other parts, and is very large. It is necessary to avoid iron treatment, and he who has a strong pain should also avoid it, and for him whose artery bursts open through the skin from above, cut deep into the flesh.
then operate on the chest as one does with wounds, and carefully remove the artery from the tissues while it is still exposed.
then insert a needle from beneath and pierce it through to the other side, gripping the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you regarding the extraction of the two arteries located in the temples.
then point to the place between the two links of an instrument until there is no pain remaining in it, and loosen the abscess.
then administer the treatment with caution, as long as the wound is open. then apply this treatment with care, as long as it is clean.
and if the abscess is the size of a vein, it is necessary to hold your hand over it, from the abscess to all the skin, then insert the needle through the flesh and pierce it, and use a double thread so that you can pull it out from the other side. then, as I have told you, take the abscess, or one of the parts of the bone to the joint;
and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, if it rebounds another needle into all the parts of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tightens the threads in four places.
then, cut the abscess until the surplus part comes out, then cut off the surplus from the center and leave what is bound.
then place on it a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer treatments of bandages and poultices until it is healed.
Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, so too do they appear in nails when they are damaged or subjected to excessive strain, and similar things.
And this occurs more often in joints and limbs where there are displacements, which are abscesses, and their appearance seems to be the color of the flesh, and they are in various positions with pain.
and when they tighten it, the patient feels pain, and is not completely healthy in that part, but the pain radiates from the heart.
and it must remain still from all sides, neither moving forward nor backward, up nor down, and the one that is in joints should not be covered with iron. in case they contract and whoever is on the head or forehead, makes the skin split with a spatula.
and whoever is on the head or forehead, makes the skin split with a spatula. if the abscess is small, if you have pliers, cut it at its base;
and if it is large, if he suspends it at the corner and scrapes off the skin, then cuts out the bone and reassembles the wound with stitches, and treats it until it heals.
It never appears in the stomach or anywhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its similarity to roots, and it has thin, large droppings.
and it has small and large droplets.
and I have seen at home those who had them in their bellies that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, had a delicate root, and were constantly moist.
I collected them and found in one eighteen ounces heavy, and in the other six ounces, and the work of the incision is such that if you watch, the patients are moist, and the colour of the articulations is white and moist and of delicate root. if it is collected with a wide spatula, and they are in your presence, perform the fire cautery.
if it is collected with a wide spatula, and they are in your presence, perform the fire cautery. For cutting often brings too great consequences of blood loss, and if it without your notice, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient afraid and filled with fear of the incision, take a well-made thread, tie it as we have said, and leave it for a day.
then restrain it, and do not stop pulling the thread until it dislocates the joint, and thereby achieve relief.
and if the roots are thick, be afraid to dislocate them especially for the stomach, but you can still dislocate half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return.
then treat the wound, and ensure you do not cover the part that is red, painful, and full of pus.
For this is an abscess magnified, and I will come to the treatment of this ulcer afterward.
When the bowel is blocked. If the appearance of the lump arises from cauterization of a wound or an incision on the soft tissues, and it is located on the belly and not in any of the bowels, as happens in other openings, or due to blood clotting in veins or arteries as described previously, or from abscesses;
and if it is through the opening of the soft tissues and through the discharge of the bowels, then the abscess has the color of the flesh, and it is slightly painful without much discomfort, and it opens up in various ways. And if it is due to an intestinal issue, then it is more diverse, and when pressed by the fingers at its opening, it returns, and sometimes becomes constricted, greatly expanding at the bath entrance or through hard work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain.
and if it is due to blood, it opens up in these signs: abscesses large and hard, and are fixed according to quantity. and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work involves observing whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery, a vein, or windiness.
and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work involves observing whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery, a vein, or windiness. If it is necessary, you must leave the cure. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter about abscesses, both for the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bowels, you should instruct the patient to raise his leg and keep it straight, then tie a cord around all around the abdomen. then command him to twist slowly between your hands, then enter the joint that you have marked throughout its entire range of motion, then pull half of the abscess above all the great hook. then tie it around with a strong thread or firm silk string tightly, and make sure the bandage is securely in place.
then open half of the abscess extended over the bandage, and insert your finger index, pressing inward to explore. if you feel it is firmly stuck to the bandage, loosen it gently, and press outward on the intestines away from the abdominal wall.
and if you feel the boil, if it is taken at the right time, and cut off the surplus.
and if the arteries or veins run counter to your work, then return to your task and take two needles, and force them through the flesh, and push both needles back in the same way you made the incision;
then strain the abscess in four directions over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the flesh until it heals, and draw out the dead flesh by yourself. You apply the knife when the swelling is gone and manageable, then treat it as we have said, and heal the abscess.
You apply the knife when the swelling is gone and manageable, then treat it as we have said, and heal the abscess. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as appropriate, and bandage the wound.
The first sentence translated from Old French to English is We have spoken in the previous section about the appearances of ulcers, and how they must be treated with medicine, and how one should avoid iron treatments.
and let us speak of the ulcer spreading in a dangerous manner, and exercise great caution in its treatment, and advise the patient that when an ulcer is in the flesh or can be cut out like an ulcer in the mammary region, or in the foot, or similar places, it must all be removed as soon as possible.
no one can ever make it whole before me.
And for the works when it is in the air or can be removed, as we have said, do not at any time purge the patient of black bile.
then make it healthier if there is evident fullness, then perform the work on the patient's good limb to carry out the task.
then apply your knife to the ulcer, and cut it from all sides, and the bone from all sides, leaving nothing intact.
let the blood flow completely, and carefully press the wound with your hand or any object, and if the discharge of blood makes the incision on the artery or vein contraindicated, then cauterize it as soon as the blood stops. then treat it with another remedy as long as it is healed.
The term "dydropisie" appears to be a We have previously discussed the similarities of hydrops and described how the assembly of fluid is formed in each case, the signs of each condition, and the treatments that are effective through medicine or iron.
and one must not use iron in these two instances: that is to say, tympanitis and ypopharacy, for it is a deadly thing;
so when you treat this appearance of edema, called 'ecrites', with medicine, and the cure does not benefit the patient, then consider if they are weak or have another illness besides edema, such as intestinal trouble or similar conditions. if he does not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient of great strength, and he has no other illness but hydropsie only, and is neither too fat nor too thin, then thus must you act: lay the patient down on your hands, and have the attendants press the belly towards the bottom, pushing out the water to the lowest part of the pain, then take the spiny spatula according to this form: And make incisions from both parts. with a point, but not so deeply that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and cannot tear:
then look if the dropy (edema) is present near the intestines. you must then cut through the bowel, three finger-widths deep, from the inside towards the outside on the little finger side. and if the edema is due to ill health of the liver, then your cut should be on the left side of the bowel, three finger-widths deep.
and if it is due to mucus, then it should be on the right side, and it is not advisable that the patient lies on top of the cut so that excess fluid does not flow into that weak joint.
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour it out, and lift your hand from all the slime between the skin and the flesh as if you were scraping with the size of a fingernail or in any other way.
then pierce the flesh until the slime is completely removed and dry, which is when the pain ceases, then pull out this instrument and it should look like this. and it is similar to a small silver chain, made of fine gold or light bronze, and has a small hole at its base. and from one side, three openings; and from the other side, two; and another from another.
and it is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision in which the scribes cut the feather.
at the top of it is the groove, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it now sinks onto the instrument.
Empty the body then, half or a third, for if you empty more than is necessary at that hour, perhaps the patient dies due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls into a coma, or draws near to death.
but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the virtue in the patient signifies, and his pulse.
then take the instrument and hold the water, which is now retained by the cauterizing iron that seals the opening on the affected part, of which I have spoken, and pierce according to this manner.
then continue with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take a small quantity of water;
do this every day, and be careful not to force it until it heals but with a little water.
And if you have doubt about the patient, and you give him too much water, whether through burial remedies or hot sand, and by sweating or a bath and in the sun, and dyeing with wine; and apply drying medicines as long as he is healthy, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after draining the water, as I have said before.
No child is born who does not have an opening in the penis, or if the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
If it is necessary for him not to pierce through all the very subtle spatium according to this form,
Then take a subtle hole in the bladder and close it and hold for three or four days when he wants to urinate, then open the closure, let him urinate, and then close it again.
and if by chance he does not remember, because the strong flow of urine does not allow the closure to be kept closed.
If the opening is small, it is a sign of a weak bladder closure, as we have said, and it will expand.
Those who do not have the hole in their bladder are cursed, because no one is born with a hole at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they close their penis. and they cannot move because the material cannot reach the joint, and it is a great illness.
And the method of performing this procedure is that the patient lies on their back, then the doctor makes an incision at the base of the spine and also cuts across the chest as if it were the size of a quill, so that the opening reaches the depth required.
and be careful of the bloodletting that occurs frequently, and if it happens, apply pressure to stop the bleeding and treat the wound until it heals.
from the pustules of the penis Many times this inflammation comes to the leg, and it appears as a terrible scar;
and it has malignant and benign forms;
you must press them gently, and clean and dress them, then apply moist cotton in an Egyptian dressing; then continue the dressing until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, with putrid color and odor, it requires cautery treatment.
When you have cleaned it, and the inflammation is deep in the leg, with some part inside the skin and some outside, then it is necessary to remove the inflammation that is inside first. and when it is healed, if the treatment deviates.
For when you cure it together, unless the joints of the bone are thoroughly secured, blackening and corruption will come to the limb and socket.
so it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and vinegar, and continue treatment with other remedies until it is healed.
And if a feverish event occurs, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Fire cautery is helpful when the patient's condition is improved together: This is to say, concerning blood clotting and corruption;
and if the part of the penis is corrupted and retreats, it is necessary that you push or draw a plug of cloth into the penis to drain the patient.
and when the hair becomes dry at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, leading to either a wound or an abscess, it is then necessary that you scrape off the dried skin with a sharp instrument, until the layers are separated and the part of the penis is relieved from all sides.
and if it is a difficult thing to devise, then you should scrape it with the spatule at any point close to the head of the rod and the blade.
then separate the edges with a delicate linen cloth soaked in cold water, so they do not tear immediately.
Circumcision is not a complete healing process like other wounds; however, when we perform this operation of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest work for their salvation.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not practice it in their laws, and we have acquired knowledge of it only through experience.
For I have sought out most of the masters and wise ones who perform circumcision around the anus, and have learned from them all, a new technique.
if the veins were different because there are two layers, and perhaps one is cut above and the other below. or if he re-covers it, the pain is doubled, and the cleansing of the wound around the anus is not assured for the point of the member.
and to the cleansing of the nail, perhaps the fire escapes and corrupts the work, causing the wound to heal, and often they grow back in such a way that no further cleansing is needed, which I have witnessed.
From the cleaning that is done with force on every link of thread, I have found the benefit of experience, because the forces cut exactly as well from above as from below.
For when you press your hand, cut it evenly through all its parts; but make sure the thread is well twisted around the skin;
and let it be the gentle manner of the first operation, so that the child, if he hears, believes that you are only tightening the thread around the stick very gently, and then make him forget in all possible ways.
then make it stand straight between your hands, and restore the strength between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see any of the tools.
then take your hand to the staff and blow on it with your breath, and hold it up until the end of the staff is in place. then thoroughly clean it from the dirt that is gathered on it, then tie the joint with a doubled thread, and bind it to another limb with a new ligature.
then thoroughly clean it from the dirt that is gathered on it, then tie the joint with a doubled thread, and bind it to another limb with a new ligature. and hold it in both hands at the second tie, with the little finger and index finger, and cut between the two threads, then gently lift the end of the staff. then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the cause. and sprinkle it with a powder made from a mixture of cooked egg whites tempered with rose water, preserved with good rosined oil and fresh herbs, and leave it until the next day, and treat it with another remedy as long as it is healed.
The method for purification is as follows:
both feet should be clean and cut, and the toes should also be as long as the rest equally.
The mistake of purification is when the veins are cut open;
Then it is necessary that you extend it with your finger, so that the veins do not form an abscess.
and hold it even, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then use tweezers to hold it and cut it.
And if they remain for three days, and what is under the stick is swollen, leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and gently peel off the skin.
if the cup is as you can see, and you keep it from the part of the stick, it will not harm him in any way.
Treat therefore the sudden wound from gunpowder, which we have spoken of in dealing with powders, and if the cup is made of hard material, and it goes above beyond measure, it will do no harm.
Cure it therefore, as we have said, while it is whole and healthy.
retention of urine
The retention of urine is a sign of stone or frozen blood, or bowels, or a blocked duct, or similar conditions, as we have said in the division.
and if the urine cannot be passed, it is because of a stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, so it is necessary for the patient to bend over on their knees. and they should place the feet on a chair behind them and extend their stomach from above the back, and restrain the patient sideways as much as possible. and then it is necessary to constrict the bladder neck at the level of the stone above, so that the urine can be passed.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer the extraction of all the instrument called "syringe", whose form is:
and it should be made of fine, light silver, like the feathers of a bird; and the length of the handle should be one palm and a half, and it should be thin at the top.
And the method of urination is as follows: you take a double thread, attach it to a small ball of wool or cotton at the end, and insert the threaded end into the syringe.
and cut off the excess of the line and the flesh just above the chief of the vein, then anoint the vein with oil or butter and egg yolk, and place the patient in a reclining position, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water.
then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis downwards towards the buttocks.
then squeeze the syringe before reaching the bladder, and let the patient feel the flow until it reaches the empty space, and this is not done correctly if you do not follow these orders, for the direction in which it flows is twisted.
then take a thread and pass it through the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out forcefully, and let the urine flow.
and repeat the process until the bladder is empty and the patient is comfortable.
When scabs or inflammation come to the bladder, due to an accumulation of putrefaction, you should draw out water and medicines using a device called a "clepsydra", and it is shaped as follows:
it is closed, and if it opens again: from one side, and from the other, as you can see;
and the hair that is used for cutting the medicine should be such that it effectively numbs the pain without addition, if we can extract the moisture and apply as needed.
and when you see your medications in the bladder, place the head of the knife into the moisture and extract with gentle pressure from the one who is inside.
if you extract the moisture with the knife, then press firmly on the one inside. if the moisture enters inside and comes into the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
and this is the form of a delicate enema by which the bladder is enemased:
and it is of silver or gold, and is the highest part;
and take it from the heart where the veins burst;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you intend to use for the enema, then wrap it between the two breasts formed by a good double thread, and heat the mixture over the fire.
then soak the head in a cleansing bath on the thigh, then press your hand against the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle of it, and punch a round hole through it. then insert a strong thread into these openings, reassemble the circle as you would a nut and bolt, and place inside what you see fit (oil and moisture and water), and secure it with the instrument.
and do as you did with the bladder, pressing it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of stone
We have previously discussed the methods of cutting and extraction, together with all the medicinal remedies;
and I have said the distinction between surgical cutting at the joints and all the signs, and in what kind of cutting we must perform carefully. and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign of acute bladder infection, similar to the sharpness of water.
and I open her widely, greatly alleviating the patient's pain, and repeating this process many times until it becomes harder. and it attacks the foundations of these stones.
and it is gentle healing for children until they are four years old, and it is much more painful in the elderly, and it is halfway between those who are young and old.
and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient through a cleanse, in order to draw out all impurities from the intestines. For it often obstructs the effort to cut into stones.
Then take the patient by the feet, and straighten them, and move them to the side, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it never moves up again.
then make him sit between your hands, with his hands resting on his thighs, so that the bladder is tilted downwards.
then take it (the bladder) and feel inside;
if you feel the stone in the passage, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not yield to pressure from the fingers, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is weak, or your middle finger, if the patient is younger and fully grown. and press it into its base, hold the stone, and when you feel it in your hand, if it's at the neck of the bladder.
then press with your hand, and the stone will move away from where you feel it, or where you see it cut.
And instruct the patient to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand upwards, and with their left hand, remove the skin that lies beneath the stones in the area where the cut is made.
then I squeeze the sponge thoroughly, which gives it its shape: and make an incision between what is between the buttocks and the base, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh.
and be straight on the stone, and your fingers should be together at the base or on the thigh, and cut across with a sharp blade so that it is wide enough to accommodate the stone without being too large;
in case the pressure on the fingers at the base causes it to move suddenly without effort;
and he knows there is stone or it has edges and corners. if it is caught while emerging;
and if it comes out of a sore, resembling a gland, and red, with a thin discharge.
At such time when it has edges and corners, make the size larger;
and if it does not yield, you must use pincers that are also like a file at the tip to extract the stone so that it does not escape. you must remove the sharp instrument from its place on the head;
and if you cannot do it thus, if the wound becomes large and very painful, and if there is no discharge of pus, but only a straining of vitriol.
and if there are more than one stones, you must first remove the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut it out, and afterwards deal with the smaller ones if there are more.
And if it is very large, they want to pull it out, and make a larger wound. For two things often happen to the patient: if he dies, or urine comes again through the place where the bones cannot join;
but nevertheless, make every effort to extract it or clear it out with pincers, as long as you treat it piece by piece;
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bandage it, and place on top a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; Then resolve the patient's complaint on their collarbone, and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
And when you dislocate it, if a lot of warm oil and water comes out, then apply healing ointment and basilic treatment until it is healed.
And if abscesses appear in the wound and cause corrosion, and blood clots form in the bladder, and due to this, urination is blocked, known in such a manner that without warning with the urine. so then press your thumb on the wound and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and it will decay.
then open the wound with heat and vinegar and salt, and aid it in every way that you can, as long as it remains healthy.
and it is necessary that all the wounds you treat, tie both legs to him, and apply the medicines on the joint.
and if the stone is small, and it is located in the urethra, deeply embedded, and urine cannot pass through. if you treat it as I say, cutting him many times, then the size [of the stone] is excused due to this treatment. I have tested this myself.
Take the iron at the front according to this form, and fix it at three angles in one stick.
then take a thread and tie it around the urethra behind the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder.
then gently turn the drill into the stick until it reaches the stone. and turn the drill back to your hand in the stone little by little, as you can pierce the stone from another side.
if the urinus (urine) comes, then press your hand against the part that is stuck from the stone inside the stick. if it is broken and jumps out with the urine, it cuts the patient;
and if you cannot do this for any reason, then remove the stone from inside and place it outside on top of it, then cut the stick across the stone between the two edges, then pull it out forcefully, and loosen the ligament, and cleanse the frozen blood in the wound. and treat it while it is clean.
of the women's stone" (referring to kidney stones)
Very rarely do stones occur in women, and if they do, the treatment is difficult, and it is hindered by three things:
One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
and the second reason is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who exposes herself to men, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that, perhaps, one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of healing.
And the fourth way is that the skill of the woman is often more excellent than that of the man, so it requires deeper incisions and great care. If need be, one must appeal to a well-versed mistress, and if she cannot be found, then any skilled but chaste seamstress will suffice.
and it presents a wise dance in the life of women, where a woman who knows a part of the art, and commands her to do what you command her from the examination of the stone; and carefully consider if this woman is a virgin:
and carefully consider if this woman is a virgin: then she must remove her hand or finger and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, despite the constraint of her finger, she recommends that she remove her finger or hand with the patient, and press her left hand on the swollen bladder.
If it is cut, it is necessary to move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder down to the thigh, until it reaches the root of the thigh.
then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh, finding the soft center where it is most movable, and feel the pain in that part. and do not move it far from the stone, either up or down, but make the first cut small.
and do not move it far from the stone, either up or down, but make the first cut small. then push the blade into the cut, feeling the pain as deeply as possible, and know that there are many ways stones can be removed.
This is to know, both small and large and sharp, and smooth, long and round, and which have roots.
knowing these similarities to know the outcome.
And if the wound does not heal, mix powdered vitriol and apply it to the place, holding it for an hour until the pain is relieved.
then return to your work, as long as the stone is hard, and have the tools I told you for extracting stones from people to assist you in your task.
and if the wound is from an artery that has been cut, apply powder to the place and press with tenes and bands, and do not repeat this, leaving the stone and not pulling it unless the patient might die. then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the eyes open, return to your work while the stone is still hard.
Rameal water is nothing other than the assembly of moisture or white of egg, which is beneath the skin, containing the heat.
and it is called "syfac", and it is never properly in the membrane of the egg, if one considers that it is another egg. and this is the skin around the egg, between the white of egg that we have mentioned.
and this happens no more. And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness in the organs, and this material expands.
And it never happens from striking against the bones, and this moisture appears in many forms. or it changes to jaundice, or lacks red, or becomes black, or clear white, and this occurs more often.
and these are the signs to recognize this collection, for if it appears entirely white as we have said, then the abscesses are red, deep like an eye, and do not open the bones, because there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the wound bed, the abscesses are red with a portion of the flesh, and because of this, one thinks it is another wound.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part, it smells good to him.
then when you see to know the color of the moisture, try to test all the inside thoroughly, from which the form will be as it is now. According to what follows then, after the introduction, judge of what is within.
And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his ability and the replenishment of his body;
then place him on his back, on one thing slightly elevated, and cover him with many sheets.
then sit him on his left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on his right, and extend the staff towards one of the two ribs on the heart's side.
then take the scalpel, and cut through the skin of the ribs from top to bottom at the elbow, and make your incision entirely straight by cutting through the ribcage until it turns a satisfying white, carefully removing the flesh according to its natural inclination.
then pierce the swelling with a sharp instrument through a large opening, and drain all the fluid, then apply your bandages, and the swelling will subside.
and do not touch the heart of the swelling, but only the swelling itself. cut it all or in pieces, carefully along its side, for if you do not cut it cleanly and precisely, the fluid will return.
and if the foam jumps out of your control, make sure it stays in its place as you complete the work with the swelling.
then join the two books of the skin at the seam, then treat it as other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the fever corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, in doubt of the flow of blood.
then cut the skin from all that is suspended, extract the fever, and treat it as we have said.
And if the arrow is assembled into two parts, together forming two branches; if you treat the other part just as you did with the first, then wipe off the blood, and apply a clean moistened cloth with rose oil to the wound.
if you treat the other part just as you did with the first, then wipe off the blood, and apply a clean moistened cloth with rose oil to the wound. and apply another moistened cloth with wine and oil, and place two bandages over it, and cover it with double-layered cloths, and tie it tightly according to this form.
Then take two cloths, make them of sheep's wool according to this appearance and sew them together at the neck of the pants, one on each leg, close to the crotch and at the wrist.
and the other side of the head, on both temples, it should be entirely compressed in the bowstring's loop.
and under no circumstances should this cautery branch be applied with a hot iron, but rather use a delicate surgical knife to make incisions into the skin, and warm it as we have mentioned before, so that the white part containing the blood becomes exposed.
if the cautery is taken according to this form, and the white part is pierced in lines, and then it is carefully removed with this hot cauterization.
And the doctor, in all ways you can, as long as you stretch everything.
and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is safer; and be careful of the flow of blood, and control the movements to avoid complications from the work's intensity;
and if anything goes against you, such as an abscess or complications from blood flow, or any other issue, treat what goes against you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this work because of its horror, then perform perforation as I have told you, and make sure that when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned, the dislocation is caused by moisture, so leave the patient in a raised position. then incise the abscess from the base to the entire surface of the spatula deeply into the flesh.
and make the perforation wide enough for all the pus to flow out.
then place cotton on the joint, tie it, and allow time for the remaining water to drain, then treat until the wound is healed.
and if a white cloth does not allow the water to drain from the wound's opening, you should insert a feather or the tool used to draw out water from dropsical parts, in order to form it as mentioned above.
and carefully examine the wound, and know that if water returns and accumulates after six months or so, it will be as before, and in this way the patient will spend their days.
You know that in the treatment of this branch, it causes greater fear, which is why I think it's better to leave it alone.
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of an abscess.
I therefore say that many abscesses come where there is a hard mass, especially in the bowels. and this is the case in many instances.
This is to know of superfluous acidity and ague, which is spread through blows or impacts.
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the flesh. and it does not cause any pain, and the abscess is serious.
and in some cases, there are several abscesses that are dark, painful, and of a bright red color, and they do not come from new veins or the opening of arteries.
When it is from an artery, if it is known by the arrangement of the hot abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it is not appropriate that you touch it.
What is made of vein inflammation is known by its arrangement in the sensitive expression of the fingers, and can be very well cut into this shape, and into other wounds. and it is that you cut the core of the inflammation, then heat is in the top, and the raw is white and pleasing, and releases the suspension from all parts of the inflammation.
If the bone is already healed with these new scars, then it is necessary that you treat the bone and its fracture.
and if it is infected or in the veins or inside the vessels, then you must remove all of that pus, and treat the fracture properly.
And if the place of the wound is behind, it is necessary that you remove all the blood, and extract the foreign body, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, immediately apply moist wool to the wound, then oil and wine, and continue to treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
This is an abscess surrounded by a similar wrapping to the borion (a type of skin lesion), with the softening of tissues, and it causes the patient great pain when it forms.
and the treatment for this illness is also very delicate, just as we have mentioned above, and nevertheless, we will tell you about its work, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient lie on a clean bed, then hang the suspended bags of herbs below your hands, to all the vessels close to the wound, and cover them with master cloth, and stretch them tightly.
then with a sharp spade, cut widely through the vessels, as they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in deep tissues.
then he inserts an needle with a double thread, and sews it to the first place where the bone came out, and then sews it again to the other side. then straighten the bones correctly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound as with others, using bowel (or perhaps a similar organ) to ensure neither of the openings is obstructed;
for if there is no pain, and all the vessels come together, it is necessary to drain the openings for all the vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, they dry up and cannot help themselves.
The remedies of this plant are obtained through incision or by spreading it open, on the belly in the area of the angles, so that the intestines descend from that opening to one of the orifices.
and this opening is either from the incision or from the spreading open of it, and these two methods come from various causes.
or from percussion, or jumping, or roaring, or the lifting of heavy sadness, and similar things.
and the signs when it is from spreading open, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly. and it is even until near the whole length, because it pleases to straighten the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the incision that it brings a sudden pain to the start, and various abscesses appear beneath the skin close by, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the flesh from the force of the incision.
And never remove the bandages with the intestines still inside, as they are trapped and cause great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments, which are dangerous, it is important to be cautious.
And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to straighten the intestine back into its place within the wound, if it can be returned. then be mindful over his collarbone, between your hands, and soothe the hips.
then press above, and remove all the skin from the legs down to the long hair. then insert into the book of the stomach hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and be sure that it is such that the eye can come out.
then peel off the skin that is under the hair, until the white fat beneath is completely exposed on all sides.
then insert your two fingers as follows: after the hair, between the white fat beneath the skin of the thigh and the second fat, and from behind the egg, and between the second fat.
and then move the hand on the right towards the heart, and it will turn white with pleasure in your left hand, relaxing all the tension towards the waist. and instruct the attendant to extend the relaxation upwards, and release that which is tight behind the ligament.
and press your fingers if there is any sign of the intestine being wrapped or white, stiff pleasure, and if you feel anything, it swells in the belly.
then take a needle or a thick thread made of X threads, and insert it into the rear part of the pleasure, which is after the skin of the testicles. After surgery, then cut the bones that appear from the skin, as long as there are four bones. then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross pattern and bind them with the string mentioned earlier that penetrates deeply into the flesh's skin from both sides. then wrap the bones with strings and bind them so that no foreign objects can enter inside, preventing any abscesses from forming. and tie the string again according to the first long string, then leave two strings of the syfac that penetrates deeply into the flesh's skin on one side. and after all the others according to the order that God gives.
then cut into the part that is under the skin of the testicles, as long as it remains intact, and bend it, as we have said above.
then apply moist wool in oil, and dress the wounds, and use the bandage that we have said. And never should the white part be cauterized after incision, out of fear of bloodletting. For this happens many times, and leave the bandage until it is worn out by itself;
and if it delays in healing, it should be raised with hot water, and apply what we have said, until it heals.
then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
herniated cartilage
In this condition, never have I seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
And the elders say that it is made like a twig that joins the bone, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after cutting into them lightly from above and underneath.
then cut it out and treat the abscess that opens, while the vessels still flow.
and the treatment as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
No rupture occurs from attacks, as we have said, and opens the joints.
and does not let any of the intestines protrude like buttons, and if it does, it is a sign of illness, and it should be repaired every hour.
and nevertheless, if it persists at this point, it is believed to be a wound or infection, and the intestines protrude.
and this happens through the expansion of the affected part, as we have said, for it is stretched, then softened and swollen, opening up.
and the cure is through cautery, as we have said above.
and it is never cured with iron in this manner: and the patient should lie on their stomach between your hands, then cut the torn joint with a sharp knife according to the depth of three fingers.
and then extract the satisfying (or beneficial) substance that is beneath the skin but not attached to it, take the right tool and place it on the apparent surface of the satisfying until it comes out.
and press it firmly in the abdomen, then cut both the apparent surfaces of the satisfying on the right side and left side;
then extract the right side, and do not cover the satisfying or extend it in any other way, as I have told you in the treatment of the root of the intestine; then treat it with wound care.
then treat it with wound care. And when you treat the wounds, if they become infected and the wound is healthy, then...
The treatment is difficult, and it has no appearance in the rupture, but the cauterization moves in this place, and it is closer to healing.
of the softening of the hard skin
Often the skin of animals is softened in no man's flesh because the moisture within them becomes soft and visible.
and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient lie on their back and cut the softened skin that has become detached from the natural skin.
then bring the two lips together with a stitch, and if you see that the excessive soft leather has become detached, sew it firmly with three or four stitches.
Then cut between the ribs, and treat it as other wounds are treated, until they are healed, and pull out the thread.
Dou chastrement
You know that chastity is esteemed in our law, and for this reason I would rather not speak of it in this book.
and it is not necessary, except in two ways:
one is that he should answer wisely when asked, and know the cure.
and the other, because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts.
I say, therefore, that castration is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
In the method where we use attraction, we should make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and relaxed. then hold them in your hand, as long as they are healed and you no longer feel them.
On the castration of the penis: It is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the hide of the testicles in your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut each one with the knife at the place where you have well scraped them.
and leave no trace of any unpleasantness or subtle pleasure that is upon the vessels.
and this method of castration is superior to that which is done by cutting, because at the cutting, perhaps something from the testicles remains, which causes the animal to desire lust.
then treat the wound until it is clean.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism exists in two manners among humans: one is when it is between the two sex organs, also as the figure of nature of a woman, with hair, and never shortens the urethra.
And for women, it is also like this, having on the breastbone as well as a rod and two points.
And the treatment for both men and women is that you remove all the adjusted characters, and treat them as other wounds.
In a second manner, of men whose urine comes out through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
Tenderness is a character adjusted on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see. and no woman has it as strong as a hand, and that is the cure.
It is necessary that you remove the excess of tenderness from your hand or fingers, and scrape it lightly.
and do not harm me too much by opening veins, lest complications of blood flow occur, then treat with another treatment until he is healed.
and there is another affliction that appears in the mouth of the mare, and it spreads, and perhaps suddenly jumps out, and it resembles a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it the "cow disease. It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said about the tendon, and heal it until it is sane.
Erroneous is the judgment when the nature of women is not well understood, or the wound is small. and it is either by nature, born with him, or by accident, through illness, that he comes to be.
and it is either by nature, born with him, or by accident, through illness, that he comes to be. or it is through a sudden adjustment, or a subtle and specific cause, and it is done perfectly in the middle, or on the side, or underneath, or wherever it may be.
and one must carefully consider conception, childbirth, and even the timing of the flowers to be had.
and the knowledge of these is through the observation of dance.
If the symptoms are immediately apparent, whether it is due to your own actions or by chance.
If it is a gentle pain, subtle, and close to the leaves, if you act quickly, then thus:
With your two index fingers together, place the woman on her back, spreading her legs.
Then form the two leaves, as long as the subtle pain is gone, and be aware of the stupor.
Then take wool and dampen it in oil, and place it on the wound, and lay the woman flat each day, so that she cannot move.
And if the substance is hard and thick, it is necessary that you cut it with a scalpel resembling a sprig of myrtle.
If the dislocation is from a fracture, then suspend it at the joint and the bone.
and use the blood-stopping medications, such as oak bark, dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of egg yolk.
then apply a wide bandage, so that the wound cannot heal.
and so do this for a long time, and apply a dry linen compress.
then he should be treated with other remedies until he is healed.
And when fever comes from heat, it should be treated in this manner, especially if there are abscesses. For abscesses that are aggravated during fever, they should not be prodded or touched to drain them.
Of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without proper care, can become enlarged. When hemorrhoids have been present for a long time, they tend to get worse.
and we have spoken about the divisions, similarities, and signs, and I will now describe those that receive treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and their complications, when they are completely in the anus, and they do not appear to be felt, can only be cured properly with fire.
Those that are at the opening of the anus can be felt; these are the ones that can be cured.
It is therefore advisable to place the woman in a cold house, then apply hot compresses to the affected areas, and use poultices with herbs that constrict blood flow, such as aloe vera and dragon's blood, and similar remedies.
then immerse his feet in the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water;
and if the bleeding continues, one should apply a poultice of sumac and bark from pomegranate and gallnuts and similar things, then take oats flour and mix it with honey and oil, and make an emollient to place on their back.
And if she is tired, that is good. If that does not help, one should apply cupping glasses on the back without harming the mammary glands;
then take flax and moisten it in the juice of plantain or olive with old wine, and apply to the dislocated joint.
And when the abscess has healed, apply a clean dressing to the wound as long as it is healed;
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp point, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous text. and then apply the cure as long as it is healed.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the body, such as chancres and previous abscesses, herpes, boils, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the classification.
Therefore, I should tell in this treatise about the hot abscess that appears in the thigh, which is not a true abscess but one that bows its joints.
and if you want to know the work of iron, look if the abscesses are active at the beginning of their appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red, then you can see it. then do not hasten to pierce, but make it die while the pain is soothed;
and then make the patient lie on his back, and have him sit up with small cushions, supporting himself on his elbows, crossing his legs away from the affected part;
and let his legs be spread apart, and place his arms beneath his knees, and bind them firmly with a good bandage.
then push the bail towards the right side, and insert the instrument used to open the wound's mouth, from which comes the shape.
and it is necessary that when you insert this instrument, you first feel the depth of the wound, so that when the instrument enters, it does not go too deep and harm the patient. and if the instrument is larger, it needs to cover the entire depth of the bandage, so that the instrument does not hurt.
and it is necessary that he places the horn of the instrument above and turns on the instrument.
And when the abscess opens and it is done gently with the hand, if it needs to be covered, it should be done at the top, with the spatule lead.
and when the bowel is emptied, it is necessary that you put into the wound moist tents, either in rose oil or in dry green oil;
and take the tent of the wound completely over the margin, and place it firmly over the margin and on the inner side of the arm with clean moistened lint made from herbs or wool.
then treat it after two days of healing has come to it, as long as it is healed;
and never lift the margin and the wound with a cleansing of water and honey, and then water or cooked roots of lily and aristologe (herbs) long. then return to the healing.
And if the wound is closed in the inflammation, it is necessary that you be careful about applying heat, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
of childbirth Skill is most important in midwifery that she knows the signs of natural childbirth, and these are when you see the woman hasten below, and desires to smell the ar (spice/herbs).
then the child hastens to be born. so know that these children are according to the natural figure, and their issue (i.e., limbs) come out with them.
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press the abdomen so that the child is born quickly.
because as it descends onto its head, if it is attached to it, then it tightens the hair roots with proper purification.
and this is what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it never comes upon its feet, but rather penetrates the body or affects parts like hands or strikes the belly or back, and sometimes turns about by chance onto its neck, or in other harmful shapes.
so it requires skill in the art that it be wise and subtle in these matters, clearing itself of error and disappointment, and I will show you all the shapes how one must aid it.
If a fever comes upon the head due to natural causes, and a woman gives birth severely, her strength is weak, if she lies on a saddle, or women hold her that way;
and if one's natural oil or fennel seed is cooked, then take a small spatula in the shape of which... and split the second layer, and cut into her fingernail as much as the moisture that is deeply embedded;
and press the woman's belly as the child descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to enema the woman with fennel seed mush mixed with licorice oil;
then make him breathe deeply and sneeze from the condition, and hold his mouth and nose for an hour. if now the child is born.
And if both hands come out, it is necessary that you reset them gently, little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair and raise her feet up. then lift up the seat from the ground, and tie down the woman so she does not try to stand up.
and if her hands cannot enter, the child dies, if she cuts them with a knife placed before her, and extracts the child, then reset them both equally.
From the birth of the child on his feet When the child comes onto its feet, it is necessary to push them up. and then make it even smaller and smaller, until it is level.
then press upon it with your hands and stretch it little by little.
can he jump up to his toes, if commanded to press, and makes him sneeze from the condition; if he jumps up, God wills it.
And if it does not happen as we have said, he should turn him little by little according to the natural form. For then it becomes slightly lighter.
And if it does not come out as we have said, take a small amount of musk, and oil from the eyes, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and place it on the nature of a woman within and without this treatment, then make her lie in warm water reaching down to her ribs.
and when she is dampened from below, make her wear a collar of myrrh and place it around her, and leave it for an hour. then make her lie on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose tight, and press gently on her belly, for the baby is now ready to be born.
from the passage of the child through its knees When the fever comes in this form, he should raise his hands little by little; then he should rest on his collarbone, with the weight hanging down below, and lie down on his side. and he should bend his hands little by little, then take his hands and place them on his belly, removing the pillows from below until it is flat. and if the fever does not subside, he should take his feet and move them forward, then raise his belly upwards, and then press his hands. and let the child grow and grow; and instruct the woman to conceive while the child is still inside.
From the birth of the child who comes with a large hand during I know how to bring the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, then one must raise the woman and move her along.
if she cannot move, then have her lie on the bed with her legs straight.
then remove the mucus I have described;
and if she does not give birth, but the fetus remains in the womb, then study how to bring it down by pulling on the hand. and pull the child out according to its natural position, make it sneeze, and command that it strain until the baby comes out.
from the birth of the child on its chest, with its hands spread and its face turned away from its mother's back. I know that the pulse has its hand, then it presses little by little, and turns it slightly;
and when they are even, he should place a mucilaginous and oily substance on them, as we have said, then he commands that they move little by little.
and when you have done this, if the fire is on a seat, command it to burn intensely. and it causes sneezing. in the same manner, throughout all of this.
in the same manner, throughout all of this. When it manifests in this way at regular intervals, take a cotton swab and remove the moisture with your fingernail.
and it ties itself to its face and neck, if the cap of the wound is not held, it will die.
then bring the child inside, as long as you have placed it properly, and tell the woman not to move at all.
From the emergence of twins Know that many times twins are born, and never more than three or four at once; and this is by no means a strange thing, and often happens. These are strange things, and do not live, but have no name.
These are strange things, and do not live, but have no name. I know that they multiply, and are devoured by the satisfaction of him who devises them, who is bound to the bow.
and they never appear as naturally as all of us, as we have said.
And if they are severely stuck, if the treatment is as we have said, and it is a cunning surgeon, then make it tight and gently do what it does. and do so as it deserves for health. from many children
Never are they formed in the joints I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of their noble wisdom, and it is necessary that the skilled surgeon knows all this, for by chance, something similar might happen. if it is done according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman with a dead or pregnant child, as I said in the previous section, and there is no discharge, and you are compelled to use forceps; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has no risk or fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be supine on her back, and that her legs be inclined downwards, and raised;
and treat the wound of its second part, where it is attached to the bed so that it does not heal until after the birth of the child.
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with fennel and fenugreek seeds, then apply this mixture to her hands.
then gently squeeze the mother, and check if she releases any pus, making sure that it does not descend onto her head.
If the thorns become stuck in its own joints or in the neck or mouth or inside the throat or beneath the beard or on the forceps or near the ribs, and this penetration is on the surface, stick or press it gently against the bones.
and it is necessary that he holds the thorn with his right hand, and places the claw between the fingers of his left hand, and presses gently with his entire hand, and sticks the thorn into any of the joints we have mentioned, as long as it reaches the empty space.
then find another joint, where you need it most, so that extraction is even;
and then stretch it evenly from side to side, so that it can be moved and the joints become sharp, as is the shape:
And if part of it remains, and if you cannot move any of its joints with oil, press the oil into that part and pull on the other part.
and if nothing remains, then move this joint higher up and do until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes forward before the other and cannot return due to tightness, it is necessary that you wrap it up in a cloth until it heals completely. then cut it at the joint of the foot or the knee, and so it is necessary that you do with the other hand, and have both feet bound.
And if the child's head is large and stuck in the birth canal, or it has a sharp point assembled, it is necessary that you press the spiny forceps between your fingers, and do the head and extract the blood. You cut it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
and thus, I myself make it attach firmly at the great natural strength.
and then pull the bones with pliers, and the joint jumps out and is seized by force, so that it may be split, until all moisture that was causing trouble has left.
and if it cannot be extracted, then break it into pieces until you can move it.
and if he is bloated in the stomach or has fluid in his ribs, then you should pierce it until the moisture is drained.
And if the fever is on its feet, it has a light pull, and the direction to the opening of the wound is light.
If he is constipated in the stomach or has a stone, then it is necessary to pull it out with a grip on the enveloped drape around the hand. and making the stomach or intestines empty, until the moisture within is drained.
and if any other part of the body is broken and the stool remains, apply pressure with your hand from the outside of the anus, and pull it towards the mouth of the anus. Then he heats the fire and plunges it in (the affected area), and pulls it out.
and if the mouth of the wound is constricted due to hot inflammation that has come upon it, it is not suitable to work on it, but instead moist and greasy things should be applied. and apply it with moist plasters, and immerse it in warm, softening and lubricating water.
And if the child is on his side, and you can make it even, then apply what we have said for the living child;
and if one cannot, if it is broken into pieces, do not leave anything of the ligament.
And when this is done, apply what we have said about the incisions that come to the wound;
and if the inflammation comes, it should be treated with severe restraint, and other remedies should be applied.
And I saw a woman whose belly had been cut open, and I consulted another on that wound, who healed the other wounds. After a long time, there comes a abscess in the cheek, it swells until it opens, and begins to cause severe pain.
I was called upon to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I could not close the wound.
I applied a strong poultice, and an bone came out, and after a few days, others followed. I was greatly amazed, because the belly has no bones.
If I thought this was a bone from a dead child.
I examined the wound, and pulled out the bones with my hands, until the woman was in better condition; and he should examine the woman long times thus, and then let go a little bit of pressure from the blue.
and I remember this chapter only because, when the master encounters a strange thing, he knows how to provide aid.
After this comes the form of pressure, with which one binds the books.
and at the second turn, as the second joint of the limbs. Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth should be wide enough for two fingers, with a margin of wood, about one and a half palm lengths in length; and also both limbs should be equally adjusted with this same wood, firmly fastened together, about half a palm length or slightly longer;
and this double adjustment is tied at the opening of the wound to open it when you turn both horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of pliers. and it should have two adjustments, as you see, of one palm length, and two fingers width;
and when you see the vagina opening fully with the instrument, lay the woman down on her back, pressing her legs apart, then tighten both adjustments together in the vagina, and hold the end of the instrument from beneath between her thighs. then use your hand to handle all the tools, just as you have done with the pincers evenly, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the wound, until the pain ceases to do what it wants.
All these tools are skillfully crafted, and they are numerous in their varieties; and when you see them properly equipped, the work becomes more rapid, and the results better for their quantity.
Do not disregard the instrument if you have not prepared it, for the need for it is not an excuse for negligence.
When the secondine (a tool or technique) is used during childbirth, it is important to instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze gently, while pressing your hands on her mouth and nose. and if she jumps through this, it's fine.
If the vein is not accessible, I take a small pot, make an opening or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calamine, fennel, chamomile, cassia, and centaury. all of these herbs, or none of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire.
then place a cane or small pot over the opening and put the other end in the mouth of the wound, and hold it until the vapor goes inside the wound.
then make the patient sneeze, as we have said. If the second treatment does not help.
And if after this treatment, the pain persists and is not severe, instruct the patient to moisten their left hand with sesame oil or alum powder, then wrap it up in a natural cloth, and apply the compress again. and when they have found it, if the pain is slight and they gently press and stretch it right away, so that the marrow does not break during extraction.
but it is necessary to gently move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull. If it comes and goes away.
And if the mouth of the wound is tight and painful, we have said the remedy of sneezing and fumigating herbs.
and if it is not of all that we have said, be careful not to follow the treatment incorrectly.
but it is important that one who has the wound in the mouth, you bind it to the thigh of a woman, and then enema with four-ingredient medicine. if the wound becomes infected and is treated, and comes back again;
but nevertheless, if it stinks badly in the stomach and head, and causes the patient to become ill. Then it is necessary to use suitable fumigants:
no one of the ancients has tried fumigation with parsley and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which the woman is cauterized to stop the flow of flowers and bleeding, this is it:
And it is like a glass vessel, and one places the head gently in its natural form, and the base wide over the fire;
and let there be fumigations over the coals, and the scabies until it is completely healed, and then repeat another.
Many children are born who have not yet had their foundations pierced, but nature has sealed them with a subtle satisfaction. so it is necessary at the bath to pierce that satisfaction with a sharp instrument, and do not let it touch anything;
then place it on a moist cloth with wine and oil, and apply the dressing until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not return, insert or open a plug of cloth, and leave it for several days, and it will be removed when the swelling goes down.
And at no time does this stoppage of the wound or abscess occur suddenly; it is necessary to cover this stoppage: if it is cured, as we have said of the pain of plunging.
Fistulas that originate from beneath the foundation are called nodations, and those that come from above the foundation are larger, or in the space between the two parts, if there is a fistula or several.
and when this nodulation is old, if it becomes inflamed again due to moisture, causing white or subtle pain, and these fistulas do not persist.
and they (the fistulas) are known by those who observe the patient's excretion or venting when the patient passes wind, and sometimes one jumps out.
And if the fistulas penetrate just below the bladder, and just halfway up the penis; and reach just below the knee joint, and almost to the top of the thigh.
And thus you recognize the present fistula in the fundament, and it is not present. and it is that you push your index finger or fundament, and push a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no curvature.
And if there is curvature, if you push a slight blow or a horsehair, as long as you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out with extraction or venting or movement, as we have said; says that she does not feel any pain; if you are in a hurry to cure.
And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to the urine conduit, if it lets go of the urine, and cannot be healed by medicine.
If it is felt just at the joint of the thigh, then there is a strong tendency for veins to form close to the place. if there is no curvature or pain around it, and if it bows slightly, but does not suddenly improve with dressing, then medication is of no use.
And in these persistent fissures, there is no certain cure but effort and the vain efforts of those who interfere with them.
In those that are neither persistent nor old, there is hope of healing through fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands.
and extends the legs up to the thighs, bending the thighs towards the stomach. then wrap a bandage of yarn, or a compress if there is curvature, as long as you know where the bandage begins.
If the patient feels pain throughout their entire body, it is necessary that you press your index finger into their side, and they will then feel the point penetrating.
and if you feel the heat or cold between your thumb and index finger, then know that it is present. if it is not treated with care, it cannot be healed.
Nevertheless, it is possible to heal no one at all, but this happens rarely.
and with the help of this, if it is made with a delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said above. and burn the entire inside of the fistula, as much as it reaches the base; and do this twice or three times, as long as you know that these charred marks must be burned, which resemble the feathers of an eye.
and then apply hot, moist compresses until the charred marks disappear, and then treat with a soothing ointment that seals and soothes.
If he is in this state, it is good.
If this, in no other way, can be healed;
and if it tries to move between them, and does not pierce through the substance that is the foundation, and between your finger and the attempt, place a thick covering of cloth or something similar, and you will see the fistula opening where the covering touches the heart. if you cut from the beginning of the fistula and pull away before attempting to cauterize it, then after a while apply the heat to where the tenting begins. and he will be freed from pain, and cut.
then identify those three characteristics that resemble a bird's feather, and do not leave anything out.
And if the pain persists, and a cut appears between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
Because fire cautery requires two good things: namely, the burning of these adjusted parts, and the irritation of blood and the dryness of moisture;
then apply the cure of moist tents smeared with butter or crushed herbs, while the bones remain bowed, and pull the burnt parts down into the bow.
Then treat the wound with hot, burning coals and dry medications.
Because once it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way through to the very bottom of the body, and it is distant from the flesh, if you press it into its origin, and feel it there.
If you feel the urge to scratch, and between the skin or the itch is the web or the pest or the prickles, and it's about to pierce, if there's no other way out with faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it deep, or if you can remove the itch and treat it as first.
and do not force me too much, so that you do not remove the covering which holds the foundation, and the expulsion comes through the side against one's will. then apply the remedy, as we have said;
then apply the remedy, as we have said; should it happen that the patient recovers, you must remove that covering and clean it, then apply a poultice or some other pointed instrument. then remove the filth from the wound as best you can; then study to restore the wound and hold the fistula in the affected part where the foundation is missing.
then study to restore the wound and hold the fistula in the affected part where the foundation is missing. if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And never are fistulas like this: and it is when you press the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the deep foundation through the skin above, then take a precise tent at the top in this shape: And insert the thread crookedly in two places, and push the tent all the way through the fistula until it reaches the top.
If it is persistent at the edge of the foundation deep within, then extract the thread from that hole, just as you insert your thumb into your foundation.
and pull the thread from the root, and bring the two joints together, and tighten them onto each other, and leave it for one or two days.
and do not loosen it, until the thread breaks through the four threads between them.
then dress the wound while it is sealed and healed.
If the fistula does not open, try to open it in every way you can, but if it is too closed. For if it is not properly opened, and then healed as we have said, while it remains healthy.
It has a form of very sharp, spiky spine from which one makes the fistula if it is much swollen and hard, cutting through one side. and on the other hand no, because one cannot copy what one must not copy, as you can see here:
There are two types of memories: or they are within the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are both small and large ones, and sometimes blood, and sometimes many, and they are pushed out from the fundament and towards the top of the fundament.
but those that are too dry have little moisture, and still, now or a little of citrus water or a little of blood, and have the colour of fresh flesh;
and the treatment for those who have them deep within the foundation, so you instruct the patient to stretch himself to move around in rooms, until the foundations are strong and the children appear. if you act quickly, and have a pen with claws, or hold it with your finger nail, then cut it at the roots.
and if they cannot hold them for their moisture, if they take them in a drape or cotton or a piece of chamois; and extract them at the right time, then cut them and sprinkle hot powders on them, which are suitable for cauterizing. or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, and apply other remedies until they are healed.
and if the foundations cannot come out, if you give the patient a harsh and biting enema to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out firmly. Let the patients hold their breath and keep their eyes closed, so the hair can grow long and even; if they wiggle or move, it will cause pain.
Let the patients hold their breath and keep their eyes closed, so the hair can grow long and even; if they wiggle or move, it will cause pain. and if you press them with your finger or pliers, cut them, and then treat them as we have said, while they are still healthy, and they do not fear the incision with a knife. It is necessary that you perform the stitching in this manner:
It is necessary that you perform the stitching in this manner: take a thin thread, twist it into a needle, and then pass the thread over the top of the needle, and pierce it from the other side, and bring both ends of the thread under the needle, making sure it's not too tight;
and hold the thread taut, then tie it off, and extract the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave some for draining the excess blood.
then place a moist cloth or oil-soaked rag on the affected area and lay it down, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then leave it until they heal, and when the wounds have healed, apply treatment and other remedies until they are cured.
Carefully consider the sources or foundations. Often, there is a drying up of sources (or causes) in the intestine, due to constraints of nature, and when the illness is old and no medicine avails. It is necessary that you scrape off the skin with a spatula or your fingernail, which will prevent it from getting moist. then treat it as long as it is sound, as it should be;
and if it cannot be healed, begin the operation again with greater force than before, as long as it is still fresh and there is bleeding. then heal it as long as it is fresh.
He trembles. a flea is a small, hairy creature that burrows into the skin, causing much harm.
and it never cools down, and he feels as if he is dead from the tremor, spreading throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure is that you take a feather from an goose or a strong falcon's feather, and place that feather on the tremor until the red circles cover the tremor entirely. then turn your hand over the entire feather until you cover all around the tremor, and press it firmly, and extract the tremor from its roots.
And if you see, make this of a steel or iron wire according to this form, and be subtle and draw them from below and above. I do not perceive, so as to keep the hand steady, and it moves with pressure.
And if you see, cauterize the tremor as it is before or at the beginning of cautery.
Never use silver or gold enema, or molten lead or alloy.
and never use these small and large instruments, according to those who administer them. He who is thus entrusted with the care of children, especially those who are weak and in pain, should be small.
He who is thus entrusted with the care of children, especially those who are weak and in pain, should be small. The shape of the bladder should be small and narrow at the top, wide at the bottom; the belly is bound according to this manner.
and I say there is a desire or the belly should be restrained, as you see, and the excretion of feces should be felt inside.
and it has two openings on one side and one on the other.
and the belly should be filled with medicines from a bladder of good leather or parchment, and it should be pricked all around in small openings, and there should be a space between each opening, then thread through these openings with strong thread twisted cruelly in X shape or similarly around, and tighten the belly as if it were a bow. and when the medicine is applied, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then enema.
and it takes the form of a soft circle.
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply to the enema head oil or yolk of an egg, or a similar substance, then gently bottle it. then the healers should press with both hands together until it is entirely full, then remove the enema and have the patient lie down against the wall, and let the medicine come out as much as possible. and if he sleeps through the night entirely, it is greater help.
And if you use the enema for a stomach disorder and the medicine quickly escapes, then it should repeat itself until it is healed.
And if the hemorrhoid is at the anus or abscess, it should be treated with just as much subtlety as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle cleansing where the skin is tightened.
We have already discussed the treatment of wounds.
or I will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to where they are located, and according to the type of wound, and from what they are caused.
The things by which wounds are made are by the use of stone, and sword or knife, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar things;
or according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that breaks through the skin, or on the head, or the leg, or the belly, or the liver, and similar parts;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, because the remembrance of them will come in their chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it's due to a sharp object or similar things, for the skin is still torn and the wound is deep, and you slightly doubt an abscess forming. if it quickly becomes healthier on its own, especially if the wound exudes little blood, and the healing is on the contrary of the affected part.
and the patient should abstain from wine and rich meats.
And if he does not want to heal, his flesh should be reduced, and he should not drink wine, nor eat meat.
and apply this to the wound; if there is an abscess, take it out, using either oil mixed with rosewater or wine that is astringent.
and if there is no hot abscess, apply to the fresh wound while it still has all its blood, and do not move it with air or any powder, which I will mention later.
and if it moves again, even if any sparks are present, as long as it is healthy.
And if the wound is large, like the size of a sword or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by tenting, they should be sewed shut, as I will explain for abdominal wounds, using stitches.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it bleeds heavily, but only for a short time, then it should be treated. then treat the wound with medicine, and replace the skin with hard flesh, and instruct the patient to eat substantial meats, such as tests (offal) and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar foods.
If you find putrefied flesh or skin that has not reached the bone, but is rotten throughout, cut it off and treat the wound.
and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which without cut, cannot be stopped by medications, if you sever the artery, and if you dislocate it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you apply this powder which heals so that the burn moves.
And the method of the powder is thus: take a portion of incense dragon's blood in two parts take live charcoal in three parts, mix it finely with the wound and form a compress, until it spreads well and joins all its blood.
and then bind it well, and leave it unbound if it does not swell. because one cannot take medicine as long as it is fresh.
And never should charcoal be used alone, unless you have incense or dragon's blood, but the fire must move the wound.
And if the wound has changed or moved, especially when it is fresh, unless someone applies this powder to it.
but apply no poultices or compresses made of ground oats mixed with water and honey while it is still fresh. then apply other remedies as long as it is fresh.
And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with delicate pincers.
and I will tell you below about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the collar (or neck).
If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple, then it has no distinction from that at the top, but if there is damage to the nerves or arteries in the neck.
If it is the nails, then there is no other tool but to let the cure happen and do not put anything restraining, for it harms the nails and makes them retract. and do not apply anything sharp to the wound, for the substance of the nails is cold, and continuing treatment from outside affects the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be prepared, as if washing with soft water, mixed with rose oil, and also washed in soft water, and other herbs according to this method, and moist plasters.
And if the wound is large, cutting it open and binding it with bands, then heal it until it is cured.
and if the wounds are deep and infected, and filled with pus, then pierce them or deeper still;
and if the artery is cut, and pus flows, then follow these steps, and apply the proper law, and cauterize accordingly.
and if the spine in the throat is cut, or the colors, and the flow is preserved, so that the flesh goes, as much as the color touches the bone in the throat, and do not touch the throat but return it according to its natural shape. and then the gradual improvement occurs, and do not let it for any days, then cure the wounds afterwards until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, so be it. and if there are pieces of bone, if you can remove them all, and those that you cannot get, if you leave it until the wound putrefies, and becomes gangrenous, then let it heal itself;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I have mentioned. And if there are bones or a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or a sword, and the wound is deep, then pay attention to the direction of the flow of blood as the patient himself indicates. then know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and the blood flow is fresh, do not apply the powder immediately, nor bind it for the blood to stop completely, lest it return to the body and further harm the patient. but I apply an attractive remedy, and bind it twice a day.
and if you have no remedy, place much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if there is no coming of spasm, no bad shaking of the body, or disarrangement of the limbs alone. and when you see the good disposition, then you know that the wound is healed. Cure the wound with various remedies and others, as long as it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, operate, then know that there is a fistula;
if the cure is as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is shallow or deep, on the front or back, then treat as follows; if it is great, of stitching;
and if it is small, of powder, and if it is tightly packed in the bone, and has cut through pieces, so that the wound is exposed, and treats them fiercely if they are infected. and if they are not infected, then leave the wound to heal, and lighten the extraction.
and for other wounds in other parts, the judgments are as we have said.
disorder of the belly
The ruptures in the belly are great, medium, and small;
from the great wound, never let the intestines spill, or the inner lining of the intestines, so as not to allow foreign objects in;
and the stitching is more delicate, and never as good as the small wound as compared to the large one, because we do not apply enough pressure to the intestines when stitching them up;
because the intestines quickly become swollen and feel painful if not stitched properly, making the smaller wound easier to manage, because we must first reset the position of the intestine in its place before stitching it up compared to others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common stitches are used in stitching the belly, and the stitch for other wounds of the body, and there are two other specific stitches that are common to other wounds.
However, they are more specific with the stitch for the belly, and I will describe each one.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is no leakage of the intestines, and the thing to be stitched is easy to manage, then this is one of the two manners: For the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the injury.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Moisten a sponge or take a soft cloth in hot water only, or cook in water with ginger, cinnamon and cloves, and soak the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and never make this wine constricting, but it should be moved to reduce the swelling.
And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestines are filled with water or blood, and bad humors are cooked, for this is lightens the entrance to some degree.
and if it cannot enter, then make a slight wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids.
and the first treatment is to move the limb, so we must not cut without great need.
and this is the instrument for dividing:
if he cuts deep into the flesh and does not divert it, then see the shape: And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, return it to its natural position in its proper place, if you are able, for this is movement.
When the wound is large and located in the lower abdomen, it is necessary to have the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his head. and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then put the head and feet higher than the affected parts, and also turn the patient to one side so that the painful area is higher than the other.
And so we must administer what I say to great wounds and minor injuries.
Treat small wounds by preparing what you have at hand, then take in your hands a gentle ointment that will heal all the cuts to its tip, and bring together the lips.
This is the common method of stitching: you pierce a needle or more than one, according to the amount of space in the wound, then leave two spaces at the top of the wound, and insert a needle or strong thread where it feels right. and pierce both joints through the leather with both joints of the knife, which is to cut through the leather from inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two joints of the knife in three parts.
then stretch a double thread around the needle from both parts, then bring together the two joints of the wound properly, and then leave two spaces, and insert another needle.
then tie the thread just as you did with the first needle, and continue this work according to your need for needles, until all the wound is secured.
and they should be needles of medium size, between subtle and thick, for the subtle needles take up all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter properly. because they need to be medium.
and one should not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin, as they can open the wound before the suture.
and then remove the needles, so they do not cause the patient to bleed while sleeping, and place bands or cloth under the needle marks to prevent movement, leaving them until the wound is healed.
and this stitching method with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one or two needles.
The second stitch is common, and it consists of assembling the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of soft tissue together with a needle using a strong, thin thread.
and when you have secured all these pieces together, return the needle to the beginning part where you started, in the manner one sews clothes.
and place enough space between each stitch, about the thickness of a smaller needle.
This stitch opens the wound, and I sewed a wound with one of my hands on the belly, which had been cut by a knife; the wound was more than one palm wide, and it extended from the intestines two palms wide, and the wound was in the stomach.
I returned the intestine to its proper place after it had remained thus for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed completely within fifteen days, and it was cured, and it became healthy.
And they had all given up hope that he would die, and it was a miracle.
and I did not cure him with any treatment, for I was in a place where none could be found, neither medicine nor help. and apply a clean cloth over the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it is healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
take the needle, and dip it into the blood from the affected part up to this point;
when it has pierced the center in a straight line, if the point is lifted or the stitching or where you dipped the needle, and pierces from the inside of the affected part up to this point again;
and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as a tailor sews the fur, leaving once satisfied on one side and taking up again on the other, until the stitch is entirely completed.
The second way of stitching, which Galen rightly calls, is like no other, assembling the two parts together naturally, and applying one of the ends satisfied to the other end in this manner.
take a needle or a piece of thread close to a mirror, and pierce only the left side, leaving both ends of the thread satisfied. then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the distant part until it reaches inside, as far as the affected part.
then pierce both parts from the distant side until they reach inside, in two other places where there is miracle on the other side.
and this is the most effective method of stitching, and the most common one.
Many dispute these words, and no one testifies to them, so one must sew the belly with needles, or thread each one.
and you should push one needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, it is the most difficult to sew than other rips in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you pierce the fresh wound and all its blood, so that the arrow has moved it, then it should be pressed to stop the flow of blood and the pain.
then apply the enchanting powder over the burned area, and if the wound still burns, use any available dressing until it heals. and then sew the wound closed with thread, ensuring the stitches are secure and tight; then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicine, apply this instead: repeatedly change a clean cloth on the wound every day until it heals.
For you do not need other medicines in various arrangements when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound affects the principal members, it is necessary to apply a light bandage in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and between the armpits.
and if it feels pain or discomfort in the bowels, and this often happens, they should enema with red wine, especially when the corruption reaches the intestine.
and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestinal tissue called "jeun" cannot heal when it is weary, and this is due to the condition of the veins, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the nearness of its nature to the nerves.
And if the plug jumps out of the wound, put it back as it was in the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and has turned black, you should leave the part that is black, so that blood does not come from venoms, because there are veins and arteries.
then cut off what is between the links and hang the two parts from the opposite side of the wound until they come out, so that the removal of the plug is easier, and the wound bends.
From the rupture of the bowels
When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in no man, for I saw a nobleman wounded by a spear in his belly;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and developed into a fistula, and from there came expulsion and flatulence.
I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to be subtle until it was healthy and the wound healed.
And when I saw it heal, I doubted that the patient would not have pain in his stomach; and there is no harm, but it waits for better dispositions, and foods and drinks.
and they should not attempt any experiments when there is a small wound in the intestine, but it must be treated in this way. take a large needle, then gather the edges of the wound, and when the needle has opened the mouth, place it between the two lips, so that it pulls the mouth apart.
and then cut off the head of the needle, and this should hold so that it cannot be released, then insert another needle in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed. and cut the wound.
If the pain is sharp in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, it is possible to bind the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way:
take the end of this intestine thread, which is well spun, and then tie it to the end of this fine linen thread twisted, then thread the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and rearrange it in the rupture;
and this method of stitching with foreign matter is not useful except according to the path of promise and hope.
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it affects one of the vital organs, there is no remedy but subtlety.
or whether it is a fistula, wherever it may be. You know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is generally called a "fistula", especially when it is covered with hair and deeply seated.
And a fistula appears as a hard and white nodule, without pain, and is also smooth like the quill of a bird.
and it never appears clear or thin, sometimes thick, other times sparse. never too little, and never too much;
and I have spoken of wound divisions, that any wound which is not clean, and there is no char, it is only out of one of the nine causes: that is to say, because of the smallness of blood or pus; or because of its evil nature; or because there is hard matter inside, and on the lips, which does not allow any discharge to form; as there is too much bowel movement; or their bowels are filled, and the matter is of bad quality; or such medicine is not good for healing; because this corruption is the manner of pestilence; because due to the proprieties of the region, digestion is slow, health is delayed, and it is weak in nature; There are veins or bones here.
and I have already described all these causes, signs, and the cure of medications in detail.
It is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
You should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body. for there are fistulas that affect large veins, arteries, and nerves, in the stomach, or intestines, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine in the back, or any joint in the hands or feet. and if it occurs at the property of the main member, and has similar joints.
And all the fistulas that are of this nature are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but hard work and ignorance.
and if there is no fistula that does not come to the place I mentioned, and you have confidence in the treatment, and you see it take effect, take a piece of iron or steel, if the fistula is deep, as you wish.
and if the fistula is twisted, try a thin piece of lead or iron, because the plunger will bend and follow the curvature.
and it cuts the hands deeply and you cannot properly search for them with your fingers if you clean them through one of the openings, because moisture passes from one opening to another, cleansing them.
then cut it deeply with your knife, so you know if there are bones or nerves, and remove the blood completely, pressing it firmly, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press, and the location where they feel it.
and when you truly know the location, and it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any of the places I mentioned earlier, then cut according to what I told you, and remove the foulness and corrupt flesh that is within.
and then the treatment as long as it is healthy, and if the fistula is deeply placed in the right direction, it is necessary that you remove it completely, as much as you can, then apply moist bandages with astringent medicine, and keep them pressed to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
and then apply hot compresses with healthy charcoal, as long as it remains healthy.
if it is not healthy, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, remove it.
If a vein or nerve does not affect your principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, remove it until the corruption is entirely gone, then apply remedies to heal the wound as long as it remains healthy.
and if it remains unhealthy and turns bow-shaped as before, know that you are not yet allowed to proceed.
if it becomes exposed and you wish to go deep, remove all the corruption, then restore the joint;
and if they are thus healed, that is good. If that is not the case, know that the corruption is too great, and you cannot overcome it. if there is no other force but to surrender to nature;
and if there is a small, corrupt bone that you can pull out with tweezers, and if it is removed with a suitable instrument, and if there are many bones, they should be pulled apart without leaving any behind.
and if moisture makes it contrary, there is no doubt or fear, if it is hot and moist and hard, and releases the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something to the wound that promotes putrefaction, and leave it until the bones are softened around them, and then they will be more easily removed.
and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh bone, apply the putrefaction treatment so thoroughly that all the blackness is removed, and then dress the wound.
and if there is a great deal of decay in the heart, it reaches almost to the bone; if it is necessary, cover it with cloth and protect it until the decay is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurs in a man's leg, so that you can take an example from it and receive help in your work.
It was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to something inside the body, causing matter to accumulate in the leg, and he had a large abscess that would not open.
but because of their madness, they pricked the abscesses so deeply that they caused much damage to the body, and it became a fistula, and many holes appeared throughout the body oozing with pus and moisture.
and many people spent more than two years without cure, and there was no wise man in the art of healing, until I was called to it, and I saw his leg and the medicines used to heal him, and what healed through the holes in the body. and the body of the young man turned red, and it had the color of amber.
I set up a tent in one of these gaps, and then I examined all the gaps, and I found that some came into contact with each other from all parts of the leg.
I quickly prepared a tool, and inserted it into one of the openings until I discovered a piece of bone, which I found corrupt and broken, and the corruption reached right down to the bone.
I realized what I was seeing in the corrupt bone, and thought that there could be no further damage beyond what I had seen.
and I began to treat the wound with strong remedies for a long time, but they could not heal.
and then I tried again, and discovered the bone just as before, and found that the corruption continued within it, so I treated it and then reset it, and focused on securing the joint. but I cannot do it until I have completely healed one side of the bone, and pulled it out from its socket, then treated it with medicine. and it became healthy and whole again, and did not wish to repeat the treatment unless due to the weakness of the patient who could not endure, or for the fear of death that I had from him. Because for the complete evacuation of blood, it often happens, but it was completely healed, and a hard callous grew in its place on the bone, and it was of good disposition and caused no harm or discomfort at all, neither from going away nor from coming back.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it should be treated in this way: take a ligature, and pull it at the end of the bone that is open, and command anyone to extend it upwards; and tie I another thread of a thicker nature to the first one, and attach it to the flesh that is beneath the bone, and focus on the joint, so that you pull the corrupted flesh from below, and expose the flesh on the bone where you wish to heal, so that the wound does not become infected.
and insert splints or a table beneath the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
and it is important to observe and feel the corruption, and do this several times.
And if a bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then it exposes all the flesh.
then place hot coals from beneath, and then gently from one part to the other, spread the corruption, and so the healing is long from the corruption as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and either extract the bone or repair it from the other part.
and if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no other choice but to cut them.
and if the corruption is in the hand or foot, it is very strong, but you must inquire about this corruption how it opens. and clean it in any way you can, but ensure the vein or nerve does not oppose you.
and know that the saw and the threads to join these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. and for this, it is necessary to have a suitable instrument for each type of work.
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases. so consider the instrument you need, according to what is suitable.
The dislocation may occur due to internal or external causes.
and when you have treated that corruption with remedies, and they do not help, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the joint where the corruption has occurred, so that the patient might escape from death or from the greater evil of a fault in the limb.
and the signs of this are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackening, then that corruption spreads from member to member, and takes over the whole body.
if you hurry in covering it, and if it is due to the bite of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion or snake or similar, then that corruption is at the top of the limb, if you cover it, do not give it space to reach the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, so that the joint is dislocated, preventing the corruption from reaching the arm.
and if it extends to the arm, so that the dislocation is at the elbow;
and if it goes beyond the elbow, it is fatal, and there is no cure except to measure the quantity of its virtue.
and thus do the same when corruption or pus appears. If it affects the first joint, then cut after the other joint.
and if it affects the foot, then cut through the entire foot. and if it rises up the leg, then cut at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to die.
and the manner of cutting or sawing off the limb is as follows: you tie it down from above and below, extending one minister (cutter) on the lower joint, and another on the upper joint, and you sever the flesh that is between the two joints with a large spatula, until the bone is exposed.
Then apply the poultice or linen, placing each layer of lint so that it does not touch the healthy skin, and bring about further injury and abscess for the patient.
And if the blood flow continues when you work, cauterizing the vein too quickly or applying any restraining powders.
then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the limb with a strong bandage, and dress it until it is healed.
and I will tell you if it turns out as expected at home after some time.
He had a blackening that seemed to be a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his right foot, spreading over the entire foot.
and when he saw the corruption, he would cover his foot and it would heal.
and after a long time, the corruption returned to his other hand, and it came to me, and I put upon it things that rebound after purification of the body, but he cannot stop the corrosion.
and he told me to cover his hand, but I did not want to, as I had hope of rebound the matter. and I also doubt if he cuts off his hand, he will not die, for the strength of man was weak;
and he became desperate, returned to his land, bandaged his hand, and was healed.
and I have no objection to this, if one knows how to do it differently, as needed.
No abscess can form in fatty tissue, and it lingers so long that it causes a great gathering of bowels. and then they will pull and pierce, and jump into the bow, and hold the bones still, just like a vase. and the skin that is above is as delicate as fine cloth, and will not tear all the way to the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called "healthy," and not "fistula.
but if it is so stretched that it reaches the bone, it is called a "fistula.
and the cure is that you cut the skin all around, especially when it is thin, as if with a cloth. and do not be afraid of its decay.
And if you think that the skin is about to decay and the corruption is not yet complete, and the skin is dry and tough, then apply a cleansing bath thusly:
check if the breasts are swollen and the bowels emit a bad odor, then cleanse them with Egyptian medicine made thusly: Take ease (or caution), and oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and place them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey.
and then take according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and enema the breast, and tighten the opening. and leave the medicine in for two hours, then extract it by straining.
do this several times until the breast is clean and free from impurity.
and never should be rinsed with water from ashes when this medicine is not present, and you press ashes into vine bark, pour water over it, then strain it and use the water for enema, as long as you know that the intestines are well cleansed.
and if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water from ashes will help, if they are enema with water and honey, or have a bit of litharge ground in it. or you should enema them with honey and sweet wine, that the honey has purifying properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine provides air to the health.
and when you have done this and are sure that the wound is well cleansed, then administer a purge from what causes the fever to rise in him, and make certain you apply a plaster carefully, and do it with rose oil and wine.
or you administer certain medications and remedies, of which I have spoken about their properties or treatment of wounds.
and if the wound is very small and the purge cannot enter, open it slightly with a needle, and apply a bandage of the Egyptian or basilicon remedy, as long as it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too wide, so that the cut and it leave so much pain in place or the wound cannot be entered, and if the opening that sags is above, then the leg or below the knee must be treated.
and if you cannot close the abdomen as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves to the lowest part of the leg where it can be passed, for when the bowel is entirely blocked, it does not allow any passage and if you cannot close the abdomen as you see fit, then arrange it accordingly. that the bowel moves slightly downwards, and leave nothing of the bowel;
that the bowel moves slightly downwards, and leave nothing of the bowel; and take consolidating medicines to promote healing, and lay them on the wound covered with linen cloth that covers all the wound; then apply pressure with your hands to the opening near the chest, making it wider from inside than outside, since there is more wound on one side, and put a softer dressing on the other cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it on the healthy opening to align the bowel, and do not remove the large cloth beforehand for many days.
and he who is sorely afflicted with a chest wound, often needs to have the bowel opened, and knows that comes from the bowel, whether it is poison or food, or properly digested or undigested.
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in this manner, and you see the effect that it has on the chest wound, then know that the bowel has already opened, and bring the patient closer to health.
and then remove the bandage in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change it for a new one, and renew the dressing.
And if subtle poisons appear after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
For there are some people who slowly heal their wounds, and others who do the opposite.
and they bend over, feeling pain in their sides after many days, knowing that the pain will not subside.
and if their pain does not subside, then use medications with moist substances and dry virtues as an ointment, for there is a great deal of vitriol, and this is the last medication.
take the final ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and add aged wine of equal substance;
then apply it and use it;
and it itself makes the honey thick and rich, when onions are not available, take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and sprinkle them onto the honey while it is still warm from the fire;
and then I wrap it in cloth and place it over the wound, and never apply aromatic herbs or roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour from oats and chamomile; and use simple or composite remedies; Break them, and make them into powder, and add the honey I mentioned, and use it.
and if the cure is prolonged, and this cure does not heal it, then know that the corruption is complete, and it makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the limbs. if the cure for the fistula, as we have said above.
A gangrene is an abscess that forms under a nail of the hand, or the foot, or may occur elsewhere.
and when it becomes infected and no attention is paid, it leads to an abscess, and the pain and swelling increase until the root of the nail is reached, and perhaps even the entire nail.
and it brings corrosion close to the bone, causing intense and putrid pain, with the skin turning dark and swollen.
When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must remove all the dead tissue remaining under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward. Cautery is very helpful when the bone is healthy and the nail is intact.
and if the nail is quickly heated and begins to hurt, and the blister forms, then you must place a hot iron under the nail that has blistered, and raise it up, and gently and lightly cut off the blister, and apply burning and corroding medicinal remedies to remove all of it. then treat the wounds as long as they are clean.
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and treat it, for as long as the bone is corrupt, it cannot heal.
and if you see both bones corrupt, cut them as described above, and then treat them as long as they are clean.
and if it is broken, twisted, and causes great pain, then you must first heal it.
then cut the nail with a sharp instrument at an angle from above, and ensure that the cut does not go all the way through to the quick of the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, apply something that soothes.
He who is born without the hands in anyone's care is entirely flesh, and perhaps he has parts where there should be bones, and never an fingernail, and none of them are born at the root of a joint, or birth takes place in no way for any of them.
He who is born with no new pain should not be mute, and he who is born at the joint of the bone may, perhaps, be mute.
the cut for that which is fleshy should be light, in this manner: Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The one that is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if it keeps you covered.
As for him who is born with or develops a deformity in the last (joint), it is necessary that you first cover the joint properly up to the bone, then dislocate the bone to a suitable position, and then treat it until it heals.
The deformities that come as one must assemble themselves come either from birth, or from the healing of a wound, or from a burn by fire, or similar things.
You must ensure that you cover the closed one, so it should be repaired according to its natural forms; then place between two moistened cloths or sheets soaked in rosin oil, so they do not stick together; You insert between two pieces of fine cloth, as long as the wound is closed, as it should be.
If adhesion occurs at any of its edges with the palm, close this wound as appropriate.
They are veins thickly wrapped, filled with melancholic excess, which come to many parts of the body.
And more often occurs in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry things, than others.
It is therefore necessary that you administer purgative remedies no more often than once, and then cleanse the bowel.
The cure for this is according to two manners: One is with cups, and they drain the black blood. and the other method is that you open the vein and drain it completely.
The incision is as follows: first, raise the leg with hot water, making it as warm as possible, so that the pain becomes subtle, then stretch the sick leg from above the knee down to the ankle.
then open the vein in one, two, or three places with a large knife, then carefully and gently draw out the black blood in your hand from one end to the other, as much as the patient's weakness allows.
and then lay it [the wound] open, and command him to eat foods that produce black blood.
and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are filled and harm the patient.
The treatment of this is according to this manner: Lift the leg of the sick person, if there is any hair, then immerse it in hot water, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell.
and if you have no bath, then heat it over the fire, and then apply it to the vein from the top of the thigh down to the ankle or in the area around the ankle.
then open the skin at the joint, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when touched.
and it appears red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white thread.
then stretch the skin from below, as long as it is lifted from the flesh, and then bend it gently at the joint, and then cut across in another place above and thirdly below.
then peel the skin over the vein while it is still open, then lift the raised edge, as you did before, and bend it at another joint, as you did first.
then cut another size, or more if needed, then lift and cut at the second joint from the top, then pull and lift until the second size is reached.
then extract it gradually, bit by bit, until it comes out completely, then cut it.
if you cannot pull it out and lift it, push an needle through the entire thread twice as thick, tie and pull it, push down the bone with your finger from one side to another until it comes out. and ensure it does not break, because if it breaks, you cannot pull it out or lift it, and it will cause harm to the patient.
and once it is completely pulled out, place warm woolen bandages on the wound soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat him as long as he is healthy.
And if the vision is contracted, twisted, and rolled up together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly but do not cover it. and treat it as we have said before.
One must carefully cut the vision if it is curved, without severing, until it reaches the vein.
and it is a great burden, for if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but since it is thick as we have said, this is its form:
This vein is located in the legs, in hot regions where there are no herbs or trees, and on land where there is no moisture.
and by chance it may appear in other places than the legs, and this leads to putridity that comes from beneath the skin, as if it were a serpent or worm winding and writhing within the flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is that there is a very great swelling in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to emerge forcefully, just like a root of a plant.
When the joint is open, you must wrap it tightly with a piece of cloth from one and a half to two fingers thick, and compress it, leaving the cloth on the leg, and whenever there is no discharge, wrap it around the cloth and compress it.
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining part, but do not cover its root again until all the discharge has stopped. because if you cut it off, it will return to the root and cause an abscess, putrefaction, or a bad disease.
For every small thing, it is necessary that it be treated little by little until it reaches its end, and nothing should remain in the body.
and it is never this vein when it is treated with V palms of length, or X, and a man came to me, from whom it emerged X palms in length, and when you cut it, if it bulges or becomes narrow, and pierce it through to the bottom, so that everything comes out.
and the material inside should be evacuated, and then the place should be treated with medicinal poultices for several days, and after that, the cure should be applied as with abscesses.
And never should this vein be cut again, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or the leg, and much rupture occurs, and from which much blood flows.
Treat it as we have said before.
vers that are born between skin and flesh. This illness is called the "beef disease" in our land because it often affects cattle, and it is a small worm that develops between the hide and the flesh, spreading throughout the body upwards and downwards, and it feels very hot from one limb to another, as far as the skin where it has taken hold, and it grows fiercely.
and it is caused by putrefaction of certain humours, as they accumulate and wind their way through the stomach, serpents, worms, and ascarids.
and doubt arises about the nature of his illness, for when it moves through the body, it rises to the head, and reaches the eye, perhaps re-enters, and destroys the eye. and this often happens.
When you see it healing and drawing (out), one cannot be sure unless it has completely gone.
If it is necessary, then you must place the limb above and below with a strong bandage tightly, then cut and pull it until it comes out completely in the char, and you do not remove it, if you cauterize it with fire, until it heals.
and the greatest harm it does is when it bleeds, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or the edge close to the oil, quickly remove the eyebrow-shaped mass by cutting and pulling it out.
and it is necessary for the patient to cleanse his body with solvent medicines to remove harmful humors, and to purify the flesh through hot baths to prevent putrefaction.
from the pain that comes from flatulence This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in no particular member, but can move from one member to another.
and I have shown you what I told you. I was called to tend to a sick woman, and upon examining her, I discovered a small swelling in the vein of her arm.
and then I see, the vision arise on the shoulder, more distinct than anything else, as vivid as silver when it cuts through flesh.
the pain departs from its place and settles into the shoulder, and then shortly after, it spreads throughout the body, until it reaches the other breast.
then it told me that it twisted around the body again, as I saw it.
I marvelled much at how she moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner. nevertheless, I wanted to see if the pain could move from one place to another, but I didn't observe it, as I saw in the woman.
and I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, her veins exposed, and this stiffness appeared constrained.
and did not appear at all to those who are delicate, with moist skin and veins covered.
And when you see this disease heal, and the patient feels the pain, if it opens as we have said, press it gently from above and below until this constrained stiffness in the joint leaves. and cauterize the joint;
and if you do not see it for yourself, if the treatment of these impediments repels winds as if through foul pills, and pills of serpentary, and similar ones.
The arrows vary, according to their appearance and according to the parts of the body from which they originate.
Their variety is such that there are some with large points, and others with small, and some with barbs, and others smooth. and some with two edges, and others with tongues, and those with fragments.
and those that split in any member, splitting in two ways: You should focus on the primary member, as in the head, body, liver, heart, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it breaks in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appears: you must then be prepared for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in various ways; and if this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully extracted, do not pull it, but treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces the skull and bone, and satisfaction is felt on top of the skull, is when darkness and blinding and squinting and redness occur in one eye, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and impaired understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without feeling from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps loses speech and voice; and from the moist wound, white pus resembling a pulsation, and also like a brisk flow of blood;
and if this sign appears, if you hold to the treatment, pull out the arrow if it is not embedded.
The sign of an arrow when it breaks or moves is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were embedded in hard, not empty, tissue. and by chance the arrow remains silent like the pulse, and there is sudden black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: so you know for certain that death is approaching.
And the sign of the arrow that the pulse never moves is that there is no foam coming from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and he breathes heavily and stops moving.
And if the arrow pierces the skin deeply, it is necessary to remove the small bones. and it causes great pain and sorrow, and sighs. and it moves all the shoulder muscles.
And if an arrow pierces through the stomach, perhaps something from the wound disturbs the indigestible flesh.
And if an arrow pierces through the belly, and there is no trace of good fate through the intestines, then there is little hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder, the patient urinates in fits and starts, strongly feeling pain. he knows that the wound is mortal.
The other limbs—as it feels and appears—the fingers, hands, arms, shoulders, aid (possibly referring to a specific medical term or condition), the lower back, knees, feet, and legs, all exhibit various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you do otherwise.
It happened to a man at home, an arrow struck him or cut his eye socket. I attempted it, and pulled from another side, removing the fat of the ear, and it was healed without pain.
And I pulled out an arrow that had struck in the fat below the paper, and the arrow was straightened, and only the tip towards the wood could be seen, and it was an arrow of great length with a blue arch, light as a feather without any noise.
The spirit was pure, and no bad accident came to him.
And extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian; it was an Arabian arrow with ears.
I removed the beard, and manipulated it gently as I extracted it, and the Christian was healthy.
And extracted an arrow from a man's home, which had entered his stomach, and thought he was dying;
and after he has passed thirty days, his condition does not change. I cut out the arrow, disassembled it, and removed it, without any adverse events.
And if you see a man with an arrow in his side or back, and the wound is deep;
and keep the arrow inside him, and do not change his natural state, nor find any harm in any of his natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow struck his face, and the wound was deep; and he endured thus, suffering great pain;
and many others of similar kind.
And pulled out an arrow from the body of a prince, the king, which had struck him in the neck and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely extracted.
I was called to treat her after she had been ill for three days. I found the wound very tight.
I examined her with great care, but felt nothing. and she felt a sharp pain and discomfort deep within her right ear.
I thought it was from an arrow's point. I applied a soothing poultice to the swollen lobe, as the swelling had not subsided. and I saw the arrow's head.
and I saw the arrow's head. I applied the hot iron repeatedly to the wound and thus soothed it, keeping the patient in this way for a long time until he felt the arrow inside his body.
and it came out. I applied strong, corrosive medicine to the wound with my hands, keeping it closed until it opened, and when I probed it, I felt the point of the arrow sticking in the flesh.
then adjust the opening of the wound with this medicine until the head of the arrow becomes clearly visible.
and after three months, the wound healed well, and then it reopened, and I had to use pincers, pulling from both sides, but it wouldn't come out.
then I did not stop trying and devising subtle tools until I found the right pair of pincers, as described at the end of this chapter, and as I manipulated it, the wound healed.
And the most skilled judges believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I then restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or, I have told you the quality of extracting arrows, so that you place your treatment on what I do not say, because books cannot encompass everything.
but the most skilled doctors compare very little and only what they see as useful and effective in practice, truly new works, and nine instruments, for the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not leave the members where they are embedded, except in two ways: or by the place where they enter, or from another side;
and the one that comes out from the other side, where it enters into the flesh, is an arrow that never returns again.
And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh around it decays and the way out is clear;
and also if it is stuck in a bone, it cannot come out, if left like that for no days, and moves each day.
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, it pierces around everywhere with a fine thread, as long as the muscles around are widened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is withdrawn into the limb deeply and cannot be seen, then press it with all your strength. and if you feel it, with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot open the wound due to its tightness or the arrow's depth, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein to be seen, then leave it as it is until the wound heals.
and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, remove them from both sides as much as you can, then break or bend the arrowhead's barbs until you can draw it out.
and carefully, without breaking the arrow, draw it out with greater force.
And if you cannot do it at once, so that the limb around it is completely relaxed, then pull it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the course of fever opposes you, then administer as we have said in its chapter about treatment;
and be careful with the incision near nerves and veins, and learn how you can draw out the arrow safely, as soon or as slowly, firmly or gently as possible.
and place the patient according to the position in which the arrow entered, for it is the greatest help, and if you cannot do this, then place him as the signs indicate.
He knows that the arrow comes from another direction, where it opens something within him, or the skin is swollen in a noticeable way.
then cut around it, as much as the pliers can grasp, and then extract it. if it jumps now.
And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then remove it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then try to extract it again until it comes out.
and if the arrowhead is embedded in the flesh, it drives itself deeper into the flesh.
and if it comes out, you must administer pressure, and if you use a sharp instrument, the point of the arrow should enter the flesh alongside the instrument.
then press firmly, and if the arrow is embedded, drive the instrument with its pointed end inside to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you clear all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
and if the arrow comes out in the stomach, or bladder, or side, and it is close to a vital organ, you can press on it;
and you must guard the vein and nerve, then extract it, and then sew up the wound, it is your duty. and treat it as long as it is clean.
The shape of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles an eagle's beak, and here is its form:
And there are many ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape [for the arrowhead] when it is like a feather is also like the quill of a bird, to push to the tip of the arrow, as this shape is:
There are 31 veins from which one draws blood, of which there are 16 main ones, that is to say: II beat the muscles that are after the ears, which are called the "soft hairs"; and the two arteries that are in the visible temples; and the veins that are in the arms of the joints, which are called "aspirations"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is on the back of the head; and the two wedges which are in it; and the two veins that are in the upper lip above the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich". and the two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins of which one commonly speaks are V in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, which is located on the left side of the body, and is commonly called by the people "vein of the head". and the middle part is called "fast" (or "middle"), composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and the common people call it "vein of the body". and the basilic is found on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", located beneath the skin, and it is the one that opens clearly on the pulse.
And the saving vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it rains (i.e., swells);
and in the leg and where the foot are three veins: one is removed from the ribcage on the left side of the body, and the second is at the ankle on the right side. and the vein called "nesse," which is at the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg, there are three veins removed from those.
The healing of veins located behind the ears is beneficial for old cataracts and migraines.
and regarding the qualities of healing, as I have said, it is important to lift the patient's head and rub the affected area with a rough cloth. then tie the patient's collar tightly, so that both veins behind the ears, hanging down from the head, become visible. place your fingers there, and where you feel the pulse below your thumb, it signifies life.
then take the lancet, and cut through the vein just above the bone, then gently your hand over the entire vein upstream, and clean and wrap the skin and the vein well it must pass through, and let out the blood as you see.
then strain and hold it, as long as it is healthy;
and I have already spoken of incision and cauterization in the first book.
The healthy of the two arteries that are in the temples, it is worth to use ancient and dried, and accustomed to the eye, and at the corner of the eyes, hot tears.
and the quality of a good healer is such as I say: and it is that the patient tightens his neck, as both veins open widely; and feels the pain deeply in both sides, and then signs with a cross;
then gently place your thumb on the vein at the top of your right index finger, and insert the lance below, and press the vein at the top, and the cup, just as you did with the other two veins, and draw out the blood according to your need.
then loosen the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton. and then form a bandage and leave it until the wound is healed.
and we have spoken of their connection and extraction, as mentioned at the beginning of this book.
The healing of the vein on the forehead is just as important as the healing of the head in cases of old facial diseases, such as migraine and redness.
and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck, until the vein opens. then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this shape:
and place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand, or another tool, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see. then gently release the patient's neck, and tie the vein as long as it remains healthy and free from a wide opening of any flame.
Nevertheless, it does not suit that the flames are too intense; and do not set the healthy one crookedly, for the bone is hard, and perhaps break the flames when they are subtle.
The health of the two veins that are in the arms should be treated carefully, and also for conditions such as scabs, redness, and inflammation in the eye, and facial diseases;
and the quality of their health is such that the patient pulls his collar tightly without twisting any ligaments, as before;
then the healthy one, and make it clean through the flame, slightly long and quite wide, for there is no scar. And if the flame is too subtle, it may break.
then apply the flame to the blood, as much as needed, then wrap it in cloth and bind it tightly.
The health of the vein near the nose is valuable for colds and sudden sorrows, and facial diseases such as migraines and redness that come to the face, especially when they are old.
and the quality of the health is such that the patient tightens his collar, then pulls his nose to your left hand, and takes the thin flame longwise and inserts it between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well enough, and now the blood will begin to flow.
and do not be too hasty in its application, and let the blood flow as needed, then bind it for a night, for it is often quickly restored.
The holy water of the two eyes is helpful for the narrowing of the eyelid, and at the onset of inflammation, and for many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and itching.
and the quality of the water is such that the patient pulls his collar away from both sides, as we have said.
and if the master is standing over the patient's head, and the patient sits on a seat, then wash the vein with long water, as much as necessary, and treat the wound with bloodletting as appropriate.
then repeat the process on the other vein, loosen the ligature, and gently pull on the veins until the patient is no longer strangled. and leave it until morning so that the wound is healed.
from the cleansing of the veins The cleansing of the veins above the lips helps to improve oral health, and it aids in the healing of gum disease, lip splits, and pain and swelling around them.
And the quality of the healing is such that you should have the patient sit before you and pull on his collar as I have said. then turn the lip and look at both veins, one on the right side of the mouth and the other on the left, and you can recognize them by their black color and the fine black veins around them.
So then, deal with both one after the other, and if you do not know them or are in doubt, take the larger one from each part, and also make cuts from above and below, for it is the same method.
From the health of the tongue The treatment of the veins below the tongue is beneficial after treating the cervical region, and it is useful for narrowing the throat, eye diseases, and mouth ailments.
And the quality of the healer is such that the patient should be cut between your hands in the light of the sun, lift up the tongue, and look below each side for a black vein.
Then make both whole, but do not force them too much, for there are arteries beneath.
The veins through which blood flows, which are commonly healed, are treated in two ways:
or cutting through them all with a hot iron or a fine olive oil-soaked cloth, which is called "anesil". and they are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins. It forms a bright red mark, very renowned, and is broad as you see.
And it is necessary to open the veins with a sharp blade on those that have visible, thick blood, which contain much blood and pus. and this is the form of olive oil flame:
and it is more delicately pointed, and is for cleansing the delicate veins, where there is delicate, yellow-colored blood.
The holy basil, which is one of these veins, is beneficial for diseases that are beneath the throat, and the collarbone, and the pelvis, and the stomach.
and the physician should treat it carefully, and wash away the artery that is beneath. And if he touches an artery, and blood flows, it must be stopped as I have said. and the flame must not be squeezed, but cut as if with a blade.
And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and use another one. or if you wish to free it from the vein, draw it out of the vein into the arm. she opens clearly; and apply the flame gently, as we have said.
And if you recognize the place of the wound, it is necessary that you extract the arm, touch the place until you feel the pulse. then sign the place with a cross, then bind the arm, and cut the vein gently with the flame. and be sure not to hurt the artery when you see the shoulder swell, for that is the artery. then avoid it.
And if you see it protrude at the top as well as the urine of a child, and the skin is red and thin, know that this is an artery. hurry then, and put your finger deeply, then remove your finger if the skin remains intact, which often happens. he lies with his arm relaxed, and lets it be thus, and does not move the patient.
and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the wound is not immediately healed, it will worsen, and there are no medicines at hand, especially if the artery opens up, as with a deep cut. and stop the wound from bleeding.
And take a piece of fig wood, cut it, and take one half and tie it tightly to the other until morning.
if it remains unstained, that is good. if that does not work, as we have said, with powders that prevent blood from clotting;
and the staining is not overly affected by the small size of the wound or the strength of the arm.
The surgeon of the vein should draw blood if it aids in treating the wound from its top and bottom, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
and the surgeon should be aware that he must wash for the nerve that is exposed, and if he does not cut it precisely, he might damage the nerve, causing swelling and infection, and perhaps it cannot heal.
this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any place due to its subtlety, then you must use a surgical instrument to free it. and avoid the nerve's power.
And if a vein is between the two bones, cut it from above.
The treatment for headaches involves drawing blood from the head, which helps and relieves the pain.
and it is necessary for the healer to prick with olive oil or myrrh flame, because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not harm any nerve or artery. Nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the gentler vein, and do not be alarmed if it hurts the first time, and try again. and by chance, the eyes may swell up in some men, without any pain at first, but it causes no harm.
The quality of the blood depends on your thinking.
The first thing you must know about healing is that health is not restored merely by treating illness, but by preserving health and avoiding future diseases.
and health should be sought through one of the three veins, that is, the neck, armpit, or groin. these being the neck (cephalique), armpit (faste), and groin (basilique). and one should heal at the beginning of prayers, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear.
and one should heal on the first day or the third, after two or three hours.
The healer who is administered for diseases has no determined hour, but whenever it is necessary by day or night, at all times.
and one should not heal children until they are twelve years old, nor a woman who has given birth for less than four months up to seven. One should not consider the old who have passed sixty years as healed.
And when anyone wishes to be healed, in any way, it is necessary that he purges the bowels with a light enema, if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out the excessive and harmful impurities from the main limbs.
He will not be healed who is excessively soaked in salty meats or too much fat, nor those who are weak from drinking excessive water.
and should be wary of the patient after colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent sexual activity, childbirth, watching and fasting, and anything that depletes strength, whether from weapons or bodily illness.
then gently draw out the humours, if they are thick, through foods, drinks, and remedies, if you have such power.
then into the bath, if nothing hinders you, to draw out the blood, and heal the vein from within and around it, as we have said.
and guard yourself from work, trouble, luxury, and similar things on that day.
and be calm and joyful, and make the healing more effective than that of others, and rub the arm twice or three times, then tighten the ligature gently, for if it is too tight or loose, it will not heal well.
and then rub the joint with your hands, until the veins swell and you feel them.
then moisten the wound with a drop of old oil, then place your left-hand finger on the vein below the joint, where you want to heal, so that the vein does not burst and cause harm.
For there are veins that flow like strings when healing, and if they are filled with pus, so that when you apply the flame, it pulls away from the flame, and cannot open the vein, thus one suffers from such a condition. and if they open the vein, if the wound is too narrow, then it is necessary that the healers be aware of these things.
And if the vein opens the first time, it is good. if not, it is necessary to repeat the process slightly below where it was done, for if the limbs are not swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the patient fears, let it be for one or two days without binding the arm. Perhaps there appear abscesses suddenly.
One should not bathe immediately, then renew the dressing if it seems appropriate.
and if it is a small opening, gently pierce the skin and doubt not that it will let out as much blood as you see, so sure are we of the same piercing itself, straight to the flame.
and open it slightly gently, so that the muscles are not inflamed. because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the vein swollen, do not immediately recommence the healing process, and apply a little oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and the sticky substance that the oil leaves is helpful in this situation.
and thus administer the oil in every vein you treat to stop the flow of blood.
and it has a soothing and comforting effect when applied to the swollen vein. if subtly the bone moves and spreads when it is too thick.
And if there develops a large abscess, which happens often, especially when the vein is not wide enough to be opened at once, act swiftly, and place a moistened sponge with some hot seal on it over the area and keep it there for an hour.
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood flow from the vein has stopped, and if it remains at the site for several days without any blackening or greening, then it causes no harm. and if you see, place on anything cool or cold, soaked in a calamine juice, show, or similar.
And many times, abscesses and pustules appear on the sacred flesh of the basilica.
then place your hand on it, and if you feel the warmth is too great under the pressure of your hand, this is when such an appearance occurs. So be careful not to apply anything of what we have said, for it might cut off the flow without an artery.
but he should make an emollient with dry herbs to harden the joint, then apply another remedy until it is healed.
And treat each one of the pains according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the pain.
For if the skin is pale, let it continue to turn red. and if you see it as thick, leave it until it becomes thin. and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for him who is sick and weak, and has the skill to extract blood, that he make a larger wound, and have wider flames.
and for the weak, do the opposite, and it is more necessary to heal them quickly and often, and one should heal them by cutting across, not piercing.
and this healing method is free from the decay of blood and the disruption of nerves, and it is more effective than healing either long or wide.
And to him whose body needs salivation, it is necessary to give a little of the juice of pomegranates. If he is overheated, he should take cold juice three or four times a day, and if he has a cold complexion, he should first dilute the salivation with a little syrup made from grapes, or honey syrup perfumed with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and nutmeg, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he faints at the sickbed, after drawing much blood, it is necessary that he inhale a brew of charcoal and subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things as we have mentioned in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to extend his arm and heal it later, as necessary, when it is weakened by much healing, he should pull and release it little by little, according to the amount of its continuous strength.
And whoever wishes to extend his arm after the first healing, and he has strong stiffness, he should heal it seven hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to heal from another side, he should heal on the second day or the third.
For he has excess heat and blood inside the body, which causes fever. if it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and widen the opening as much as possible; since you fulfill all the conditions for healing, and place your hand on a pulsating (vein) when it is healthy, death does not come in its place, and this often happens, when healers are negligent.
and it is not advisable when you see the arm dislocated a second time, and blood flows out again, and the opening is closed, to press strongly on it. If he is weak, he should stretch his arm slowly, for it would be harmful.
but he should let it heal the second time around; or you should apply the tip of the flame to the frozen vein until it bursts open, then place a small piece of silk over it and gently press.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not squeeze it until the abscess is calmed.
And if it becomes necessary to drain the blood again due to the abscess, either in the same place or in another vein or arm.
The vein in the arm is healthier in place of the vein in the head because it is composed differently.
And the method of healing is that the patient should immerse their hand in hot water until the veins turn red.
then tie it gently, so that the vein opens well, then clean the wound now with a thin and precise movement, not too wide or too long.
and make the wound wide enough, and ensure the healing is close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be extracted, immerse the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow out in the water until you have enough.
and if this does not work, do not push the hand back into the hot water, as it is more harmful than helpful.
and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are neither arteries nor nerves.
The health of the vein in the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
strain the hand and immerse it in hot water, as long as the vein is inflamed, if that is visible; and hold the hand across, and if you grasp it firmly from every side, then there is no pain.
and do not harm the patient too much, for the nerves are entirely exposed and naked of flesh, and then apply the hand to warm water, so that the blood is frozen in the wound, and it cannot escape.
And when you have treated the blood as best you can, then place oil and silk on the vein to bind it tightly, and so do for each person.
The healthy person holds the mouse with their left hand if it has a disease of the eye, and does everything as I have told you for the right side.
The sage of the soul holds sway over all illnesses affecting the body, such as illnesses of the eyes, and retention of flowers (possibly referring to a condition related to plant or petal-like growths), and diseases of the kidneys, feet, and old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of his health is such that the patient should immerse themselves in warm water and rub the vein until it breaks, and then bind over the joint with a cloth. and the vein is at the ankle, and they will apply much rain (or perhaps pressure) above the foot.
Sanct then make wider or larger cuts, or at the ankle, wherever it is valuable to move.
And if you make cuts on the foot, be careful with the nails that are underneath, and cut across as well as when piercing.
and so the flames will subside.
And if the splint cannot be removed, place the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
And if the cuts need to be made for the first time, then repeat the second cut just above a little, because the wounds are salty.
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the other foot equally.
The vein's lion is at the ankle's fire, and its healing brings pain to the lower back when it is hot blood.
And the quality of his health is such that if the patient enters the bath, he should pull three times on the ankle, twisting it, because otherwise the vein will not open.
and if it opens, take the health in every way that you can, and draw through it. and it is worth that you hold it, because the veins are safe, and it is much refreshed with many hands.
and it is worth that you hold it, because the veins are safe, and it is much refreshed with many hands. And if you do not let it heal, if any healthy thread from the wound opens or closes slowly and gently, and takes care of the nails.
and apply pressure against the blood as you see fit, then loosen the bandage, and place a piece of cotton and tighten it. it is now healed.
Suction cups are made of horns, or iron, or glass;
and ventilation is done according to two manners: or by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this ventilation without piercing is according to two manners: or it is with all fire, or without fire;
and the ventilation done by piercing and drawing blood is done in twelve parts of the body, so that one part is entirely in sleep at the head. and the others are in the neck. and the others on both sides of the neck. and the suction from under the chin. and the suction from both shoulders. and the suction on the knees. and the suctions on both arms. and the leech (suction) cups of both legs; and the leech (suction) cups on both ankles;
and the leeching does not treat blood, but rather small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason it weakens no one, as is done with vein-sucking; and it is not advisable to use it in any condition arising from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if, due to necessity or illness, it is necessary to release the air, either at the beginning or end of the month, or every day, then it should be done each hour.
for there are such people who, when they need to release air, have a heavy head.
and if they who experience relief with release have redness in their face, head, neck, and dark circles around the eyes.
and those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, have an inflamed tongue, and bleed. and if there are such people who think, see blood, and feel pain and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order vomiting after three hours during the day.
The healer of the muscle should help with the great pain in the head ...  that comes from these (causes), and it is not appropriate for this to happen after the evacuation of all the body.
and this treatment should be in the hands of the healer of the head, and it is not appropriate for someone of a cold disposition to use it, or who has catarrh, for it causes them much harm.
and for this reason, it is not advisable that the elderly or those with cold illnesses use it.
And he who recovers from it often becomes oblivious, and for this reason, the cup should be placed a little lower down in doubt of its oblivion.
The wind or inflammation of the neck is contrary to health from the top and base, and for this reason it causes tightness in the chest, narrowing of the airway, coughing, and congestion.
and it is advisable to press lightly, as if it holds too firmly, it can cause faintness or stomach and body pain.
The inflammation of the ribs in the neck causes pain in the head, eyes, and migraines, constriction, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is contrary to the health of the sinus from the base.
and it is necessary that you instruct the healthy person to press his hand gently so as not to damage the artery, and no blood loss occurs.
The inflammation of the jaw is worth addressing for mouth diseases, gum corruption, and similar ailments in the mouth. and is located in the healthy areas between the two lips.
Breathing through the shoulders is beneficial for illnesses that arise from heat and swelling.
The inflammation of the edges (possibly referring to skin folds or areas around veins) is as important to address as three major veins in the arm, because it attracts blood from these large veins.
and instruct the healthy not to cut too deeply, for the flesh is devoid of strength, and the bones and arteries are easily damaged.
The cup (ventouse) placed on the groin is useful for draining blood from deep within and for treating internal diseases. It must be large and made of iron, and it needs to be applied correctly. and if, by chance, it (the cup) is too thin, it will break. and it causes great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs should be opened tightly, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and they are as painful as ancient rain, or pain in the joints, or in the bladder, and they cause trembling.
and they affect the second ribs, and the two ankles, but they weaken the body after long use, and cause paralysis in many positions.
The proper way to apply a suction cup is to first ensure it is empty, then suck gently, and place it firmly. Move it slowly and consistently, without stopping, until you see the red skin become pale and the blood flow cease.
Then, apply pressure, and remove the suction cups, taking care in the placement of the bandages, for there are some with deep wounds and clear pores. it is necessary to strike only once, and make large wounds, and deep ones. and suck gently.
And if the pain is intense, it is necessary to strike twice. The first time to carefully extract the thick blood vessel.
And if the blood is very thick, it may be necessary to cut it a third time;
and when we want to extract thin blood little by little, it is enough to do so only once. And if we want much blood, we should not do it often.
and if the blood is thick, cutting it will be effective, and completing the process ensures that the veins are suddenly pierced; for those with thick, hard skin, and who have swollen pores, one should apply oil to the suction cup before and after use. if it is a matter of a red-colored oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
and if it is in the form of oil from beetroot, or lily, or chamomile, or any similar plant.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balm oil, or hemp oil, or similar substances.
And if one has a strong and wide wound, it is not necessary to put oil on it, but rather after cleansing with rosewater, or cold water, or myrtle water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or any similar liquid.
And those with much moisture should rise from it using myrtle water, sumac water, and similar substances.
And those who have excessive moisture should rise from old wine, or eucalyptus water, or anise or chamomile decoction, or any similar thing.
and they should not use a vacuum immediately before or during a bath, but rather after the bath, one or two hours later.
and do not sleep after the incision, and it is necessary that he bathe, when he needs to be ventilated and when he has been ventilated.
and be wary of those who have a fever that is choleric, and if the patient lacks heat, it is too acute and inflamed. it is necessary that he apply cold things, such as grapes, endive and lettuce in the shade, and similar things. and eat prunes, and juice of chestnuts, and moist meats.
and eat prunes, and juice of chestnuts, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, should drink syrup of honey, and moderate, fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat nothing too much, and small birds and pigeons.
and on the day when he feels hungry, he should drink more than eat.
and it is necessary to give no one any triacle or nutmeg at any time before or after ventilating, in order to strengthen the main members. and be subtle about it, but those who are hot should not drink it.
The suction cups that are used to heal are those applied to the liver, and the spleen, and podagra, and the belly, and the bowels, and the kidneys, and the hips, for these parts do not tolerate being struck, and they are only used to draw blood from one part to another, as we apply them to the mammary glands when nursing.
to remove the viscosity from the member, as we apply suction cups to the belly and bowels to reduce the member.
and remove the pain when there is an extraction or stone, if by its attractive virtue it draws out the extraction, or leaves the stone in its place.
and thus it is done when one places it upon the liver and spleen when there is retention of wind, and these suction cups are emptied to suck only; and they are never filled with fire together, and never with cold water, as in cases of tears flowing freely, and in such a way one fills the cup with hot water or water mixed with herbs suitable for this purpose.
The shape of the cup (ventose) administered by fire is this:
And it should be two and a half palm widths in length, and on one side there is a small opening around the middle, large enough to push an needle through, and it should be curved gently so that it does not hurt the patient when placed upon the limb.
and tell them to place a stick diagonally of wood or iron, to take hold of a cloth, and according to the diseases and age of those who use it, they will be large or small.
for the suckers of children are different from those of the old, and thinner than the fat ones.
And one must thus place this sucker on the member:
take the cloth of wax or linen, and place it across the sucker through the stick that is in the sucker, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the sucker so it does not burn the patient.
and then place it over the member, and your fingers should be on the opening we have mentioned, so that when you want, the vapour goes there, and we remove the suction cup.
and draw along the line as before, and repeat often, if you need to.
In the case of the suction cup, which is applied to treat pleurisy, and any acute condition, it has no opening or gap, and can only be applied when the part is filled with fluid, and placed over the member only then.
and this is the form:
Without exception, only members where suction cannot be applied due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts, are exempt. and in bare skin areas, such as the hands or feet, and others similar.
and the quality of the user is such that when you find suction cups in fresh water, clean and without putrefaction, if they are taken.
and place a hot needle in their armpits until they become accustomed to it, and have no wind or pressure on their bellies; and then make them well from veins and leeching, and rub the limb until it turns red, and apply blisters.
and when they stop bleeding and crying, if it is a place where a leech can be applied, then apply one, for this is much better afterward.
If this is not possible, then lift the leech from its place, wash it well with water, and then dry it.
and hold the eyes steady after the surgery until the wounds are healed; if a moist linen cloth in cold water is placed on them, and left there until the wounds are closed.
and if the wounds multiply, then apply crushed vitriol, or gall, and similar substances until they are completely healed.
or you can place half-peeled beans on the joint and leave them until they adhere to the bone; this will now heal.
and if you need more skill, then take other wounds.
And if the veins do not want to be taken, so rub the fresh blood vein with a strong press, or you insert an needle until the vein pops, and then place them back on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will move.
and when you see that they are moving, sprinkle some aloe and powdered silk or ash on them, and they will stop now.
We begin the book of fractures. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear reader, that the strange symptoms that arise from this chapter are not found in any ancient books, nor have they ever been read or written about.
and for this reason, the knowledge is strange in our land, for I never found any good of it.
and I know nothing of it, except through the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have acquired the knowledge, and through experience, and through the habit of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I have done in these two chapters mentioned before.
It is therefore necessary that we say in this prologue of this book the principles of speech and the chapters where the wise ones apply their understanding, staying on the truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture, dislocation, or twisting occurs in any part of the body, you should quickly tend to the patient from both sides, if nothing stops you, such as weakness of the body, illness, or old age. or if it is too tight or too cold,
and warm things, such as hot towels, and a horse's collar and chest bandage, and do not drink wine, do not eat any fatty foods, and do not stuff yourself with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you are certain of the heat of the abscess or the swelling of the member.
If the patient returns to having a fever after proper treatment.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that we alleviate the patient from foods that cause excessive belching, or have a viscous consistency, such as cooked flour in water, and rice, and peas, and veal, and offal, and fish, and fresh meat, and strong wine, and similar things. For excessive belching prevents the bone from healing properly, as it re-opens the fracture more quickly.
And know that bones broken from old age or fragility cannot be well healed or consolidated according to their nature due to the stiffness of the members, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children.
but there is no cure, reset the broken bone with thick fingers that open and join the member together, as much as it was before. and do not restrict it entirely from its movement, and for this reason, it is necessary to feed on substantial meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of fractures. Because there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, just like the blade of a pen for writing.
Because there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, just like the blade of a pen for writing. And if there is a fracture with a wound, and the fracture is at a small split.
And each kind has its own mechanism, and its specific tool for restoration, according to what the memory comes to it.
and the fracture of the bone is recognized because the joint is twisted, and it opens well due to external force, and feels tender under pressure from the hand.
and when there is no twist or pressure felt, and the patient does not experience much pain, then there is no fracture.
but it can still have twist, crack, or small fracture. You should not move it with the hand, but apply remedies that will come hereafter, and then gently tighten it now.
And know that the fracture which goes in an arc, and the two parts are disjoined, now it is fitting to put them back together evenly so that an abscess does not form from there.
and if an abscess forms, it is important to let it heal for a time, until the abscess is calm.
then make it even with the muscle as you can gently and firmly, and know that the restoration of what is whole is lighter than the restoration of what has been broken.
then hold steady, as it is needed afterward.
And if in the bones there are broken pieces, if they extend from two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or to your hand if it is a small member, or to the tendons, or to a tendon and to your hand.
and place the member according to its natural position, so that when the parts of the broken member are out of alignment, you reset them with all instruments at your disposal, and ensure that through your work, the patient does not suffer further injury or pain.
and adjust both joints of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems not properly aligned to you.
if you dress it properly and do not tighten it too much, nor press as those who cause deep abscesses and contractions in the member through their own work, as we have seen many times.
And when the member is at its limit, gently instruct the patient so they do not move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor by turning or any other manner. and ensure that the limb is secure so as to feel no pain. For when he feels no pain, except just at the point of treatment, it is necessary to put oneself in a position where he feels no pain.
and ensure that the limb is secure so as to feel no pain. For when he feels no pain, except just at the point of treatment, it is necessary to put oneself in a position where he feels no pain. and ensure that it is set correctly, so that no crookedness comes when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I tell you.
You know that broken members are diverse in size and shape and strength.
For it has small members, as bras, legs, and similar ones. it is necessary to wrap soft and delicate linen around it. and those that are thick, like the thigh and leg:
it is necessary to wrap with a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the entire limb, compressing it evenly from all sides so that there is no movement.
then he enters lightly, making three turns or four according to the limb, and tightens your hand slightly on the entire joint, then goes above the fracture and tightens it less, so that the fracture can gradually pull itself apart.
and softens the joint little by little, as you press deeply into the healthy part of the limb, then take another joint and repeat this process from the beginning above the fractured bone.
then return to the part at the bottom of the fracture and tighten it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we said in the first section above.
Then place it between the thick cords of linen or cloth, as even as possible, then bind it all from above with bandages, and then put your well-made needles on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
If there is an abscess or swelling, apply a hot soothing compress to it, which reduces the swelling, and leave it like that for several days.
then stretch your needles, and they should be of half the thickness of a fine cane cut sharply, or made of wood used for making arrows, or palm fronds, and according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the thread which one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and be also as long as necessary for the member, whether small or large; then tighten the threads on the thread as you did in the first layer, then tie a new thread over it, just as in the first layer on the fracture; the tighter it is bound, the less it will move;
and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be made of soft linen.
For if the thread is too thick, as I have seen many people make their threads from twisted linen cords, it is a great error, because the thread cannot be even if it is too fine, and it does not suit that there should be less than two threads per space between each stitch.
And if the patient is troubled by the seeds of stars (possibly referring to splinters or foreign bodies) after dislocating their joints, he should place soft cloth or other bandages over them to prevent bleeding.
When the wound is accompanied by breakage (of bones or tissue) and the heart is broken, I will describe its treatment below.
And know that it is not appropriate to extract all the stars (bones or splinters) from a member that is broken on the first day. Because when the members (limbs) are large, it is not suitable to put stitches too close together, only after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your own judgment of the swelling coming down.
and now let us consider the ancient methods of applying plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and take flour that clings to the walls of a mill, mix it with enough egg, and make this preparation, neither too liquid nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of applying plasters to restore fractures in various ways, especially for women and small children, as it is not too hot or too cold.
Another method of applying plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take some barley meal, and almonds, and henna, and asafoetida, and gum Arabic, and mix them with water (or perhaps meant to be mixed with oil or another base), as directed by Doctor X. mixture of mirror and aloe, as directed by Doctor V. alecin (or a medicinal preparation containing alecin) from Doctor VIIII. and make it into a powder, mixing it with egg albumen. If the patient's skin is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and benefits many men.
Another method of plastering that is effective for twists: Take vinegar and wolf's dung, mix with X (unknown substance); Mix mirror and aloe, add seven (unknown substance); Use lime six (unknown quantity or substance); Bolic armenic X Z., grind it well, and mix with enough fire or water, and administer.
Another method of splinting joints and realigning bones in their sockets, easing the pain that arises, and using a saw to cut the bone, and the fracture. Take another new cloth, moisten it with oil and heat, and place it on the joint.
Cyst splints do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and properly removing pains.
Another method of splinting that restores broken bones: Take dry figs, and land pavot leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method of plastering to restore the broken bone and thus lessen the remaining pain of the abscess. Take the root of alder, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each in equal parts.
and grind, and mix with wine, and warm the affected members by mixing with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another stronger method of plastering when the abscess hardens during the restoration of the member. Take the roots of alder, and flaxseed, and valerian, and melilot, and fennel, and violet and chamomile flowers, each in equal parts. and crush, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates states in his book that one should not apply a hot compress to a broken member, but rather a certain type of compress made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too hot nor too cold.
And it seems that Galen states that one should apply warm, dry things to a broken member to restore it, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Another method of splinting that is effective for both injury and pain: take feathers and goat hair from humans who have been shorn, or pen feathers, and silk, and cut them equally, and crush them, and make plaster and bind it tightly.
And then loosen it slightly after, and take care that the patient feels no pain, and that the bone has not moved from its place. if it does not come loose by strong hands. and if pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling, then act quickly, dislodge it and remove the splint immediately.
and take a light cloth, and a moist sponge from the sea, and dip it in water, and lift the limb until the itching stops and the pain is soothed. then let the limb rest for an hour, then cover it with a dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it up until you are certain that the abscess is hot.
and rests the swelling of the affected member, and heals the bone pain, then begins again with subtle heat, and a little plaster, and does not strain it as strongly as before. as subtily as it is healthy.
And if you see that the abscess is closed, red, painful, and swollen, then you need to apply plaster and bind it again; just as you did at first.
And if nothing improves in the member of what we have said, then do not dislocate it until after three, four, five, or seven days. and never leaves it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and the joint approaches its normal position on the limb.
then hold it more tightly than first, and thicken its flesh, as I have said before;
and if you notice the vein is more engorged than necessary, know that no healing can come from it. open the vein with hot water immediately, every time you dislocate it, and let the blood flow a little each day.
by this effort, therefore, cut the vein in the limb, and use cautery as the foolish do, attempting to restore the twisted member.
This is evil, and if it causes great fear, I see no other way but to leave it and do it correctly.
There are many ways of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are diverse.
For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the bone splits completely through to the other side, as if cut with a hatchet or axe. and for this reason, this type of fracture is called "hatchet-like".
Or he uses a spear to pierce the bone without causing injury, and this method of fracture is called "absolute".
and this is the wound of these two fractures, great or small.
And if there is a pounding, or a fracture, or a cut from a stone, or a blow against a stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent fracture, which approaches the bone tissue that is beneath or on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound that is closed over the bone is as subtle as a hair, and the crack is small, it is called this fracture "capillary".
and if the wound is caused by a stone or an arrow or something similar, and the bone fragment goes deep inside, and the joints are bent as when a blacksmith bends metal over a forge. if it enters the stone inside.
and this is more common in those who have moist bones, such as children's skulls.
and it occurs in all these ways of fracture, causing small pieces to be dislocated as if they were. and I will speak of it in its place.
And we know all the ways of breaking through withdrawal from them, and inquiry at close range, and by corrupt flesh that is upon them.
The appearance of hair is perceived when the bone is discovered and rubbed further, opening the black fracture.
In the treatment of fractures, be cautious of accidents with the patient, and if you notice any ill effects such as vomiting, loss of consciousness, extension or bending of the limb, paleness, fever, sudden warmth, redness, or other similar symptoms in various combinations, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any dangerous accidents and hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
And when the fever comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon's cycle while it is still fresh.
And if this happens, if you hurry to remove the bone on the seventh day, when the tissue surrounding the bone is decomposed, then come the complications that we have mentioned.
And if the fracture of the bone extends up to the membrane covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part like this:
and you should press the patient's head with pain, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and on the wound's surface as gently as possible, and if blood comes out when you uncover the bone, or an abscess opens, use what is necessary to help, and fill the area with moistened woolen cloth. and keep the wound at rest until the abscess is calmed and be sure of the blood flow. then begin to separate the bone, and this is done according to two ways of work:
One method is to hold the affected area tightly with your hands, and this is how it looks:
And then take another treatment even more powerful than the first one.
And the second method is to have many different-sized instruments, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed and made of iron.
and gently open it, so as not to damage the head.
And if the bone is hard and dense, you must drill around it gently, so as to insert instruments with care, without going too deep that they penetrate beyond the soft part of the bone, and on top of the point should be a margin or curve, which prevents the tip from going through the bone.
and it is necessary to have many, so that each comes to its place according to the expectation of the bone, so you must take care for all parts.
and this is the form of the three types of care:
The quality to pierce around the broken bone is that you apply care to the bone and return to your tasks as long as you know that the bone is pierced.
then apply the care elsewhere a little later, and do so all around, then cut with incisions the space between the fragments of bone, and make it as gently and subtly as possible while still removing the bone with your hand or with any of the tools you have, such as pliers or pincers.
and ensure you do not touch the brain or the heart.
And when you have pierced the bone, and treated it, you must then observe the tension that is delayed from the bone to all other instruments resembling a chisel, but it should be more tense and more subtle than any other chisel.
and if it does not delay any small bones, or any scales, gently remove them with the instrument. then dress the wound with bandages and bindings as we have said.
And another method of treatment is that which Galen says, which is safer. and speak very loudly, and that is his word. It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone, either where it is broken open or clearly visible, and when you have exposed this part, place the flat edge of this lens-shaped scalpel beneath it. This is its form:
And do not deviate from this method in any way, and it is the acute side on the second rib, so that the incision is towards the bone.
then strike with a small mallet from above, so that you gently hit the bone all around, and be very careful of the skin that is below.
If it is detached from the bone, gently pull it, for it comes out with a good sensation, without pain or fear.
And if the break in the bone does not reach down to the flesh, and the bone is only broken on top, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to smooth out these asperities and shave off the scales with a fine rasp, of which you should have various quantities, to soften each part according to the severity and form of the break.
If you encounter great difficulties and then even more subtle ones, do not cease from this task until it is well done.
For each of the other haircuts or subtle breaks, you must treat according to their specific location.
and this is something that is never fully answered for those who have dedicated their study to this art.
And if satisfaction is achieved, it is necessary to apply a linen bandage according to the size of the wound, soaking it in rose oil and placing it on the wound. then take another cloth doubled over twice or thrice, soak it in wine and rosin oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. and make it lighter than you can, without straining the wound too much, then apply another bandage on top and do not tighten it excessively so as to only touch the wound.
and leave it thus for a day or two until the abscess is calmed, then loosen it and administer medications such as roots of lis, flour of times, powder of incense, aromatic herbs, and similar things.
and from these things make a powder, apply it to the wound, and administer worldwide remedies without biting;
and ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any uncleanliness, nor allow it to fester, for when it festers and pus forms on the flesh, it causes great harm to the patient.
for when one applies sharp, biting things to it, if it is not held steady, it causes no harm. Take care then, if no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if darkness comes not from the medicine applied, then let that virtue take effect; it is necessary to press a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and wrap it in cloth, and apply it to the biting place. then the cure with ways of healing that are necessary, as long as he is healthy.
Knowing that the two parts of the upper arm are never broken, either entirely or partially, for they are two bones.
and the inner part is cartilage, and does not break, unless it bends or twists severely, then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should apply your little finger or press into the joint, and make the same fracture in your index finger, and hold it firmly until the joint returns to its natural position. and make it gentle, and ensure that the patient feels no pain through your actions.
And if the break is in the upper part of the joint and the fingers cannot be moved to reset it, you should put a slightly thick stick at the top of the joint to realign it.
And if the fracture is of the second degree, repeat the same procedure, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
if this is not possible, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess at the wound's edge has healed, then apply to the head new bandages made of linen thread, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you may bind it from another side if the fracture is present. and make the bands so thick that they fill the gaps between the teeth.
And they say that no healing occurs when the bandages are not moistened with butter, and they must be changed each day. I do not think this is correct, but it is necessary that they be moist when preparing egg white and flour powder. then leave the band, until the bone is hard and the cartilage stiffens.
And never should bands or goose pen be applied in place of bands, and if the wound is covered with moisture, and the break persists, and the patient suffers, it will blow among them. or make sure you see well.
And if abscesses form in the wound while you are treating it, apply a plaster or wet cotton wool soaked in rose oil or a poultice of dill seed.
And if an abscess does not drain, apply a poultice from outside with flour of spices and incense powder, confited with egg yolk, then place light bandages on it and do not tie the nose.
and if the nose is broken and shattered into small pieces, remove it with suitable instruments, then clean the cut and treat it with hot charcoal and other suitable bandages.
and if there is no wound inside the nose, if it is cured with these treatments, and he puts splints, as long as it heals.
When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only slightly out of place, and it is not broken into two pieces, but only displaced inward, then if you gently recognize it, it can be set back in place.
If the fracture is in the right side, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient with the injury. and if the fracture is in the left mandible, insert your index finger of your right hand, gently push the fracture back into place, and use the other hand to apply equal pressure.
And if the fracture of the jaw is severe in two parts, it is necessary that you administer an extension of the second part, as long as it is even.
And if the movement of the teeth causes a fracture, tying them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then apply a plaster to the broken jaw, and place a double cloth over it. and place the cloth with a large, well-made star or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and fasten it to the teeth as best you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light meats.
And if you see that the alignment changes, untie it on the third day and then reset it as it was aligned. and then apply a plaster on it, with a powder from the mill mixed with enough egg or flour of chickpea, after you have removed the dressing.
and then apply a lighter second plaster, and if the plaster sticks, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it heals. often it heals within three weeks.
And if an abscess appears, then administer what we have said many times before.
And if there is a break and wound together, it does not matter if any part of the bone is removed. if skillfully using suitable instruments.
And if the wound is tight, stretch it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and it does not delay, close the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable plugs to it, to draw out pus, as long as it is healthy.
The force breaks many times before, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners:
or it is broken and disjointed in two parts, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore;
or there is fracture with a wound.
And the work is when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the aid that is broken with force. and the others stretch the collar towards the affected part;
then make the break even with both hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no bulge or indentation.
And if you need to extend it further, place a round, thick piece of cloth or wool under the shoulder of the patient, as needed. and gently extend the arm, and grasp the cloth with your hand, ensuring that the break is even as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the dislocation away from the bone because it is stuck completely, then the patient should lie on their side with their shoulder supported, and have a helper press the shoulder downwards until the bone in the dislocation is lifted.
And then address the fracture with your hands, and if you feel any debris, it is necessary that you cut through it.
and gently try to separate the pieces, and if the bone cannot join together for any reason, then the fracture is at one of the incisions you have. but that you apply the strength of this instrument underneath, to ensure satisfaction.
and it should resemble a spoon, and is not too sharp, and as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work.
and take note of the joints, as you see them, and let one be wide and the other narrow, just as is the rupture of the wound that you made when treating the bone;
and when you are certain of the hot abscess, if cutting the wound, and if its rupture is small, then you doubt the hot abscess, if applying bandages and poultices according to their quantity.
And if hot abscesses appear, then moisten the cloth with rose oil and silk and wine, and apply it.
The straining of the bone, when it is sensitive to touch and has no incision, is that you place a thin layer of fine-milled powdery plaster and egg white on the bone, then put light bandages over it, and insert a spear under the joint if necessary. then take a very wide bandage, one palm length wide, then place two layers on top of each other on the stump, and apply the plaster. then take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the top of the bandage is exposed. and place the stick on the fracture, then turn the bandage around the collarbone, and lift the healthy armpit, and lift the painful armpit. and reset each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the stick does not move over the broken bone, reward it each day, and when the bands loosen, restrict them.
and make the patient lie on his side, and place a small pillow under his armpit to raise the dislocated joint; if you lighten the fracture with the alignment of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the collarbone, and no further harm comes from it for twenty days;
then resume the splinting if you see that it is necessary, tighten it and leave it thus until it is healed;
and it is restored within 28 days, and to no one sooner.
from the dislocation of the shoulder
It follows that when the shoulder is broken or severely dislocated, it does not move normally, and its position can only be adjusted by touch.
if the apparatus is adjusted according to the shape of the fracture and restored to its natural form in every way possible.
then place a soft, fine-milled powder on the joint, along with light bandages and a double cloth covering. then place a wide and thin steel (blade) slightly larger than the shoulder, and dislocate the blade in no specific place of the shoulder, using that sharp edge of linen cloth, so that the blade cuts evenly.
and then tighten it with a great firm band so that the blade does not move from its place, and examine it every day.
and whenever it loosens (the band), loosen the strap and place the blade evenly if it is out of its place, and lay the patient on his side.
and the shoulder is reduced after 10 to 25 days.
And when these numbers are reached, if it is dislocated, be careful, for it is not bone that will set itself easily.
And if a piece of bone sticks out and is not removed from the inside, it causes inflammation and pain in the abscess, so do as we have said to calm the heat of the abscess.
from the break of the worst abscess
The skin is never broken in the middle, but it can be slightly damaged. but it often breaks when subjected to heat.
And when it is broken at the end, it retracts inside and causes the patient great pain, and there is no strength left, and sometimes it bleeds, and opens up the wound in the broken bone, and feels better.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his side, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and aligns the ribs with your hands, subtly making it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be.
then apply plasters and bandages over the tender flesh of the broken bone, wrapping it in a cloth and securing it so that it does not move. and restore the ligament to its proper position on the back, tightening it gently, and checking the freedom of movement every hour, relaxing it if it becomes tight.
if it becomes necessary to release it due to corrosion or itching in the flesh, or pain or an abscess that develops at the site, act quickly, release the plaster, and treat the underlying condition appropriately.
then reset the splint and hold it tightly until it heals.
from the breakage of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in the upper regions of the back and at the top, and they do not bend unless they are broken. and feels the patient well during questioning as is right.
And the restoration is such that you put it back in place as it should be. And then apply the plaster, gripping it with a splint if necessary.
And if the rib fracture is inclining inward, the patient feels great pain, as well as piercing and crying out, because the bone punctures the tissue. and furthermore with pins, and often and violently filled with blood, it is of great pain and the ancients have put much skill into it.
And for those who say that it is appropriate to administer foods that cause bloating in the stomach to push the fracture out.
We do not claim that incisions in hot wounds will not come, if they have not already come. And if it comes back, then the patient is healthy.
And they say that none of us should use cupping glasses on the skin, as it forms a vacuum, and this seems reasonable. However, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not attract impurities to the skin due to its weak condition.
And they say that none of you should cover the joint with moist wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to evenly distribute the heat around it, then treat the cure for pleurisy, flesh, and with medicine.
And if the patients feel great pain that they cannot bear through their bones where the cup is pressed, there is doubt in the patient, and it is necessary to cut into the broken rib bone, and it is necessary to put under the instrument to hold the satisfaction.
and then one must cut the bone, draw gently, and stitch the two edges of the wound together, if it is large, and treat it with poultices, until it is healed.
And if abscesses develop, place moistened oil-soaked rags on them and cover with a cloth.
and treat while the cloth over the abscess is fresh, keeping it in place, resting on the side where it should be, until it heals.
and also to the painful spine.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover, pay attention if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and they cannot move or stretch them, and if you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Knowing that it is deadly in many ways, and if they are mute and feel well when squeezed and not at all, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and the patient will be cured, if proper treatment is given.
And if a similar thing occurs to the painful spine, you must know if it is whole or not, if you observe if its joints are soft, and if there are any accidents in the hands, and on the back, coughing and vomiting without will.
and when you remember it on your belly, such severe coughing and vomiting without will. And when it is remembered lying on its back and wants to move, it cannot. He knows that it is deadly: if he does not labor in its treatment.
And if this accident does not occur, then the matter is lighter.
And the treatment is that if there is a hot abscess, you apply warm rose oil or egg yolk oil to it until it is soothed.
then place a comforting and drying plaster on it, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as he is whole.
and if any bone becomes detached, it is necessary to cover it with cloth; and remove the bone, then close the two edges of the wound with a stitch if it is large, and apply a dressing to the wound, keeping it clean, as long as it is whole.
and if the bone fragment is broken, which is called the "fragment of the wound," press your pouchet (possibly a type of bandage or compress) with your left hand and place it equally in your right hand over the wounded area, then apply plaster and a splint if needed.
then hold it tight, and if there is a bone out of place, put it back in order, and heal the wound as long as it is clean.
from the fracture of the bone in the hip
First, if the bone in the neck is broken, and it has, there shouldn't be much reduction at the top. and stretching it long, and bending it in the opposite direction, brings pain to the patient at the site of the break, and swelling, and inflammation that results from the fracture.
And the healing is such that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the break. and such is the fracture and shape of it;
and if the fracture is only at the head, then make all such fractures even, as long as they are in their natural shape.
And if the fracture is long, it inclines inward, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of this fracture appears. And when you have made it even, then place a splint above it, and put a stick or rod under it, and tighten the fracture so that it does not move.
and hold the limb against the body, as long as the muscle is even. Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if an abscess forms, it should not be touched until it has calmed down, and then apply what we have said above. and then return to restoration, holding it as necessary, if there is no adverse event.
dislocation of the joint
The helper is what lies between the shoulder and the head, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways:
do not take a sharp instrument of medium thickness according to this form:
and bind the two parts together, twist them upwards, and place the patient in a reclining position;
then pour the hot liquid over the broken arm until it is completely immersed, and place a wooden splint around it, then twist it upwards towards any heavy object or have the attendant pull it downwards.
then align the fracture so that it is level with both hands together, until the fracture returns to its proper position.
And another method is that one should place the patient on his back, and bind his hands to his neck, then command the assistants that one holds what is above the break in the hand, and the other holds below at every joint, and extends each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then tighten it slightly from around the fracture, and on the fracture, and stretch each of the assistants to their side.
And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, it is necessary that you apply a medium-strength ligature under the joint, and another towards the neck, below the fracture.
and also if the fracture is towards the neck, it is necessary to apply a light ligature without effort, as long as the fracture is even on the bone, both on top and towards the neck.
then make the fracture even, as it should be, and tighten it, if abscesses do not form.
And if an abscess appears, it is not pulled out for seven days, and a moist cloth is placed over it in linseed oil and rose oil until the abscess at the base is calmed.
then pull it out, and the manner of pulling is that you place the strap over the dislocation, then raise the arm towards the helper, and place your hand on the shoulder or the breast.
and take the cloth, pull on the helper and the arm, so that the arm is straight up, as long as nothing prevents it or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place on the fracture a broader and stronger splint than others, and leave two spaces between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes beyond the fracture on both sides.
then tighten the splints, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter about the fracture, stronger and less apart.
And if you see the position of the splints and their tightening, as we have said, when you return the broken member to its place, and doubt whether the abscess is hot, leave it bound for up to seven days, as we have said.
Then, each day for three days, observe the wound, that it does not become inflamed or swollen, and let no movement come to the limb because it is too tight. If it is necessary, as we have said.
And if no such accident occurs, then do not release it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach.
and place the dislocated joint in a soft pillow of equal-length wool, and observe each hour during the day or night, to ensure that the shape of the limb is not altered, and the ligaments do not relax.
if it is healed by the virtue of medicine, and given food that we have mentioned above, in such a way that the food is first subtle. and when it begins to recover, it will be significant.
and it is customary that the aid and leg should be healed over forty days in all. and then it should be dislocated and treated with baths and medicines suitable for the joint to be healed.
And if the contraction is severe and swollen, it may take longer to loosen, sometimes days or even months.
of the dislocation of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossa," one smaller and the other succeeding to the pouch.
and the other is large, and it is the one that is opposite, towards the smaller bone.
should the larger "fossa" break only, or both, then reassemble them together if possible.
When the smaller bones break, their restoration and healing is easier.
and when the bones are broken, if healing is poor, it becomes more painful than when they were broken together.
If only the small bones are broken, it is sufficient to extend them slightly and make them even.
And if it is a large, deep wound, then more force must be applied to tighten it.
and extends it on the cushion, placing the palm higher than the others, and the small fingers lower, crossing the patient over itself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any pain.
Then extend the healers' hands to the side of their hand, or to the joint, and other ministers to the others above.
And then set it even with the eyes, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture each piece is set in its place, and if there is none that holds the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then doing as we have said above, on both sides of the bone.
And if with the wound rupture, I have spoken of it in the specific chapter; then take the cure.
And if in the beginning of restoration appear abscesses, I apply a bandage made of rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft. and I cover it gently, until the abscess is calmed.
Then remove the bandage, and apply the plaster of fine-milled powder with plenty of egg, then place the pins, and let the pin from the break be even stronger, a little broader than the others.
and know that it must have six pins or arms in various positions: so that the break is in one of the bones, or in two;
and it is held tighter on the fracture than elsewhere, and less as it heals, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter. and let the bandages on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough.
and let the bandages on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough. and the thread, from which it is held, should be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the member and the ligament after no days. And if no ill accident befalls the limb, such as itching which may come upon it, then you should apply hot water to the limb until the itching is soothed.
and let the member not be squeezed tightly at rest.
And then repeat the exercise, and if the ligaments become slack and the bones lose their alignment, or any similar thing, address it accordingly.
And if the tightness prevents any movement in the limb, because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a little and leave it for some days until the stiffness improves, and then tighten it again.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then he should be released in twenty days.
if troubled, then tie his hands to his chest, and make sure his collarbones are even, and guard against movement and gesture, and sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 45 days, and by chance in 10 days, according to the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
of the dislocation of the hand
You know that on the back of the hand and at the joints there are often small breaks, and it brings only pain many times over.
And when the hand bone is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient cuts across it and holds it straight before him equally.
Then he places his hand on the extended board, extending the broken bones of the minister and aligning them equally until they are properly joined.
and applies a poultice and hot compresses, if abscesses do not form, then he places a piece of salt according to the size of the wound. and is wrapped in a cloth drape.
And if the fracture is near the stomach of the plant, make a ball of cloth and instruct the patient to press it against the broken place. and then stretch a long drape, and make the heart-shaped cloth as tight as the palm of the hand, and tighten it, as needed.
And if the fracture is at the edge, then you must place a stick across it and another underneath in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the bones.
If any of us experience a break, and it is the joints, place it evenly, as appropriate; and tighten with the palm, and if you see that a small, straight cloth raises the break without moving;
and if the break is in other joints, like in the example or any other, place it evenly and bind it with the healthy finger after; you hold them all in place with a tight grip, as much as possible, or you put a splint on it, just like you would;
and take care in the restoration and placement of hot abscesses, and protect those who come near it, as I have said.
the bones of the foot are often broken, and it is clearly visible when they heal in front and behind;
and the restoration is when they are bound together above the break and another is placed below. And the patient lies on his face, then extends each limb evenly to both sides.
and this is when the fracture is through the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the hipbone, one should bind it towards the wrist, and the others below the break.
And also if it is near the knee, then the ligaments around the knee should be relaxed and the extension should be downward.
then aligns the bone with both hands, evenly according to its natural shape, and then applies the splint, binding it firmly in place without causing new damage.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it soothe down, then return to your work and treatment. The bandage is made in this manner.
You should wrap around the fracture a bandage hard and tightly doubled in two or three layers, then remove any excess, and turn the leg until the heel reaches the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the calf and the leg, below the knee joint, and bring the end up over the top.
then turn to the leg and shin the bandage, then place the splint across it, and put a stick over the bone of the leg.
then use the eighth part of a cloth, soft between the leg and shin, to apply an even strain, then begin to tie three turns or four over the splint. and as you go higher over the splint, strain it less.
then take the two threads that you have woven between the leg and shin, and tie three stitches on top, then return to the other side, under the knee with the thread, until you reach the foot.
and hold it steady, if it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, and it will not become abscessed or swollen or any other thing. And if it happens that it disconnects, and the swelling comes back as it has many times before, as we have said numerous times;
and if there are fragments of bone that grip, it is prudent to extract them if possible; and if one cannot extract them, then it is necessary to break the joint and pull forcefully; and the treatment is as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
And never should the foot be broken in this way with stars, as is done in the aid or arm;
However, this restoration done in this way does not please the sick.
And know that the foot is restored in 7 to 10 days, or perhaps a little less or a little more, depending on the variety of complexes.
You know that in the alley of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, even if it is only a crack or a hole, it affects every wound, and without a wound, and everyone feels well.
And the restoration is when everything is put back in place as it should be, as long as it can be moved together.
then apply the plaster, and put a round stick, if you need it, and hold it as appropriate, then correct all the positions that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as a hot abscess or any similar thing. if each case requires it, as long as it is healthy.
from the fracture of the leg
Knowing that the leg has two bones, of which one is called the "right" and the other is called the "shank";
and it has a similar fracture as the arm, and its restoration is the same as that of the arm, equally difficult; and if both bones are broken together, the leg can turn in every direction.
And if the small bones are broken, they return to their original position.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it well. and turn it inside out.
Then apply extension, and set it even, and tie the stars equally.
But nevertheless, it is necessary that the broken bone be ugly, and there are multiple pieces, so the extension should be less severe and lighter. and make it straight according to its strength.
And when you have completed your task, take two strips of cloth as thick as the leg, extending from one side to the other, and make them quite long from the thigh down to the ankle.
then wrap it in two bands of cloth, both above and below, and tie it tightly in the middle, and with this binding, the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is good.
and no one should administer any binding around the length of the leg, and if it is of cloth, they place the leg to prevent movement, and properly make this at the fracture where there is an injury.
and move each part of the leg to see if there is a hot abscess or any other accident; if you treat it while it is healthy.
from the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot can be fractured and the two small bones, and there is no treatment that applies in all cases.
And if a bone is broken deeply, and you see the bones pressing against each other, causing the patient to lie with great pain on the ground, as if they wanted to move, then place your foot on their leg, holding the bones in their original position, and press until they return to their proper place.
then apply a splint and bandages, place a small, flat board under the belly of the leg with two holes, fasten it to the leg, wrap it tightly with cloth and other materials as needed.
And after three or four days have passed, if you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, either broken or discolored.
And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them as we have said about the bones of the hand. then take the broken bone and make it into a splint according to the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, then place the foot under the board that I have mentioned, and tie it securely.
and if there are two or three, or more broken bones, take a splint for each bone according to its length, wrapped in a cloth, and tie the board under the foot. and so it is placed on the upper part of the table, with the belly facing down, if it is done well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, when we have spoken. and attend to each of these accidents as it should be.
Regarding the fracture of the bone in the hand
When the bones of a woman's natural structure are broken and the swelling increases, then incline her to one side, leaning on her back, and hold her from behind.
then fill the wound with a cloth saturated with honey and also add as much as I can.
then turn the woman around, gently pressing her back, and then pull out the cloth, until it reaches the wound's entrance, and return the bone with the honey.
and when she wants to urinate, remove the cloth, and once she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or so. if the fracture is healed, and you notice, take a bladder of barley, tie it to the opening with a cane, and pour all the contents into the wound. then blow into the flame until the bladder is filled inside. nature will heal the broken ones.
then fill it with cotton and leave it thus for no days until it is healed.
And when the bones of a man or woman are broken, restore them thus as we have said regarding the hip bone.
and these fractures are not hidden from him who devotes his study and skill to them, and listen to my book.
For fracture indicates various dispositions towards the right way of restoration: understand then.
In the staff, when it is broken, take a goose throat and blow the staff; then wrap rags around it, leave for three days or until healing is complete.
from fracture with wound
It is important for someone with a fracture and a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone in the shin or shoulder or similar, to be treated immediately, so that the healing process, as we have described, can begin.
And if the wound heals, but there is still hardness from the bruise, if you have no other remedy, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or on the same day that the abscess appears.
And if the abscess opens on its own, let it heal undisturbed for a new day or two, until the abscess is calm, and do not touch it even on the third or fourth day, or you would bring about a bad outcome.
And if the broken bone is visible beneath the skin, you must gently place your hands on it, with small extensions.
And if the extension does not appear even in your hands, then reset this instrument which is of iron, having seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound. and for this reason, it is necessary to use a mirror so that he moistens three or four times, according to what he needs in each break treatment.
and it should be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend to the pressure on the limb at your discretion, and it is sharp in front and thick in the middle forward, thus:
And it is called a "palainche", so it is necessary that the curved bone be placed on the visible head of the bone; and the bottle should be held once, as it returns, and so that one is even with the other. And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, you must hold the head of the bone until the instrument has a firm grip.
And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, take a suitable instrument, such as a scalpel or forceps, in your power.
then take that which is delayed in the bone, of hardness and small cuts.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
If you make it stay in its place, then moisten the cloth with black vinegar, and apply it properly. and do not place any wax or other substance on the wound that would prevent air from reaching it, as it will cause putrefaction and decay.
then administer steriles when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and clean the surrounding area, according to the size of the wound, and be careful not to constrict the wound with any fragments.
and many times they have done this foolishly, and brought upon the patient death or great corruption several times. and so the bindings should be softer and more gentle than others.
And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that a complication will arise, as we have said, and it brings pain instead of healing, if it is not suitable to place anything on it. but wrap it around, instead of bandages, with hard cloth, and bind it.
And when you see after one or two days that the wound is bowing or sinking, then remove what you have applied to it, and apply a healing dressing for wounds, such as a four-part ointment or similar.
And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it remains swollen and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be separated in such a way that the bow of the joint gently moves downwards.
And if this persists for a long time, it cannot heal but repeatedly returns to the bowed state, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, so it is necessary that you clean the wound thoroughly and remove all these misplaced fragments causing the pain.
And if a fistula forms in its place or any other type of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in the chapter above.
And when a bone is broken and opens up on the limb, such as the bone of the shin or the shoulder, or other similar bones of the large limbs, do not pull it, for in many cases it leads to gangrene, but let it be until it rots.
if, after twenty or thirty days, the wound has healed, then treat it if possible.
and if it cannot be treated, then leave it.
We often encounter after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near a joint, and the sight of the misaligned limb is a sad thing. and by chance cannot perform the natural movements of its limbs.
Beware therefore, if this happens to us: if he administers astringent medicines such as aloe, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, akebia, and similar ones, without pressing any of these things or all together, and conserves them with astringent wine or with abundant egg white or with ash. and places them on the wound in compresses, tightens them well, and does not untie them for several days.
and places them on the wound in compresses, tightens them well, and does not untie them for several days. and then dislocate it, and begin again with a new one, until the knots are broken.
or you stretch it on a well-made plank; for the property of the plank is that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
and if the knot has become hard as stone, it must be broken, if possible, and the excess removed, exposing the surface. You must cut it with no rasping, as long as it is fresh, and treat it while it is clean.
the weak member after treatment
When the fracture of the bone is healed and the limb remains weak and delicate, it occurs for many reasons: because one is due to it being constrained too tightly and not constrained as it should be; or because it has too many constraints and cannot attain the normal movement of the limb; for from many irritations; or due to too great movements, not staying in its proper time; or because it has little blood in its body, it becomes weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and make the body firm, until the blood begins to multiply within him; and administer baths, and give joy and comfort;
then place lead on the affected member, so that the lead attracts great pain, and often raise it with cold water, until the pain subsides in the member. and returns to its natural shape.
The twisted member after health. When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the member is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function.
do not believe the fools who say we must break the member from the very beginning, and many foolish practices have been done in our land.
and this work is blameful, and brings great harm, and sometimes death;
However, if the nodations (swelling) and torture are fresh, they should be treated with hot water or cooked herbs that have soothing properties, such as fennel, roots, melilot, and similar things.
and apply the soothing plaster, well-prepared as it should be, and take the resin of fennel, and preserve it with gelin fat or sesame oil, and apply the plaster.
You take fatty substances, crush them finely with collyria and similar medications that ease inflammation.
And never should the dislocation be rubbed continuously and for a long time with moist hands. And allow the limb to move every hour.
And if the swelling is inflamed and hardened, like stone, then it needs to be opened with iron, if necessary covering it with cloth, with a delicate incisor lightly. and apply compression and study the treatment.
Dislocations occur from a joint moving out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs due to no apparent cause, it is necessary to attempt to bring the limb back to its normal position immediately.
Because if treatment is delayed, the swelling can increase, and it may be necessary to apply pressure firmly to the site.
because it is not necessary to move it with force when it is swollen. often causes pain and other discomforts;
however, when this happens, if it makes the patient healthier, then leave it until the abscess is completely healed.
then raise the affected limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the cure comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint all the way to the foot.
It is first necessary that the jaws be dislocated slightly, and both dislocations are according to two manners: when they are slightly separated from their sockets, and softened somewhat; or they are entirely dislocated, hanging down towards the chin, and draining saliva from the mouth so that it cannot be held closed, nor can he close his lips, and he drools while speaking.
When the dislocation is minor, it often returns to its proper position through various dispositions.
And if it is entirely and completely dislocated, then it must be reset immediately, without delay;
and in such a way that the physician places his thumb on the patient's head and pulls it slightly with the root of his hand into the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, thus dislocating it by half. and the other two hands should be prepared equally.
and instructs the patient to soften his jaws and move them from all sides. And he should equalize the pressure, until it returns to its place.
And if they return to their place, especially when both jaws are involved, then apply hot water and oil, gently bringing them back together.
I shall not try to bring it back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth is closed without too much difficulty, apply moistened cloth bandages made of rose oil and wax, then gently bind them with soft cords.
and have the patient sleep on their back, with their legs between two cushions, so that they do not move to the left or right, nor strive for anything more, but gently press meat into them until the pains are gone and the jaws are still.
and then massage it gently, and do not try to open the mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well-nurtured and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their proper position within an hour and are not aligned properly, then fever and severe pain may occur, as well as abdominal distension, and possibly pure bile vomiting.
And when you see this, then know that it is destruction; and often leads to the death of those whom it befalls within seven days.
The forceps cannot stay in place from either side within the continuation of it and is dislocated neither outside nor inside, and it causes great pain.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, extending their arms. and then press the joint back into your palm, and it will return.
then apply the plaster and bind it tight, and hold it fast.
and the joint that is near the shoulder cannot be dislocated. if it does not move, and if it does not dislocate even once, then put it back in place as we have said.
then apply the plaster and bind it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
and so, itself is brought back to the shoulder joint, when it is dislocated from its place.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
You know that the shoulder is injured in three ways:
one is when it is injured at the part of the shoulder blade towards the back; and the second is at the part of the lesser curve; and by chance, it is injured at the upper part, and this happens rarely;
and do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the nerves.
and often dislocate away from the axis, especially for those who have little strength, as this causes them great pain.
for those who have enough strength, the dislocation occurs gently, and it returns gently.
And occasionally, no matter the person, they might experience a bruise or fracture, and an abscess of heat forms in the shoulder, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
It is therefore necessary that you test it, as long as you are certain. and then begin treatment.
And dislocation is recognized when it moves towards the joint, and makes a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their manifest diversity between them. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a pit, and by pressing on the joint, the top of the shoulder feels as if it were one. and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its normal position, nor make any movement.
and also, if it is dislocated at the top and not hidden away, for you will feel it clearly through touch;
and this method of dislocation is not only to be used when it is fresh, or if the patient is ill.
And the method is that the healer places his hand on the patient's head, then puts his palms underneath the affected area, and pulls the joint upwards with strength towards the joint. and the healer lifts his hand, extending it upwards, then places it underneath. if illness comes.
And if illness does not come as we have said, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water. and apply it gently and soothingly, such as with an infusion of fennel and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be applied.
then the patient should be placed on their back, and a soft cloth of equal thickness should be placed beneath them, neither too loose nor too tight, then place a pillow under their heel and gently lift the head from the shoulder, and pull the hand of the ill person.
and other ministers should tie the patient's head to prevent movement. the shoulder now returns, and if it is dislocated, reset it according to this manner:
and make sure that the presence of someone at home is more significant than the patient's illness; and be straight against the side, and pull the patient's shoulder blade away from the spine, and lift the blade upwards, so that the patient's arm hangs down. and other assistants take hold of the patient's hand below the abdomen. And if the patient is too light, and any heavy object causes no discomfort, then the dislocation returns now.
And it is also adjusted in another way:
and place a long stick in the ground, so that the end is also bright like a pestle, and not too thick or too thin; then the patient is placed on their back, but with soft cloth over them, and the pain should be from a long wound;
Then, stretch his hand downward from another direction, forming a new angle, and the joint will return to its place steadily.
and if it does not want to return for all the things we have said, make this treatment: take a small piece of cloth from both arms, broad and long enough, that the end can be pushed completely through the wound, according to this shape.
then wrap over the wound with a cloth from above, so that it does not hurt the patient, and then insert it through the wound of the ill person.
And stretch one arm over the thigh, holding the shoulder on the thigh, and raise the arm up to the top of the hand; then place the arm on the palm of a wide knife, and extend the hand downwards, leaving the body hanging from the other side. The joint moves back now.
And when it is dislocated, in any way, it is necessary that you place under the limb a spear of equal wool, then apply the plaster made from powdered chalk, with incense and eagle's egg, over the entire shoulder area, then stretch the limb away from the body, and secure the bandage on the plaster, and press the hand to the collarbone, so that the hands remain in this position.
And it is necessary that he move slightly, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal more quickly.
and then move more after two or seven days, and move it again. and if it is frozen and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is stuck due to moisture or any other cause, it is necessary that you apply heat at three points, as described in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all this, and after seven days the dislocation persists, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm above his head, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either compressed, stretched, or softened. and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is toward the worst, and the joints, either front or back, are caused by a sudden movement, extending the hands, and similar actions, and require another treatment.
and heal as long as he is healthy.
And after healing comes cracking in the limb, and delayed movement; if the patient uses it often enough, as long as that cracking is relieved, and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation cost
Knowing that the joint's pain is caused by dislocation, and it repeatedly dislocates;
and it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not fully corrected, for one can both see and feel it clearly; and dislocated according to each misalignment. And when you join the sick part with the healthy, if you can see it clearly. Because the joint is dislocated, and the arm cannot bend, nor can it touch the shoulder at all.
And you must reset it so that the dislocation is corrected before it returns, because if the dislocation comes back again, it will be difficult to correct.
and it may not be brought back completely, especially when it is at the back. it is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and in some cases it can lead to death.
And for the restoration, when it is such that it can be brought back, you should extend your hand with both of yours. And let his arms be spread out, and the hands with wide open fingers according to the contour of the bone around, apart and together, and straighten the joint at his palm's base, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his palm, and turns the root of the palm side that is misaligned.
And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension.
and it is that the two ministers extend the arm, and the tie of the two ministers, so that it does not move with the extension.
then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it.
and when the mirror shows the joint of the joint in the hand, if it is not oiled to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly, until it returns.
and when it is in place, apply dry plaster with heat and stretch the joint, pressing the arm against the collarbone of the afflicted person, and leave it for no days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, release the ligature, and leave it.
and if you see that the joint is not well aligned, recommence the binding and the bandage, and leave it thus for no more than a few days, until it is firmly set. then loosen it.
and if it feels sore after resetting the joint, and it becomes stiff, then bathe and gently rub it, pressing until it is relieved. or place on the joint a greasy sheep fat, leave it there for a day and a night, then remove it, and make the patient take a bath. and when it swells, rub the affected joint tempermentally, then place a cold compress on top, and then immerse it in water. and do this twice or three times, as long as it remains healthy;
and if you see that it is covered with moist, hot pus and swollen, apply a fine cloth dipped in butter and press it on;
it will return to its original position.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates easily, and its return is light, more so than other joints. However, it is necessary to reset it gently in the same moment it dislocates, so that the joint does not swell or an abscess forms hot.
And the resetting is done by placing the patient's hand on a table, extending the affected limb, and visually ensuring it aligns evenly; then pressing down on the palm until the joint returns to its place.
However, you should check if it is well-positioned. Then, place the patient's hand on a table with the fingers extended and then bent. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, let the patient lay his sick hand on a table, and look carefully at the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If it does not return, strain soothing plasters over the abscesses, and leave them thus without beginning again.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after any number of days, then the twisted joint persists.
and do not harm the patient until their hands are relaxed, and they cannot squeeze anything at all. so know that the nerves or arteries are cut,
if there is no other engine but to extract with delicate cautery, and by chance it is worth nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, if you put on the plaster as we have said, then pull it and leave it for a day, then loosen it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, then apply warm water and rub it until it is healed.
on the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
never should the two sides of the hand, or the back of the palm or the stomach, be dislocated.
Then they should hold, and reduce the dislocation in their hands until it returns, then support the head with both hands, and align it towards the part where it is separated.
and leave it for two days, then set it equal again on the third day;
and do not tie it, as we have said, but loosen it on the third day and make it move, then relive it with the nut.
and do this often, as long as it is tight, and do the same if it becomes distorted in the palm of the hand, and proceed as you have done before, until it is healed.
and do the same when it is dislocated from another side.
dislocation of the shoulder blade
When the shoulder blade or collarbone is dislocated and there is no cure, the patient faces a greater risk of death due to haste.
And the signs of this are that the patient's movements are sudden and involuntary, they cannot hold it, and often the limb becomes limp, whether it is one knee or both, or both arms.
And often the elderly become mute, at least partially.
the one who becomes mute at the back is called "gibbosity
The cure is that you warm the joint if the stiffness comes from childhood. If there is no cure or remedy for it at all.
And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, they speak of ancient ways of cure with great words, but these have little to no benefit at all.
But I have abreviate it according to my understanding, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gigot (fatty tissue) that comes to the foot first, no one has ever felt well.
and also those that come straight to the second side, and one cannot cure anything outside of that which comes properly to the back, as I say.
and it is that the patient should be extended on their back equally in the first position, and have strain from below, so that they do not bend.
then insert a thorn into the ground at the head, and another under, and tie a string from below around the patient's limbs, and another at the hips, and at the thighs, and at the ankles.
and two attendants know the ligaments, one at the head and the other at the foot, among the two splints.
and they should be well secured; the splint as we have said, and the surgeon places his palms on the protruding bone, until it heals.
And if it does not heal with this treatment, take a table three feet long, cut a slot in the wall, and place the patient on their side, then turn the head of the table away from the wall, and put the middle part of the table over the bone. and place the mirror on the other side of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place.
and if you look, do it with the turning wheel that turns in your hand. And take two sharp splints from a large limb of a patient and place them at the head of the dislocated arm, then put your other hands on top, with one palm-length space between each splint.
and make each splint have a hole, or let the turning wheel run through them, and ensure the splints are firmly in place so they do not move.
and between each of the two pieces there should be one piece that turns, so that the joint is restored, and it has two small pieces turning in one hand, to return to its original position.
and then tie the ligament that is among the attached to the joint towards the top, and the other ligament towards the foot to the other joint, and each of the assistants turns their joint with the entire ligament, and the master sets the splint evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with plenty of heat, then the pads, and then the plank of three fingers in length, which secures the joint from the stiffness and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a ligament as we have said, and use gentle treatment for the patient until it is healed.
and if any thing comes to the end of health, it is necessary to administer soft and soothing medicines, with the care that we have said above; and never administer a plug, and never does the appearance come in the last spine of the back, and it is believed that this is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, so one must not have presumption; in case death were to come.
You know that the joints of the spine and the joints of the shoulder only cause dislocations, not like the other joints.
and the spinal joint is misaligned according to three parts: inside, outside, front, and back;
and more inside, then slightly misaligned in front and back.
And the knowledge of his dislocation is such that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it extends further, and opens up the diseased knees more widely than the healthy ones, and the patient cannot bend their knee fully. and it is the swelling that is affected by hot abscess, because the joint of the thigh comes over here.
And the sign of him who experiences this at death is that this event is contrary to what has been said before.
And the signs of one who experiences it in front, are that their leg is straight according to its natural position; but do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make it move, it cannot go forward, and it retains urine, and swells up the ankle, and when it moves, it goes over the heel.
And the signs of him who experiences this afterward, are that he cannot spread or bend his knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the angre is softened, and the limb of the thigh is raised on the side of the ribs.
They must reset this appearance of dislocation if it is old and persists according to its nature, as there is no cure for it. and there should be no presumption that it will not recur.
And for the one whose dislocation is recent, there are three types of dislocation: if you hurry to return the joint, it will be inside and outside, or moved to the right or left. for fear it may return, and there needs be no other cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong compress and extend the leg firmly at two hands, or fasten it to the knee joint. and other ministers extend their hand over it in such a way that they press their hands down on the sore spots, then pull firmly with a slow motion on the leg just above the ankle. and another holds the head with a firm grip.
and they stretch up and down several times, until the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains still.
This method of extension is common to all three cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If this is not done, then care must be taken of its appearance.
When dislocation occurs in the joints, it is necessary that you bring the patient to rest on their healthy side, then wrap a bandage around the root of the thigh, and the joint that is away from the pain, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the pain and downwards towards the stronger part.
then apply pressure with your hands on the patient's arms, embrace the large joint of the affected thigh, and stretch it to a wide angle. if it returns to its place now;
and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot hold it in that way as we have said, then you should tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligature on the two heels and on the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two more degrees than the other.
then it should be hung on a pole with the head down, and two long arms above the ground.
then instruct the assistant to embrace the hip joint, and have other assistants with the patient who are embracing the hip, for the joints will now heal slowly.
And when the dislocation is external, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of stiffness, and carefully extracts the ligament from the affected leg, also from the opposite side;
then place two splints, one at the hip and another below, then insert a splint between the hips of the patient in the shape of a bow. and place moist rags around it, so the patient does not suffer pain, then extend each limb towards him and equally apply the medication to the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If it does not return, place it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous section, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is present, it is necessary to extend the affected leg forcibly, as I have said before. and apply the compress to his pain of being on the affected limb, then press with the other hand and stretch it downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is on the outside, it is not necessary to stretch the affected limb downwards or lift it up, but rather, it should be held in the same position as when the hip was dislocated, as we have gently described above. and place it on his face, with the limb extended as we have said before, and all must press down on the joint on the table; and it will be clear when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even. then tighten the thighs, and apply the plaster, and wrap it with a bandage, so that the hip does not move. and rest for three or four days, then untie it, and apply the plaster again.
and if you see that they are even, hold them as before, and leave it for three days.
then dislocate it again, and make it go smoothly, as long as the limb is comfortable.
From the dislocation of the knee.
The dislocation is treated according to three methods: that is to say, internally and externally, and behind.
and do not treat it in front.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not return to its place at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if they can, and place them face down on your lap, and rest their foot on top of yours.
then take their kneecap in your palms, pull it between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee cap; and other helpers extend their help until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it has recovered well its leg slightly.
and apply a poultice, and make the leg recover to its place, and hold it together tightly for three or four days, then release it.
and the patients should not move about until the limb is healed.
And if the limb is not in place, apply firm extension as we have said in the treatment of the shoulder, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are neither completely dislocated nor fully aligned, and they are distorted both inwardly and outwardly.
And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, and it turns red at the site where it was dislocated.
We reset it if it is slight, and one must gently extend their hands when they are slightly dislocated.
And when it is slightly dislocated, one should make the patient lie straight and hold them by the leg above the ankle with a helper.
then take the foot in your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and gently pull the foot upwards.
and do this twice as we have said, by extending and pulling the foot.
If it returns, that's good.
If it does not return, the work must be restarted, for it returns.
and if it cannot return in that way, lay the patient on their back on the ground, and insert a stick firmly into the earth between their legs, and wrap cloth around them to prevent the patient from hurting themselves.
then strike the patient's thigh, and another assistant extends the leg or holds it at the knee; then extend each limb equally, and the bands should be placed again between the legs of the patient to hold the patient still when pulled.
then place the mirrors equally on the dislocation of his hands, and another minister ties the healthy leg at the ankle, and the dislocation will return steadily.
And when it has healed somewhat, apply the plaster and fill it up, and stretch it tightly, and fasten the foot to the leg, and hold the reins that are on the ankle behind, so that the bandages are not too tight.
then leave it for two or three days, and gently move it if it is strained.
then dislocate it on the third or fourth day, and make sure the patient walks for three days. and if it does not heal by this time, it is not fortunate that it will still be dislocated.
And if abscesses form, it is necessary to soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, while they are clean.
Of the two (parts/sides) When both (sides) are dislocated, if they need to be realigned without effort, it is a light task.
And if the dislocation is in any other part of the foot or leg, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back or on a table with his body straight, and place your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press gently with your foot until it returns.
and when they are even and open nothing, place the sole of the foot on a table with two joints, then stretch it firm and leave it for three days, then loosen it. and make it rest until it is healed.
From wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with a dislocation and one wants to restore it, often the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in treatment, since you are ignorant of the art and have not practiced it for long, and if you lack compassion and mercy and are slow to act, do not be bold.
and at the beginning of things, apply hot poultices to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you have no hope for healing. and if you see hope, then now reset the member to its place, so that the abscesses heat goes away;
and when the member is in place, apply hot poultices to the abscesses, and treat the wound as appropriate, with dried herbs.
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are broken, then as we have said in simple illnesses:
and keep from entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, for it is your movement according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arms and body.
