After I completed this book for you, my Sons, which is the last on the science of medicine with its complement, and having reached an end in it through expositions of its contents and its declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you also with this Treatise, which is a part of operations, that is, surgery with hands.
Since the operation with hands is prostrate in our region and at our time, altogether lacking; until perhaps the knowledge of it has perished, and its trace has disappeared, except for some small descriptions in ancient books which have been altered by hand, and error and hesitation have occurred, until the intentions have been closed off, and the force of it has been weakened: It seemed to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise in it according to the way from the positions, the declarations, and the abbreviations, and that I should come with forms of iron tools, and the rest of the instruments of work, through addition of declarations and proper use of what is necessary.
The reason why a skilled artist with his hand is not found in this present time, is because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to exercise himself before that in the science of anatomy as Galen narrated, until he knows the remedies of members, their shapes, and their connections, and disconnections, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, their number, their exits, veins pulsating and quiet, and places of their exit.
And for this reason, Hippocrates said that name with name is much, and with work it is little, and especially in the art of hands.
We have already said about him at the beginning of this book.
Whoever is not knowing what we have said about anatomy, may already fall into error, in which people are killed: as I have seen many of those who are formed by this science and boast about it without knowledge, and without experiment.
I have seen a foolish physician cut an abscess on a woman's neck, and he accidentally cut some arteries in the neck: therefore, blood flowed from the woman until she fell dead at his hands.
And I have seen another physician who presumed to draw out a stone from an old man, and the stone was large. Therefore, he came to him, and drew it out with a piece of bladder. Wherefore, the man died on the third day.
And indeed I was already called to draw it out; and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the man that he would die.
And I have seen another physician who received a stick at the court of some Duke of our land for his medicine: and there was a black eunuch with him, who sustained a fracture in his leg near the heel; and the physician, with his ignorance, pressed the fracture over an open wound with awls, iron staples, and strong ties, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he cured him according to his own devices. Then he dismissed him for some days and commanded him not to loosen the bandage; and he stood thus until an abscess formed on his leg, and his foot, and it came to ruin.
I was therefore called to him; and I hastened to loosen the bandage; and peace came, and he was freed from his pains.
However, corruption had already become fixed in the limb; and I could not restrain it.
Translation: Place therefore let corruption walk through the member until it perishes.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous apostema: and it was healed afterwards until the evilness of its magnitude with its lord was revealed.
Because when it is a pure cancer from the humor of melancholy, then it is not necessary to approach it with iron entirely, unless it is in a member that can endure, so as to remove all of its extent.
And on account of this it is necessary for you to know that the operation is divided into two divisions: namely, an operation which brings salvation: and an operation with which there is danger in various dispositions.
And I have already awakened in all places of this book where the operation comes, where there is fear and dread.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of this and divide it so that fools do not find a way to speak and shameful things.
Therefore take the measurement with care and protection, and treat your sick ones gently and firmly, and make use of a better way leading by the grace of God to salvation and praiseworthy succession: and leave behind terrible illnesses difficult to heal: and remove from you what makes you fear, so that hesitation enters upon you in faith and comfort.
For it remains more to your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your profits.
Galen has already said in some of his warnings. Do not treat an evil sickness, lest you be called a bad physician.
Now however I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters. ¶
First Chapter.
On the cautery with fire, and the cautery with sharp medicine, set out, arranged from head to foot, and forms of instruments, and ironwork of the cautery, and all that is necessary for the operation. ¶
Chapter second.
On cutting and perforating, on venesection and cupping, and on wounds; and on the extraction of arrows, and similar matters; and an entire chapter arranged according to the forms of instruments. (paragraph break)
Chapter third.
On restoration and dislocation, on the treatment of twisting and similar matters; arranged from head to foot, and according to the forms of instruments.
Before I remember the operation with him, it is necessary that I say the quality of his remedies and his harmful effects; and in what composition they are presented.
I say therefore, that the discourse on the quality of the remedy of the Cautery, and its harmful effects, is a long, subtle, scientific, and hidden secret.
Also there was a multitude of wise men who disagreed about it; and to me, at least, their many discourses are enough for me, fearing a prolonged debate.
I say therefore, that the Cautery applies universally to every composition, which is with matter and without matter; except for two compositions, which are a hot composition without matter, and a dry composition without matter.
In the hot and dry composition with matter they disagreed. Some indeed said that the Cautery is beneficial in this [hot and dry composition with matter]. And others said the opposite of this [that the Cautery is beneficial in hot and dry composition with matter], namely that the Cautery is not suitable for the sickness which is due to heat and dryness; because the nature of fire is heat; and it is inconvenient to heal a hot and dry disease, when heated by hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite said that by Cautery is beneficial for any hot and dry sickness which happens in human bodies; because when you compare the body of a man and its humidity to the composition of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
And I myself say by his discourse; because he has often revealed that to me in experiment.
Nevertheless, it is not necessary for him to come back to this, unless he who has already been tested and experienced in the last exercise of the chapter on Cautery, and knows the diversity of human compositions, and the disposition of diseases in themselves, and their causes, and accidents thereof, and the space of time of those diseases.
From the remaining body compositions, there is no fear for you: and especially in cold and moist illnesses. For it has agreed all physicians on these: and they did not disagree in helping with cautery in them.
And know, sons, that from the secret of cure by cautery with fire, and its goodness over cautery with medicine burning, is that fire is simple, whose action does not reach, unless to the member which is being cauterized: and it does not harm another joint connected with it, unless a small damage.
However, the action of medicine burning reaches to what is extended from members: and perhaps it causes illness difficult to heal in a member, and perhaps it kills.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not do that unless it is excessive.
Now we have understood that through an experiment, because of the length of service and study with art, and position on truth of things: and because of that I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it was not forbidden to this book of mine, I would give you the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies, by which it expels illnesses with a philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be understood by your minds.
And know, sons, that they themselves disagree on the time when cautery should be made, and put a better time for it with truth.
And I say that cautery is suitable in every time: therefore, because damage occurring due to the time is drowned in help, which is attracted with cautery. And especially if cautery is for pains from necessary pains, strong, pressing, which cannot endure delay: therefore because it is feared that what may happen from them is greater than a small damage which occurs due to the time.
And let not that thought enter your minds, O sons, that it is only the common people and foolish physicians who believe that there is not always a return for the sickness cured by cautery; and they assume this as a consequence, but the matter is not as they think: because cautery is not, except in place of medicine, which alters complexion, and extracts humidities which are the causes, wherefore pain arises.
However, cautery is superfluous over medicine due to the swiftness of its health, and the strength of its operation, and the power of its dominion: and it is possible that sickness returns at some hour according to the complexion of the sick, and the location of the sickness, and the virtue of the same: and what prepares in his body from an accumulation of superfluities within him: and what reaches him in acquiring it from foods, and similar things due to its causes, except for the sickness in which cautery is administered.
A subtle sickness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, such as the cautery of a tooth, because of pain and similar things, it is possible that that pain does not return in him. But this happens rarely.
However, the speech of the common people is again correct that cautery is the last medicine: not to what they intend in it: because they believe that there is no cure that confers with medicine, nor with anything after the fall of cautery.
But the matter is contrary to theirs and their intention, that cautery is the last medicine, is not, except when we administer modes of cure for a sickness and they do not confer with the same medicine: then we administer cautery at the end of things, and it confers: thence it happens that cautery is the last medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than a cautery with iron; and they did not say this, if not because of the equality of gold, and the loftiness of its substance; and they said, that it does not cause a place for pus at the site of the cauterization. That is not entirely true; because I have already proven it and found that it does not do this in certain bodies without others.
And a cautery with it (gold) is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you put fire to the cautery from gold in fire, it is not shown to you, when it burns according to the quantity that you want, due to the redness of gold; and when it rushes towards it (the gold) coldness, and if you add more fire to it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls into this (mistake) due to it; and because of this, a cautery with iron is more quickly and closely made among us for the sake of the operation.
And I myself have already arranged this Chapter (on cautery) in the Cautery, according to chapters; and I have arranged it from head to foot, so that those who are seeking (information on cautery) may find what they want from it.
Chapter II.
Here is the cauterization for the dominion of humidity and coldness over the brain: these two are the causes of soda (seizures), and the flowing multitude of fluids from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and the multitude of sleep, and toothache, and throat pain; and universally all illness that happens due to coldness, such as paralysis, sodae, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The method of cauterization is to instruct the sick person: first, that the head should be evacuated with a solution of medicine cleaning for three or four nights, depending on the strength of the sick person, their age, and their habit.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a razor. Then make him sit square between your hands so that he puts his hands on his chest.
Then put the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger comes, mark that place with an uncauterized spot.
Then heat the cautery oil: this is its form.
Then put it on the marked uncauterized spot, descending with your hand to tighten it gradually, and you turn it. Then quickly withdraw your hand, and look at the place.
If you see that a piece of bone or quantity of pus has been discharged from the skull, then remove your hand. And if not, press your hand with the iron itself or with another tool, until you see the bones that I told you about.
Then take something from salt, dissolve it in water and soak the cloth in it, and put it on that place; leave it for three days.
Then place on top of it a wet cloth in butter, and let it remain until the burn is consumed by the fire. Then treat it with the four-ingredient ointment until it heals.
It is said that the larger an open wound remains, the more pus it discharges; therefore, it is better and more helpful.
And some of them said that the skin should be burned up to the bone; and the cautery should be held until it has heated something of the bone's thickness.
Then grind down what has been burned from the bone, then treat it.
Others say that when the cautery reaches the bone, it should make an impression on the bone for as long as the bone falls off, so that it becomes like the shape of a scorch mark; or they use an instrument that women put in place of the small alphabet: and they believe that vapors from the head will escape from this place; and let the open wound remain for a long time.
Then treat it until it solidifies.
But I do not see these two types of cautery at all except in some people according to the way of fear.
And let it be, in my opinion, it is better for his health.
For the head is weakened by the solution of its own continuity; as we have testified in other members: and especially when the head of a sick person is naturally weak: and the first species of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, and I use it: therefore operate with it for his health.
Chapter 3.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the head, and it persists in a weak person, and they use hyson (a type of tea), hot baths, bloodletting, massages with oil, and fomentation. And particularly if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, as we have mentioned, and none of the above helps him: then consider. If the head of a weak person is strong by nature and not frail, and it finds extreme cold: then cauterize it with another cautery, but sparingly. Then cauterize it on all the horns of his head with another cautery, but be careful not to penetrate the skin, and remove only the quantity of bone that we have mentioned. Cauterize it with one cautery on the occiput of his head, in the place which is called "was": and it is a place where pus collects: and clean out your medicine in this place, but do not remove bone. For the weak person finds relief from that intense pain, and it is different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
And I will say that this cautery is in its place: and it must be a cautery with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the occiput more subtly with the cautery used for cauterizing the middle part of the head.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occurs on part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and the head is treated with cleaning medicines, and further treatment is administered as I have said in the divisions of diseases, but it does not work completely: then cauterization is used in this case according to two methods: either cauterization with a burning medicine, or with iron.
The cautery with burning medicine is to take one clove of garlic, peel it, and cut off the ends from both sides. Then cut the painful spot at the time with a broad lancet until there is a place under the skin where a tooth can be captured.
Insert it (the tooth) into the same place under the skin until it is hidden; then press upon it with a suitable plaster and leave it for fifteen hours, then dissolve it and extract the garlic clove and let it be for two or three days; later, place it submerged in butter on the spot until pus forms; then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do this with certain burning medicines, as I wrote in the twelfth treatise on Medications that Burn.
But cauterization is performed in this manner (with iron). The form of the hot cautery is as follows: a cylinder of iron about the size of a finger, covered with a sheath of leather, and on both
It is called a claw-like cautery because its head resembles the shape of a nail, having something sharp on it and in the middle there is a small projection.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand; and you rotate the iron slowly with speed; and the amount that is burned should be of the thickness of the skin, as the middle part of it. And lift your hand so that an artery below is not burned and there is no bleeding.
Then immerse the hot iron in water with salt and place it on the spot for three days; then immerse the hot iron in butter; later, treat the spot with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemicania (half headache) with the tip of the second cautery (small knife-like instrument). Be careful not to cut an artery during this half-headache, not by the ancient method.
On the method of cauterizing in the old half-headache.
When you treat a half-headache as we have said in the treatment that follows, and what we have said in the division of diseases, and it does not help: and you see from the disease that it is not enough for us what we have said with the first cautery with medicine, or with the cautery with fire, then it is necessary to use a cold cautery, until it whitens after marking the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or about this much: and put your hand instead, and tighten it until you cut an artery, and reach as far as the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the lower jaw area that moves during chewing, so as not to burn the side or the nerve that moves it, thus causing a spasm.
And take care and be careful about the flow of blood from the artery that was cut. For there is fear in its cutting, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not careful or experienced: and they abandon the operation first of all.
And I will come with a reminder about the management of the flow of blood that occurs from the cut artery according to its method and in its place in this book.
If you see from the disease that this cautery is not enough for him, and you see a weak body tolerating the cautery in the middle of the head as we have said, treat a wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with a cautery having two blades. Cauterization is indeed better in this way and more suitable.
On the method of cauterizing ear pain.
When cold pain occurs in the ear and it is treated with solutions, and the rest of the treatment as we have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then cautery by fire: and that is what is called a puncture, whose shape is as follows.
Then the puncture is made around the entire ear, as it is rotated: or around both sides if the pain is on both sides. And elongate [the cautery] from the ear's root slightly after marking the spots with encaustum (beeswax): and let the amount of cautery be ten punctures on every ear, approximately.
Then heal the spots until they are healed.
In the manner of cauterizing in a strain (torture).
Chapter VII.
A strain that is treated with cauterization, is not anything other than those types which occur due to phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
And avoid cauterizing species that occur due to exhaustion and muscle spasm.
When treating this species of strain with hyssop, mouth washings, and gargles, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the weakened area with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the second slightly lower than its own time (i.e., below the earlobe), and the third at the junction of the two lips (labia).
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the weakened area. Since softening does not occur unless in the healthy part.
And the shape of the cauterization is to cauterize with the cautery itself, along the tip of the upper part of the ear near the head slightly, and another at the earlobe; whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. Place your hand with the cautery until it is burned to a depth of half the thickness of the skin.
This is the form of Cautery, and it is made of a knife whose shape is as follows: however, it should not be too thin as you can see; it is necessary that the knife in it has little extra thickness.
Then take care of the places with it until they heal.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for apoplexy (ancient).
When apoplexy occurs and your treatment does not help, nor does the patient have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on every horn of his head, and a cautery in the middle of his head as previously stated, and a cautery in the back of his head according to what has been described; the method of cauterization should be as previously described.
Additionally, it is cauterized with a Cautery on the mouth of the stomach; this is more the final procedure.
Then it will be treated with what has been described before.
Chapter 9.
It is necessary that in drink there are firstly large quantities of hyssop, and pills cleansing the brain.
Then scrape the head of the sick person entirely, and place upon his occiput ointment described in the treatise on ointments, and place it repeatedly.
For this is the method of cauterization: and do that according to the same order as I said there.
If therefore he is cured by it, it is good. If not: then do three cauterizations on the back part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye: and place between every cauterization a thickness of a finger.
Then take care of the cauterization, with that which preceded.
If however you wish an addition, and the sick person can bear it: then do a cauterization in the middle. What if you wish an addition: then cauterize him above both horns.
Then take care of him until he is cured: and let the cauterization be anointed according to the shape that was mentioned before.
[Chapter Title] On the method of cauterizing in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter X.
You should proceed with the cleansing (munda) of the head with hyson (hyeeris), and with what was said.
Then scrape the head of the sick person: afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over behind it, and three over the vertebrae of the neck.
If, however, you need for the softening (mollification) of the body to be done with more of these things, and the patient is weak and the disease is strong: then cauterize it with four cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and the last one with a cautery, until the skin of most of it has been burned off, and wipe your hand. Then take care of him (the patient), until he is cured: thus cauterize with oil (Oliuare).
Chapter on the method of cauterization in epilepsy.
Epilepsy is not to be cauterized, unless that person's epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain of that person first with hyson (hyeris), and with the treatment we mentioned earlier: when the patient is very sick, or weak in accepting medicine.
If, however, the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medicine, then administer gargarisma, and cleansing mastication (masticationes) for the brain, before that for many days with good food.
Then scrape the head of that person, afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, as before (secundum quod praecessit in modo): and with another cautery on the back of his head, and over all the horns of his head with a cautery. If the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with the cauteries that were mentioned in the presence of paralysis, and the softening (mollification) of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and back: and let the cautery be oiled (Cauterium oliuare) as before.
If a child is sick, then place a subtle cautery in this manner.
On the method of cauterizing in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the Cauteries which we have mentioned in a person having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of declivities to melancholy and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him to drink what purifies his brain, according to what was mentioned in the division: then shave the head of the sick person, and make afterwards a well-made plaster made from linen, just like a circle.
Then place it on the middle of the head: and the sick person sitting facing all directions should be held.
Then bring a liniment. It is better from ancient sheep butter. And heat it over a controlled fire temperature that the finger can bear when it is inserted into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and leave it until it cools down.
Do this to the sick person once every week, with the rest of his good treatment regime, until he is cured.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small punctures in it, besides holding your hand with the cautery; it should be smelly.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with a certain quality.
Then put over it a cloth soaked in butter or goose fat.
On the method of cauterizing in water descending to the eye.
Book Thirteenth.
When the beginning of water in the eye is declared to you by the signs I mentioned in division, then begin and wash the sick person, with it to clean his head.
And keep him away from all moistness, and make him sit in a bath for several days while fasting.
Then command him to shave his head, and brand himself in the middle of his head. Then brand him with two cauteries on both temples, if there is an obstruction of water descending in both eyes at once: or from one side, if there is an obstruction of water in one eye: and cut with the cautery all veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauterizations be long in width equal to the temples: and avoid bleeding.
If you see something from him, then cut it off immediately with any medicine that is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes he should be branded on the neck, under two bones, with two cauteries that are pushed out to the utmost.
Chapter on the method of branding in tears (anciently).
When the tears of the eyes are old and constant: and they are on veins and arteries that are manifest on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is from superfluidities cold, phlegmatic: then brand with the same cautery as I mentioned in the obstruction of water descending, branding in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries on the neck under two bones. And if it is necessary to add, then brand him on all sides of the eye with caution, on the edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Method for Cauterizing in Nasal Foul Smell.
When you treat it as we have said in division, and the medication does not work: then hurry up, and give infirmocochia for three nights; afterwards, shave its head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with an oil-filled cautery. Then cauterize it with a pair of cauteries, two cauteries, on both eyebrows under the hair.
And keep away from the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the claw-shaped cautery.
Method for Cauterizing in Softening of the Eyelid.
When the eyelid of an eye is softened by illness or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with this lunar-shaped cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it over both eyebrows with two cauteries in all places; and they extend from the two temples: and let the length of the entire cautery be according to the length of the eyebrow: and do not go beyond the end with your hand, rather according to the amount that is burned by the third eyelash.
Method for Cauterizing the Eyelid when the hair turns inward and pricks the eye.
Cautery is in it according to two modes: either cautery with fire; or cautery with burning medicine.
In cauterio with fire, command the patient to shave his hairs beforehand if he is among those who clean them, until they are extended and evened out. If however they prick him at its origin: then constrict his eyes with adhesive until they do not move until they grow (healing).
When they grow and are evened out, then place the head of the patient in your lap; afterwards mark on the eyelid of his eyes with encaustic (wax), mark what is second in shape to a myrtle leaf; let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a cotton soaked in egg white or slippery elm gum on the eye.
Then heat the cautery, which has this shape (circular or spoon-shaped).
Then cauterize on the shape marked by you gradually at many spots, until the surface of the skin that is like a myrtle leaf, completely visible, is burned.
And the sign of your health work is: if you see that the eyelid of the eye already contracts, and hairs are rising at the prick on the eye.
Then lift your hand at that time; and release him for three days.
Then place on it a cotton with butter until the scab falls off. Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
If some hair grows back after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cautery on that place as you did at first.
If however the hairs are on the lower part (eyelash area): then cauterize it until they rise to their own place and become even so that they do not prick the eye again.
It is to be ordered for the sick one, that he lets go of hairs until they grow out and become equal. Make from linen cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and unabsorbed lime each a weight of ounce I or about that, then crush them together well with good grinding, and make it quickly so that it does not get cold. Then spread the paste on the cloth that you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf and place it over the eyelid of one or both eyes. And put under the eye, an egg yolk immersed in white of egg; and let the head of the sick one be in your lap.
And place your forefinger on the medicine and press it a little. And you move it as often as the sick one feels pain from the medicine; because its pressure is like fire.
While this pressure, which he feels as pain, continues, then release the medicine and move it with your finger. When the pain subsides, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And then consider if the eyelid rises as it does when contracted with fire or incision, this is good; and if not, then repeat the application of the medicine on the place where the medicine does not press or blacken until your operation becomes equal and the eye contracts.
Then place over it the yolk of an egg with butter until the skin of the burn is removed. Then treat him with a diaphine ointment or another one until he is healed.
And it is necessary for you during the operation that you keep the last guard so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes softened after days and something fights from hairs within the eye, then repeat the medicine on that place which becomes softened from the eyelid, as you did initially. Then cure it (the affected area) until it is healed.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And know that human eyes differ in size and smallness. Therefore according to that (knowledge), let your consideration be: and the path of righteousness for this art should not be hidden from you.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in the lacrimal fistula.
When you treat the fistula (lacrimal duct), and your treatment does not help as mentioned in the divisions of diseases, then it is necessary that you cauterize it using this method.
Command the patient to place his head in your lap and hold his head with one of your hands so that it is not moved or shaken along with his head.
Then place the cotton soaked in alcohol or slime of comfrey on his eye, then with a hot cautery whose shape is as follows.
Be concave like the shape of a goose feather quill from one end, with which the cautery is made: and if you want it to penetrate up to the other end, or if you want it to be extended upward, it should be thus shaped.
Nevertheless, this concave shape is better for your purpose.
Then open the fistula if it is open and remove the pus from it, and cut it (the affected area): and if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus.
Then place the hot cautery on it.
And hold your hand a little away from the cautery near the eye, by the nose, so that your hand does not slip or shake, and place the cautery on the fat of the eye and burn it.
If therefore you arrive at the beginning of your cautery until the bone, it will be well. And if not: then repeat the cautery once, or twice if necessary; and leave it for three days.
Then place a cotton with butter, and care for it with an incisive ointment, until it is healed.
What if it passes beyond forty days and is not healed: then place a sharp corrosive medicine on it until the bone appears; and shave it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another way of cautery for a fistula, which some of the first said. Direct yourself to the place of the fistula, and pierce it; then put in it a fine cannula, that is, a thin cannula, whose shape is this. And pour into it a quantity of drachmas made from melted lead, and hold your hand with good retention on the cannula, and do not move at all, so that the melted lead does not run or reach its eye.
And it is necessary that you put a hot cotton on the eye of the weak person, either in egg white or in water.
For lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it with a marvelous healing.
If the fistula is healed with what we said from cautery and cure, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a nostril hole, and lead the fistula to the nasal passage, according to what comes in its own place.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in fissures of the lips.
Multiple splits occur in the Lip, which are called Hairs, and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these splits, as we have said in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then apply small cautery with a knife, according to this shape.
And let its depression be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then place it [the heated tool] quickly into these splits, until the cautery reaches the depth of the splits.
Then treat it with pitch, until it is healed.
[Title] The method of cauterization in the Fistula of the Mouth.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and bursts; afterwards it becomes old, and pus runs, and a fistula is formed: then treat this fistula, and the treatment does not help in it, then it is necessary that you apply heat to the cautery according to its size, which can enter into the fistula. Then insert the heated tool into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand; until the iron becomes hot to its depth and end; do this once or twice.
Then treat it after that, as we have said about treatment, until it is treated.
If the pus is cut off and healed, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to remove the corrupted bone according to what comes out of its head.
[Title] The method of cauterization on softened gums and teeth.
When the gum softens due to moistures and teeth move, and care of it with medicines does not help: then place the head of the sick in your bosom.
Then apply fire to the cautery, whose form will come later, in such a way that you place the Cannula on the tooth and introduce into it the heated cautery quickly: hold your hand for a moment, until the sick person feels the warmth of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
Then remove your hand: then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
Then let the sick person fill his mouth with water and salt, and hold it for an hour: then spit it out.
For the tooth moved hardens, and softened gums contract, and dryness sets in to corrupt moisture.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing tooth pain.
When the tooth pain is due to coldness or has coldness itself, or worms, and care with medicines does not help: then apply cautery in it according to two modes: either cautery with butter; or cautery with fire.
The cautery with butter is such that you receive fresh butter, and heat it in an iron cauldron or in a ewer. Then take the bag and turn it over the end of the wound. Submerge it into boiling butter and place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it cools; then repeat this process several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
If desired, immerse wool or cloth in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth; then place a heated iron on it until the heat reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
Cauterization with fire is to prepare a copper or iron tube (cannula). Let there be something bulky in the body so that the sharp heat does not reach the weak bone.
Then apply fire to the cautery whose form will come; place it on the tooth and hold your hand until it cools.
Repeat this several times, as pain will subside either on the same day or another day.
It is necessary to fill the weakened bone with good butter and hold it for an hour; then spit it out.
This is the form of the cautery.
Cauterize with whatever shape you desire, provided it is possible; and this is the form of the cannula (tube).
Chapter on how to cauterize ulcers.
When worms are from phlegm, and from cold moistness, and do not obey digestion by medicines, and desire digestion quickly: then to a concave cautery, whose shape is this.
Having two open extremities, so that the smoke may leave at the other end of the cautery: and place it heated above the ulcer once, and a second time, if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the ulcer.
If the ulcer is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the ulcer.
Then let it be for three days, and place on it a cup full of butter heated, until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment, until the canal heals.
On the mode of cauterizing in swelling of voice, and constriction of breathing.
When moisture accumulates on the bronchial tube of the lung, and especially when it is accompanied by cold constitution, then it is necessary that the ill person first be evacuated with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it at the nose at the root of the throat in a hollow place: and be careful not to reach with the cautery at the throat, nor on the skin, unless something of that part is present.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck near the last vertebra of that joint: and let the cautery be small according to the manner which was mentioned earlier.
Then care for it with what has been mentioned before, until it is healed.
On the mode of cauterizing in diseases of the lungs and cough.
When cough and lung disease are from cold moistness, and the ill person does not have fever, nor phthisis, and the illness is neither old: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the clavicle in hollow, loose, open places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cautery be a cannula as described before.
And if you wish your cauterization to be by pricking with the cautery called "Punctum", whose shape was described before in the section on ear pain: let them be pricks of about thirty, up to another.
Then treat it with that same thing as before, until it heals.
And now let the cautery have three branches: in this shape. Why should cauterization be applied with it, when you perform it with one of the three cauteries.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head is dislocated due to the cause of humidity, and it does not return to its place within an hour after its dislocation, until that has become its custom for returning, then it should be dislocated again from a slight movement, as we have already testified, then you must first reduce the dislocation. Then the patient lies down on his back or on his healthy side. Then clean the skin that is inside the tickle towards the upper part with your left hand fingers: and if it is a union that is dislocated towards the inner parts.
Then take the cautery with two openings (cannulae). Its shape is as follows:
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates through to the other side, and the figure of cauterization with four cauteries will come.
And sometimes a cauterization occurs with a cautery having three prongs, whereupon the figure of cauterization becomes six cauteries: and the prongs are according to the thinness of the tendon.
And this is the form of a cautery having three prongs.
And sometimes one more is added to it, whereupon there are eight cauteries.
Then place over the cautery narrow strips of salted meat. Then make the patient remain still to avoid movement of the limb until it recovers.
And if a dislocation is upwards (rarely does this happen), then cauterize the same over the shoulder with an ironsmith's cautery or many puncturing cauteries.
For joints are strengthened and moisture is removed; and the sick person recovers.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When coldness and many humidities occur in the stomach until it is expelled from its composition and multiplied catarrhs are produced to it, and continuous methods of treatment fail, then the sick person must lie on his back, extend his legs and hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, an iron smith's cautery of the size of one finger at the sternum, and two cauteries below from the sides of one cautery, until a triangle figure of cauteries comes. And stretch them apart so they do not join when pus forms.
And the depth of the cautery should be the size of two finger-widths of skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be in this shape without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape, then let the cautery that is used for this cauterization be one in the shape of a circle according to this shape.
The stomach is to be cauterized by piercing it with a probe that frightens the patient from the cautery: and it is, as signs are placed on the stomach according to the quantity desired with wax: then cauterize it with the same cautery at the point pierced: then take care of it with the healing method that preceded until it heals.
On the method of freezing the stomach.
When pain arises in the stomach from coldness and humidity, or from thick vomiting until it has passed through its natural expulsion of excess, and the sick person is not cured by what was said, then the sick person should lie on his back on his neck, and signs with wax three cauteries according to this shape, and the same quantity below in the stomach near the hypochondriac region where the elbow reaches: and let the space between each cautery be as wide as a finger's thickness: and let the cautery be as long as the straight body: and do not press your hand too much with the cautery.
And let the quantity that is to be burned be taken from the thickness of the skin, but not increased in half: and let the sick person stand on his feet.
If he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has already stretched out his legs and raised his arms.
This is the shape of the cautery.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a surgical cautery, when subtlety and wisdom are present with you in the art.
And be careful not to advance too far in cauterization so that the entire thickness of the skin is burned, for the body is being burned entirely and it reaches the intestines; because the skin there is delicate, therefore know this.
On the method of cauterizing abscesses in the stomach.
When there is an abscess that needs to be opened, and you want to know if it is in the liver flesh or its sheath: then, if it is in the liver flesh, a weak pain and heaviness without sharpness will occur; and if it is in the liver sheath, with pain it will have a very intense sharpness; and you notice that the treatment of this abscess has exhausted the doctors.
Therefore, the weak person should lean his head back. Then shape the location of the abscess with the hot iron; then heat the cautery similar to a scalpel. And this is its shape. And cauterize it with the heated cautery until the entire skin is burnt and reaches the abscess cavity, until all pus is discharged; then treat the patient with the treatment of opening abscesses, until he is healed.
And this cautery shape should not be used, unless the person's interest in the art of medicine is prolonged; and through whose hands these diseases often occur with experience; then he may dare to perform such an operation.
But it is better for her to leave herself, in my opinion.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in pleurisy.
The ancients said that the cautery with the roots of Aristolochia should be applied to cold pleurisy in this manner. And you should take a dry root of Aristolochia with long roots; select the longest root from it, which is about the size of a finger. Then immerse it in oil and heat it over fire. Then cauterize it with one heated cautery in the area between the connection of the collarbone and neck, and with two small cauteries below slightly sloping cheeks on that side.
And with two cauteries also in it, which is between the fifth and sixth ribs sloping towards the back a little bit: and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries from the back: one in what is between the two scapulas: and two cauteries on both sides of the chest, the lower one being the one that is between the two scapulas.
And it is not necessary that you press your hand with the cautery, rather let it be in the open air smelling the skin.
And some ancient ones have said that there are men who use a cautery similar to a rod of iron, they heat it and put it inside what is between the ribs until they reach the abscess with it, and the pus comes out: as we said in the abscess of Epates.
But in this perforation with the cautery there is fear, that either the sick person dies immediately, or a fistula occurs at the place, which has no healing.
Chapter XXXII. On the method of cauterizing the Spleen Head.
When you treat the illness of the spleen, as we said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then there is cauterization in it according to three modes, which are all correct.
One of them is that you make three or four cauteries in a row along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the cauterizations of Epates, whose figure was previously mentioned.
And let the space between each cautery be the thickness of a finger, or more or less.
And let the mode of cauterization be equal to the one we mentioned in the cauterization of Epates.
And do not press your hand with the cautery, and let the sick person lie face down on his back.
Another method for cauterization is: hold a pair of cauteries, as we said in the chapter on dislocation of the humerus; and lift the skin, which is straight over the spleen, where the weak arm arrives; and let your elevation of the skin be according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall according to the length of the body.
Then introduce two hot irons very deeply, until they penetrate the skin from the other side; then extract one of the cauteries; thus four cauteries are made.
And if you want to cauterize with a cautery having three hot irons.
Then take care of the cautery after you have released it to emit pus for many days; indeed, this is more effective than the rest which preceded from treatment.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for hydropsy.
The cautery does not fall in hydropsy, unless it is properly applied.
When you treat a hydropsy patient with the methods of treatment mentioned in division, and the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two behind the loins, one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach; and let the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open cautery to emit pus for a long time.
And do not evacuate the weakened patient from treatment after cauterization with it; because two intentions must be assembled for him, and healing will hasten to him with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be clavicle-shaped; as its previous shape has been; and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive oil-shaped, as its previous shape has been.
On the method of cauterizing feet and legs.
When the feet or legs are sickly or fractured and filled with yellow water (i.e., pus): it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot, which is between the big toe and ankle; and take the cautery in hand without twisting it; then take the hand away; and do not reapply it at all.
The yellow water will run out, and the cautery should be of this shape.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be with the point of a knife-like cautery; and let the cautery be along the length of the leg, one below the knee and the other lower about halfway down the leg; and over the hip make two cauteries: and leave the open cautery for a long time without treatment until some water comes out from it; then treat it as we have said before.
On the method of cauterizing for abdominal dissolution.
Cum enim ventrem aliquis malignus, aut
When the abdomen is malicious or: when there is a dissolution of the abdomen due to cold and moistness, until its powers of retention and digestion are weakened in the stomach and intestines; and it is treated with methods of treatment, but does not heal; and you see an infirm person tolerating a cautery with excessive power, then cauterize it with a large cautery over its own stomach, according to the method used in cauterizing the stomach with a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the umbilicus, with a small sharp cautery; and a large cautery or two large cauteries on the alcatin above the navel.
And if you see excessive moisture and the infirm person tolerating it, then cauterize it with a cautery over the breastbone and over the whole ilium; and perhaps add two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach.
The progressing treatment, whose advantage does not wander.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When in the anus there are many old hemorrhoids or one, and they consist of thick, cold, or corrupted fluids, and they cannot be cured by what has been said in the division; then cauterize with three cauteries on the lower part of the back slightly triangularly below the almeidatum, and with a cautery near the navel as if with two fingers.
And if you consider that its stomach is chilled and food is not digested, and you see the face turning pale; then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery as described before; also cauterize the liver and spleen of his with another cautery, along with a cautery on the kidney; and leave the open cautery for some time; then care for him until he is cured.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you cut (open) althelul, then heat the cautery similar to a rod. Then insert the heated (cautery) into the cut althelul: and hold your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows; do this once or twice.
If there are many altheluls (abscesses), then cauterize each one with the cautery as I have said. Then take care of them (altheluls) with what you apply to them from ointments until they heal.
And if you cauterize it (the althelul) with a large cautery on the coal, it is more useful for healing.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing an anal fistula.
Chapter XXXVIII. (the thirty-eighth chapter)
If the patient does not obey the incision and operation as I have described at the place, and is afraid of it, he may heal with cautery.
When a fistula occurs and becomes chronic, pus flows from it, and the affected area is corrupted (putrid). Therefore, as is necessary, you should examine it with a probe of fine material. Then recognize the depth of it (the fistula) by probing with a probe.
Then heat the cautery that is similar to a rod. Then insert the heated (cautery) into the fistula and close the wound with a nail at the depth to which it was inserted.
And repeat the cautery over her (the fistula) until all the rotten flesh is burned away; do this once, twice, or three times according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerve or large vein if it is there; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or the intestine, then be careful about all these places.
And thou shalt not do that, except when the fistula is in a fleshy place: and consider, for it is not penetrating.
Then care for the place until it heals.
If the place is sealed and the matter is cut away from it, and it remains for a long time: then you shall know that it is healed completely.
And if the matter is not cut away from it, then you shall know that it is penetrating, or that the bone inside of it is corrupted, or as one of those (conditions) whose memory will come up in its place.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing Kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys from cold or gross wind and it diminishes due to weakness of the body, then it is necessary that you cauterize it on the upper part over the kidneys with a cautery on top of each kidney with a claw-shaped cautery, whose memory is mentioned earlier.
And perhaps we have cauterized it for the second time in the same almethenum (location). Why three lines will come. Therefore they will be more towards the benefit.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing Bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moistness, and the sick person is unable to retain urine, then cauterize it below in the lower part of the scrotum over the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and with one cautery from the right scrotum, and another from the left; and let the length of this cauterization on the side be according to the size of the knuckle of the thumb; and cauterize it with a lower back cautery, or with two cauteries, if necessary; and let it be according to the preceding cauterization with a nail.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to cold and moisture, causing the sick person to be unable to retain urine, then
When the bladder is afflicted by cold and moisture and is unable to be impregnated, the menstrua are corrupted and their provocation is delayed, causing pain during their arrival, then it should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a lower back cautery or two: let it be with a nail-shaped cauterium.
If the anus is displaced in a dislocation, then cauterize it on both sides of the anus, equally from the left and right side, using one cautery for
If the moist mucous effuses to the vagina and cause its exit from its place, and a sign of this is that one leg prolongs over the other when they are compared together; and a hollow spot is found in it where the dislocation occurs: then cauterize it equally on both sides of the anus using one cautery each.
Therefore, it should be cauterized over the vagina of the sick person using a similar circular cautery: After you mark the circumference of the vagina with the encaustrum, as described; and let the vagina fall into the center of the circle.
If this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, using a large oily one; and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the whole skin.
Then care for it until it heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and its cause is coldness and moistness: and the sick person is treated as we said in the division, but the treatment does not help, and it worsens: then it is necessary that you release the sick person from thick fluids with foul pills or artificial pills, or similar ones. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization is done according to two methods: either cauterization with medicines advancing, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with fire, is according to many ways.
One of these is, to cauterize over the ankle joint itself with three triangular cauteries in this shape. And make a good or bad depth for them. And let the space be between every cautery of thickness of a finger's length: and let the cautery be to oil.
Occasionally, however, cauterization is made in the middle over the ankle joint itself. Why are there four cauteries?
If you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose shape precedes the ankle joint dislocation, one: so that it contains the entire ankle.
And burn the thickness of the skin all around.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica, when the pain is adhering to the ankle itself, and it does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, at the place where the sick person indicates, where there is pain, and your cautery four fingers on the side of the forest part: and let the cautery be a knife.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the sick person indicates that the pain extends to near the toes of the foot, then cauterize it there where he indicates with a cautery of points, three, or four, or more if needed.
And if he indicates that the pain is turned towards the leg from the foot, then cauterize it there with a single-pointed cautery.
And be careful with every cauterization in your work, so as not to burn the nerve or a large artery, and thus attract harm upon the sick person or constriction.
I myself have seen one and another of those who cauterized above the hock, and burned too much in cauterization, and the leg swelled so that the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated all over, and the entire foot rotted; then there followed rupture of the abdomen, and death after that.
If the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize both according to this method.
And some wise men have said that in cauterizing the ankle, this method of cautery should be used. Make a small iron rod similar to the thumbnail in size and thickness; and within its opening, there should be a third of that small iron.
And the space between each small iron should be as much as the knuckle of the thumb; and let the small irons have openings on both sides; and let their height be like a knuckle, or two knuckles; and make handles of iron well-suited for the small irons.
Then it (the small iron) is heated in fire until it turns red and emits sparks; then it should be placed on the box of the ankle on the sick person lying down on the healthy side. Cauterize him with three round irons at once.
Then let him go for three days. Afterwards pack it with butter: and let the open wound heal for many days. Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis says, in this manner of cautery, we have not been often employed, because of the fear of its appearance: and therefore, few are found who wait upon it.
Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauterizations for him who endures it, and finds a place for it.
The cautery with stimulating drugs is, that you should make two pieces of silk having a perforated thread, into which descends the key of his gate from brass or iron, the length of the wall: whose knots in their height are two, or as if they were themselves.
And let there be the space which is between both of equal thickness to a finger, and let them be open below and above: and let it hold together on either side, according to this form.
Then place it upon a box of an oar, a weak one lying upon the healthy side. And press your hand much upon the box of the oar. Then pour between the two circles from warm water, which is heated slightly with fire and hold it for an hour's time: and let the weak one endure its biting and burning, for he himself finds the biting as if by fire, until the biting ceases.
Then wash your hand with the instrument and clean the oar with warm water together with sweet water: then let it go for three days.
And place butter upon it until the blackness of the burning is removed: and let it go for some days, and let pus run out from it. The remedy is at last in help.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg: make a setting in it that contains water, as you did with the ankle, equally.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medications. Take equal parts of lime and unburnt chalk; grind each one separately, and put them in a new pot whose lower part is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that will be added to it; place another earthenware pot underneath; pour on top of the lime and chalk from sweet water, so that they are submerged by a finger's depth; when you have compressed them with your hand, let it stand until the water descends in the lower part of the earthenware pot.
Then gather that water altogether and pour it over another lime; cook until it returns.
For indeed, it will then be very strong for sharpness, which is used in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of other body parts. Because it performs the action of fire itself.
And among the medications are those with which anchors and also stitchwort, walnut honey, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed. [The rest of the sentence is missing.]
And Galen indeed reported the cure of a certain man from ancient times, who was cured of pain in the anchor and sciatic vein; he praised it very much. And he said that it did not need any other cure, and because he was cured from the first application, until he reported that perhaps he himself had entered a bath carried there, and came out already healthy from it.
And it is to be taken from green seedage; and if no green seedage is found, dry ones should be gathered, recently; they must be ground thoroughly with some fat, and placed on the anchor where there is pain, or leg, or hip: and tied, and left for three hours' quantity, or until the patient feels relaxation of burning. Then insert him into a bath (or tub).
When his body becomes hot, insert him (the instrument) into the bed (of fire or coals). Pain retreats and it heals.
And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that goat dung, when cauterized with it on the sciatic vein, brings this about: and it becomes a cautery in this way. Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on a deep place that is between the toe of the foot and the heel, and closer to the heel.
Then take dry goat dung and heat it in fire until it becomes coal.
Then place it on the wool and let it rest until it is extinguished. Repeat this again. Do not stop doing that until sensation reaches the ankle through the intermediary and pain ceases.
And this method of cautery is called the cautery of goat dung.
Section on the Cauterization of Back Pain.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back from various causes, either from falling, striking, excessive evacuation, and similar ones, or from the infusion of cold and moist matter: and cautery does not fall except in this single case, which is made by the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the sick with fetid pills, and similar ones, they should be made over the back where there is pain, three lines according to the width of the almud itself, after signs have been made with wax in every line, five or more cauteries according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the sick person: and let the cauterization be done with a cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries, together with the middle claw-shaped cautery, according to this shape.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in the swelling of the Hump (Gibbositas).
Often this illness occurs in small children.
The sign of its beginning in children is that it happens on him constriction in panting during lifting and movement: and you find at the end of the vertebrae of the back and nodes of it, which has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When you see that and wish to do it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery shaped like this.
And let the cautery encompass all parts of the vertebrae equally: and if you wish, cauterize around the vertebrae with a pointed cautery two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
Then care for the place until it is healed as we have said.
And beware not to administer cautery on a hump that occurs due to muscle spasm.
On the method of cauterization in gout, and the pains of the joints.
When the pains of the joints are caused by cold and moist humors spreading to any part of the body, and when the pain is in the feet, it is customary among physicians to call this gout properly.
Since, therefore, when gout caused by cold is treated with means of treatment and the pain does not subside, then a cautery removes them.
And it is to be cauterized with him after evacuation around the joint of the foot, with many cauteries; and let the cautery be Olivar.
And if you need to prick the sole of the foot, then do so with a cautery for pricking. If the pain ascends to the knees or other joints and this often occurs, then cauterize it over the entire knee with three or four cauteries from all sides, using the same cautery as Clavius.
If more cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, rather let it be about the thickness of the skin.
If the pain ascends to the knees and back: then administer what was said concerning cautery in its own chapter.
If the pain is only in the hands: then prick around the nails as two lines are rolled.
If some of the pain remains in the fingers: then prick them all over each nodule and on the back of the hand.
If the pain ascends after several days to the elbows or shoulders: then cauterize both from all sides.
And do not evacuate a weak person from good diet and medicine intake. If good care is taken and phlegm is evacuated, healing will be aided by the help of God with this cautery.
On the method of cauterization for ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groins and the intestine or scrotum descends, and it begins close by: then it is necessary that you advise the sick person to abstain from food on his own day. He should use purgatives, so that he may pass stool from his bowels.
Then he should lie down on his back before you, and you should command him to hold his breath until the scrotum or the intestine appears.
Then you should reduce him with your fingers and make a mark with hot wax at the rupture on his chest, with a sign whose end is similar to half of a circle above the body.
Then apply cautery with this shape until it becomes white and expels pus. Then reduce the intestine or scrotum into its hollow. Then the assistant shall place his hand on the place so that the intestine does not come out; and you have already opened between the legs of the sick person, and you have placed a pulley under him, and one servant above his thighs, and another above his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on the mark, with your hand holding it straight. And hold him until you follow the bone with it; or replace him with another if you do not reach the bone with it the first time until the bone.
And be careful to observe the exit of the intestine during your cautery operation, lest you burn him, and a great evil or death come upon the sick person through it.
And know that when you do not follow the bone with the cautery, the operation does not help.
It is necessary that the cautery be small for children, according to their measure.
Then care for him with ointments until he is healed.
The patient lies down on his back for forty days until the wound is healed.
It is necessary that you place food for him in accordance with the duration of his cure, to soften his stomach, so that the intestine does not come out during surgery or evacuation.
Then, when he wants to perform surgery after forty days, then administer a well-made ligature and hold it for forty other days.
Let him be reduced by work, let him be filled with food and drink, and let him be silent with strong voices.
For when using this regimen, he will heal with complete healing.
And I say the treatment of ruptures with incision in its own chapter.
When ruptures occur in the rest of the abdomen, and they are starting and want to be added, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautionery in accordance with its size: and let that which is burned from then on be like a third of it. Then take care of him, as I said before: do not add anything.
And some have said in the beginning: that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautionery in this shape.
After it is signed with a hot iron and a line is placed which is across the width at the top of the rupture, and another line down below. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery tongs.
But the first cauterization is easier and better.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in pain due to rupture or injury.
Chapter 48.
When there is pain in some parts due to rupture or injury and the pain persists for a long time and does not cure with medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a puncture cautionery.
And let the cautery be for each member according to its size and its own smallness and weakness, and also according to its strength, and its location of twisting, and pain from it.
If he is cured by the first cautery, it is well. If not: then repeat the cautery upon him.
Because it is a custom for these pains that they are changed from one member to another which is closer to it. Therefore, you must pursue them with the cautery until the sick man is cured.
Chapter on the manner of cauterizing in Leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes helped by a great extent by cautery. And especially the species of Leprosy which arises due to corruption of phlegm and melancholy: when therefore you wish to cauterize it, consider this.
If leprosy is beginning and you have treated it as we said in the division, and it does not abate nor stabilize: then fear for the sick person, lest corruption spread over his entire body; then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second lower toward the forehead near the end of the hairs, and two over the two horns, and one behind over the nuchal bone.
And the last [cautery] press your hand slightly with the cautery until it makes an impression smaller than a finger, and the scales will be dislocated from it; so that the expiration of gross vapors from it is relieved, and cauterize also the spleen with the cautery according to what preceded.
If leprosy is already spread over the sick person and is manifestly apparent: then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries which we said in the head, and a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on the cheeks, and two cauteries on the shoulders, and six on the spondyles of the back, and one large one over the alhahosos near the greater trochanter and one above it in the same almeidat: and two over the ankles: that is, over every ankle with one, and two over the knees, and two over the elbows, and two over the wrists, and two over the tendons of his breast; and cauterize him over all the joints, from the joints of his fingers of his hands and feet, and cauterize over all the calcanei of his feet, and the soles of his hands.
Beware not to burn the nerves that are above the last calcaneus (heel bone).
Whenever cauterized with a cautery on the chin, and another on the breast, and another on the epigastrium (upper abdomen).
And know that as much more you add cautery, it is more beneficial and more effective.
And know that the sick do not feel pain in cautery as healthy ones do, for this reason, because his body is already numb.
Cauteries should be of different sizes and shapes according to the limbs and joints; this depends on the type of instruments that preceded.
Then, treat the cautery with flour from a plant mixed with honey, and the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Section on Cauterizing in Epilepsy.
When a limb is numbed and treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and yet it does not heal, then the affected limb should be cauterized with cauteries, according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery go in slightly deeper than the skin's thickness. Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
Whenever a cautery is applied for numbness that occurs in the hand or foot, at the joints of the back near the nerve exits that move that limb, the numbness is removed.
But do not presume to apply it unless you are wise about the anatomy of limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
Chapter LXI.
When Albaraz becomes gangrenous and no medicine is applied to it: then cauterize over the affected area with a deep cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the white disappears and its color changes.
Then care for it with a mixture of barley flour and lentils with rose oil, arnoglossa leaves, dove blood, and heron blood. Each ingredient should be an equal part. Mix all these together, soak the cloth in the mixture, and apply it to the affected area until it heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for cancer.
When a cancer is beginning, and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference, as it rotates.
The wise have said that it should be cauterized with the ultimate cautery in the middle.
That does not seem good to me, for I fear it will burn: and I have already seen that happen several times.
It is more correct to cauterize around its circumference with a circle, as we said before: or with many cauteries.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in adubelation.
When someone has adubelation and it slows in maturation, either due to excessive matter causing it or because the person is old and weak with few blood vessels, or because of time and a desire to hasten the maturation of adubelation: then cauterize around its circumference with many small puncturing cauteries. Then let it go. For it will hasten when it matures.
If you wish to make a perforation with the cautery: then heat the cautery in fire, and this is its form.
And place it in the middle of the adubelation until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be weak after that, to alleviate the course of the purgatives.
Then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in a rotten wound.
Chapter LIIII.
Corrosion is not unless it is walking corruption in a limb, and it consumes itself: just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see a corrosion in a place that can bear cautery with fire, then apply much cautery, small and large nails according to what suits the place where the corrosion is present.
Then cauterize it from every part until you eradicate the entire corrosion, and no part of it remains deep within.
Then let it rest for three days and put over the cauterized places finely ground sulfur with oil until all scabs are removed and the entire corrosion is eradicated.
Then treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth.
If after three days you see new flesh growing healthy, without any corrosion, it is good.
And if not: then apply cautery again to the remaining parts of the corrupted places.
Corrosion is sometimes treated with an acute medicine. It arises where cautery was applied.
Nevertheless, cautery with fire is quicker in help. And I have already said that the cauterization of it with an acute medicine is useful in division; take it there when you need it.
Chapter on how to cauterize nails and warts.
Chapter 50.
It often happens that this sickness occurs in the lower parts of the feet and it is a serious condition, filled with pus, which damages the foot.
Cauterization is done in these cases in two ways: cauterization with fire and cauterization with hot water.
As for the cauterization with fire, it is done by heating a concave cautery similar to a vulture's feather, made of iron according to the size needed to hold the nail from all sides; and the edges should be thin.
Then place the hot iron on the nail. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail; and leave it for three days until it begins to emit pus. Then plaster it with malves from the forest, crushed with salt; and leave the plaster on it at night. It will be uprooted by its roots.
Then care for the place with a gentle ointment until it heals.
If they are not converted and occur frequently on the surface of the body, particularly in hands and feet; then administer cauterization with hot water: and it is that you receive a cannula from brass, iron, or from an eagle's feather; and place it on the nail, or the sore. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the cannula: hold your hand and turn it with a slight compression to print the edge of the cannula on the root of the nail, and let the hot water find its way deep to the root of the nail; and let the weak person wait a little while for the biting of the hot water for an hour.
Then leave it, for the nail will be uprooted with its roots.
Do this to each one separately, until you come upon all that are in the body.
Then care for them after they have been uprooted, with what generates flesh from ointments.
\*\*On the Method of Cauterization in Tremor.\*\*
When trembling occurs in a person due to cold in the nerve, or quartan fever, or something else: then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the dorsal spine, and between every spine with a cautery, and in its chest with a cautery, and over its stomach with a cautery.
For trembling quiets with the cauterization of oil, and hastens the health of the cold illness.
§ On the method of cauterizing Albathir.
Head LVII.
At times, foul matters called Albathir (boils) are expelled from the body; these boils arise from corrupted thick substances.
Therefore, when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize the entire head of each boil with a fine cautery and myrtle wood, whose tip has been ignited with fire. Or, if with a long root of Aristolochia (Snakeweed). Or with a concave cautery.
And sometimes, the cauterization of ademeanol (a type of abscess) is done at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; they do not increase and the excess is broken causing them to discharge pus, from which they heal.
However, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy (bloodletting).
Chapter on the method of cauterization during blood flow from an artery in a wound.
It often happens that blood flows from an artery, which has been cut near a wound, due to external causes or during the incision of an abscess, or cauterization of a limb, and similar cases; it is difficult to separate it.
When this happens to someone, then quickly place your hand at the opening of the artery and put your index finger on it; press it tightly until the blood is contained under your finger and nothing can be expelled from there.
Then place a small olive oil-coated cautery in the fire and many more of them; blow on it until they are lit very well.
Then take one of them, small or large, depending on the wound and the location where the artery has been torn; place the cautery over the vein and then remove your finger quickly; hold the cautery until the blood is cut off.
If it is expelled with the finger from the opening of an artery, and the cautery is extinguished, then take another cautery hastily, from those that are prepared in fire.
Therefore do not cease to do that (the procedure) one after the other, until the blood is cut off.
And beware lest you burn the nerve which is there, and another harm befalls the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to cut it (the artery); especially because the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it (the artery) is drawn out, the ends are contracted, and the blood is cut off. Or it is tied with a strong thread. Or medicines of the property for cutting off blood are placed upon it (the artery), and it is squeezed with a proper ligature.
Whoever administers the cutting off (of the artery) with a ligature and compression with a cloth, or placing of burning things and similar items, does not completely restore him (the patient), unless rarely.
If that (the procedure) should happen to anyone and the physician is not present nor medicine: then let him begin with the position of the index finger over the opening of the vein itself, as we have said, and with very strong compression, until the blood is obstructed from the superior part of the wound, and on the artery. And let the finger not be removed from above it (the artery) with cold water of violent coldness always, until the blood is frozen, thickened and cut off.
And meanwhile let him consider in it (the wound) what requires a cautery or medicine.
On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds, and Such Like Things.
As we have said in the first chapter, every illness where cautery with fire and burning medicine is suitable, its occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries.
And I set there chapters from the neck down to the feet.
And I shall proceed in this chapter along the same path, so that what is sought may be clarified for those who seek it.
And before I begin that (discussion), you sons must know what is in this chapter from the fear which was mentioned in the first chapter about cautery.
And for this reason it is necessary that there be a greater caution in this, because in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation often falls with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein or incision on an abscess, or the opening of a wound, or treatment of wounds, or extraction of arrows, or incision on a stone, and such like: from all of which is associated tremor, fear, and death occurs in many cases.
And I warn you that it does not happen to you what is hesitant, for sometimes men of this art fall into your hands like weak ones. For there is one who gets angry with his illness, and death is easy for him because of the intensity he finds from weakness and the length of his wickedness. And when it comes from fear, it signifies death.
And there is one who gives his guaranty and pays you along with it, hoping for health, but his illness is fatal.
Therefore, it is not appropriate that you agree with him who comes to you from those whose method is such. Let your caution be more intense than your greed and rapacity. And do not presume about anything from it unless after certain knowledge which verifies at your place the successful outcome.
And in treating all your sick people, make prognosis and indication concerning that which is appropriately healthy.
For there is help for you in the acquisition of fame and glory, as well as memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His understanding, and may He not remove from you guidance and inspiration, for that is in His hand.
And I myself have arranged this chapter by dividing it into sections according to what preceded in the chapter on Cautery, from neck to feet: so that you may be relieved of what is sought from it and what you need.
Chapter on Treating Water That Gathers in Children's Heads.
Section I.
Know that this weakness frequently occurs in children during childbirth: or when the midwife tightens the child's head without ease.
And it sometimes happens due to an unknown cause which is not known.
And indeed, I have not seen this illness in others than children; and death approached every one of them whom I saw from them; therefore it seemed to me that the operation should be avoided in it.
And indeed, I have seen a child whose head was full of water and his head grew great every day until he could not sit on himself due to the size of his head; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture, indeed, either collects between the skin and bone; or it collects under the bone above the brow ridge.
And the operation on it, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a fissure in the middle of the head, one opening wide; and let the length of the fissure be like two knuckles, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the form of trephining (spatumilis).
If therefore the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then place two fissures, according to this form (trephining).
And if the moisture is under the bone, and there is a sign of it, which you see that the joints of the head are open everywhere; and water sinks when you press it with your hand to the inside, and it does not hide from you; then it is necessary to make three fissures in the middle of the head, according to this method.
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. Then tighten the fissures with bandages and lints. Then pour oil and wine over it until the fifth day.
Then cut the ligament, and care for the wound with sutures and ointments.
And do not let the head be bound equally. Feed the sick man with dry food of little moisture until the limb recovers and heals.
Another method of incision is to consider where the size of the abscess appears, and collection of water.
Because sometimes it is more in the skull, or in the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore, with the incision, go where you see the abscess and filled water: and cut it as much as possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause a blood flow, and let the sick man die from this flow along with the evacuation of moisture.
[Section heading] On incisions of arteries after the ears.
Chapter II.
When someone suffers from catarrhs on the eyes or chest and it becomes chronic and does not improve with medical treatment: then the final cure is more in him, incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when one wishes to make an incision there (on the affected area), let him shave his head. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then let him tighten his neck with any of his cloths. Then observe where the vein pulses. And these places are places that are depressed behind the ears: and they are rarely hidden except in some men.
Then mark both with pitch (or wax): and make an incision on both sides with a spatula or sharp tool, the incision reaching the bone: and let it be done along the width of the head.
And if one wishes, introduce the spatula under the artery, and make an incision upward with the incision.
Let the length of the incision be like two fingers joined together.
For when an artery is cut, blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which leaps to the interior with frequent jumps.
If, however, the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary that measurements from the ear determine the size of three fingers' space. Then mark both with pitch (or wax) and make an incision up to the bone.
And what must be released from the blood is about 6 ounces, and you may possibly release more or less from it. All of this according to the quantity that appears to you from the strength of the disease and the filling of its artery.
Then observe at the wound. Then if there remains any of the flesh at the bone, then cut it so that a hot abscess does not occur: then tighten the wound with linen rags.
Then care for him with an ointment until he is healed.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When an old hemiplegia or acute catarrh due to acidic humoral excess and heat in the neck muscles, or an old sclerosis, violent, and similar conditions occur in a man, and it is treated with methods of medication, but there is no improvement: then we have experience in dealing with such diseases by extracting arteries from the neck or cauterizing them, as we have said.
The method of operation for extracting them (arteries) is as follows: shave the sick hairs that are on the neck, and stretch to the visible artery in the neck. It is indeed evident to you by its pulse and rarely hidden except in a few men or in case of violent coldness.
If it is hidden to you, then let the sick person tighten his head with any cloth of his own and then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or apply heat to the place with warm water until it appears clearly to you. Then take the spatula that I have prepared earlier. Then scrape the skin with it (the spatula) easily until you reach the artery. Then plunge a hook into it (the artery) and pull it upwards until you extract it from the skin, and make it escape from all sides from the layers beneath it.
If the artery is fine: then insert the tip of the hook into it. Then cut off that portion according to its length where the ends are extended and contracted so as not to cause bleeding. For if it is not cut and not separated, blood does not rise deep inside.
Then evacuate the blood to six ounces up to three-quarters.
If the artery is large: it must be tied in two places with strong double thread, silk or catgut, or with a twisted linen strip, so that decay does not occur near it before the wound heals and bleeding occurs.
Then cut the excess, which is between two ligaments. Do this at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone, with a small cautery: until its ends are cut and it remains in place for that same operation.
It is better work unless if the patient has fever, or has a warm constitution. Because the cautery is from those things that help to end moisture. Therefore it is better treatment.
And after the removal of the artery, it is necessary that the place be filled with cooked clay from ancient times; and little balls made of clay should be placed on top of it.
And after the solution, it will be cleaned with dry medications that promote growth of flesh, and with linen cloths until it heals.
If during the operation bleeding occurs from the artery, then hasten to cut it with a cautery, or to fill the place with wax; and press your hand until the blood stops flowing. If nothing from these is present to you, then place your finger on the place until the blood freezes. And pack the place with water of intense cold, until the pain subsides and it is tied as necessary.
And because the vein is lighter and easier to remove, it is to be cauterized with this cautery having two small blades; and the sharpness of the two blades should resemble a lancet. Nevertheless, they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they are sharp like two knives, cold is needed for both of them; and they do not cut flesh with speed. Since there is a certain thickness in them, heat from fire must be held within them and the flesh is cut quickly; therefore this work is better than any other, and lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space between two knives be the thickness of a finger, after you mark two places with hot iron; and place both heated ones until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between its ends can be removed. They do not coagulate completely with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
Chapter on the care of sharp, frequent epiphora from the eyes.
When the tears are frequent and the flow is from veins on the outside of the skull; and no medicine for their cure is applied to them with medicines; and you see the face of the sick already reddening, and he feels a wandering in his forehead like the wandering of ants; and his eyes are weakened, wet, so that the hairs of them have already been corroded by corrosion; and the eyelids have been heated by the acuity of the tears: then the ancients used this operation for their cure, and they named it treatment with the sword.
And it is to be ordered that the sick person should shave the hairs on his forehead. Then make three cuts in the forehead, equal in length to the forehead; and let the length of the cut be about two fingers, and one cut should be in the middle of the forehead, and the second, a little below the movement of the arms, and the third on the opposite side: and avoid cutting the arteries that are on both sides; and extend your hand from the continuation of the lower jaws, and let the entire length of the cut be the size of three connected fingers: and prepare for yourself a piece of sponge or dry cloth with which to squeeze the blood.
Then insert a double-ended probe (spatula) with sharp tips, which follows its shape immediately. From the first incision that is on the side of the temple, until the second incision: and excise with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, along with the sifak (sinus frontalis) that is above the eye. Then do the same from the central incision until the second incision. Then extract this probe and insert into the first incision another tool called a sharp scalpel, blunt on one side but not on the other. And this is its shape.
And position its sharp side towards the attached flesh with skin and its blunt side towards the bone; push it in until it reaches the midline, and cut with it all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes, except where the incision continues until it appears on the skin.
Then do this along the midline up to another fissure (incision).
And when an equal amount of blood has flowed out, squeeze the places from the clotted blood fragments.
Then put a linen cloth soaked in old oil (or wine or vinegar) into every incision and cover them with small pieces of wool soaked in water, oil, or vinegar. And be careful not to cause a hot abscess (infection).
On the third day, loosen the bandage and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then treat it with basilicon ointment and the other ointments used to heal wounds until it heals.
Chapter 5.
Chapter on the treatment of acute tears (eye discharge) and catarrhs of the eyes from within the skull.
When someone experiences acute and intense catarrhs or tears that are persistent, you see their eyes weakened, small, and their appearance is already debilitated; and their eyelids are ulcerated, hairs fall out from them, and there is a sharp pain deep within the skull, which causes sneezing; then take action on these symptoms when this happens, because those substances and catarrhs do not come unless from many veins.
A better treatment for them is this. And it should be ordered that the sick person shave his forehead. Then make one incision in the middle of the forehead, or slightly to one side, and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right temple; let the incision go as far as the bone; and move your hand away from the temples which move during chewing, until the bone is exposed; then dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the fissure between the two lips with a spatula or with flax from linen. Then bind it above with thread; and dip the threads in wine and oil, so that no hot abscess occurs.
And when you release it, and see that the abscess is about to burst; then it is necessary to fracture the bone, until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then treat the person with a drying regimen that makes flesh grow; as if you were to take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony; and prepare a plaster from them, and administer it for the growth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter 6.
Chapter on the care of an ear wound.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or something like a stone, such as iron and wood; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is fluid, such as water, vinegar, and similar substances; or it is some animal.
When a stone or something like a stone falls into the ear, which does not grow in the ear, lay open the ear; if you see the stone, then pour some oil of roses or sesame into the ear. Then administer the extraction and make it cause sneezing with powder, and insert oil at the nostrils during sneezing; after you place in the ear's edge fragments from cloth or wool, and stretch the ear upward.
For many times, it goes out with this care.
If it does not come out, then administer the extraction with Geppi, that is, finely-powdered pigeon droppings; whose shape is as follows.
If therefore it comes out with Geppi, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction with a finely-sharpened blind hook in small doses.
If therefore it does not come out by that, then make a cannula of bronze and insert the end of the cannula into the ear's hole as much as possible; and insert what is in the circumference of the cannula with softened wax mixed with oil, so that there is no path for wind but the cannula; then draw it out with your strong attraction of wind.
For many times, it comes out by what we have said. If it does not come out by this method, then take from helkalimbat or from vinegar (that is, prepared gluten), a small amount; and place it at the end of the radius after you have placed a well-centered piece on top of it; then insert it into the ear's hole with ease, after you have removed the ear from humidity.
If therefore it does not come out by all that we have said, then hurry to cut it before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
And the method of cutting is that a lancet is applied first to the head; and draw blood from it according to its power. Then make the patient sit between your hands, and turn the ear upward, and make a small incision in the base of the ear near the fat in a depressed place; and let the incision be crescent-shaped until you reach the stone; then remove it with what is possible for you using instruments.
Then, open your wound at your hour (time) with speed, and care for it until it heals.
If something falls into the ear from among the grains that grow and swell, then administer its removal (extraction).
But if it does not obey your attempt to come out, then take a thin, fine pledget, shaped as such.
And administer with it the removal of that kind (species) of grain from those that fall into the ear and do not come out; and do not do this when you believe that the grain is already moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you place many fragments (pieces) thereon: then remove it with tweezers, or with a thin stick, or with suction, as we said, for its extraction will be facilitated.
In water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the sick person to use sneezing with incision at first; and already his ear has been filled with some warm water; and there lies on top of it (the water) the ear. If therefore it comes out through that (opening), it is good.
And if not: then take many small, soft stones (pebbles), and warm them slightly with fire; and the sick person shall insert one of these into the ear's opening; and let him spit on one foot from that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone that is in the ear. Therefore, he should not cease doing it with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out in such a way that you shall take one from parchment or reed and insert its end into the ear; and you shall light the other end with fire until it is burned much of it. Then take another reed and do this repeatedly until all the water comes out; and remove it with a syringe according to what was said about the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into it [the wound], if it is small like a louse, and similar to it, care should be taken as I have said in division.
But if it is of a large body, which appears to the sense: then administer its extraction with forceps and tweezers; and its removal is easier for all who are required to pull it out from the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you care for it with what I have said in division, and in treatment of distillation, and your care does not help: then it is necessary that you look at the ear in sunlight. If therefore something appears there [in the ear] of worms, then extract it with forceps, or with fine tweezers.
But if nothing appears there [in the ear], then take a cannula whose form is constricted below and wide above; and insert its fine end into the ear according to the quantity that the sick person can bear; then suck with strong suction. Do this often until all worms come out.
If they do not obey you for exiting, then surround the head of the worms with a cannula and beeswax, as I have said in stone [a chapter about treatment with ointments].
If they do not come out with what I have said, then administer the distillations that were experienced by the ancients in killing worms; and you will find it in treatment of distillation.
And let your flow be with oil and medicines into the ear with this tool, whose shape is depicted here. Make it [the instrument] of silver or brass, constricted below and wide above, with a small hole.
Let the pressing part which is on the concavity of the cannula be made of well-made brass. And if you wish, take the radish, and insert it into the ear opening with a suitable lining: then pour oil, or juice, or whatever medicine you prefer into the cannula; let it be in gold: then insert the radish with the cooked [substance] on top, and press it gently with your hand until the oil is driven into the hollow of the ear, and the sick person feels it inside: and whatever is poured into the ear, let it already be heated slightly with fire: and take care that no substance which distills very cold is put in it; for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter 7.
On the Care of Ear Blockage (Auris).
When some infants are born from the wombs of their mothers without perforated eardrums.
It also happens to some people that ear blockage occurs in the cavity of the Ear due to a wound or flesh born in it.
And this blockage sometimes occurs deep within the Ear's cavity, which is not visible to the eye; and sometimes it happens near the outer part of the cavity, which can be seen by the eye.
Therefore, that which occurs deep within the Ear and is not apparent to the eye, is difficult to cure in many respects.
And in that which can be seen by the eye, one must place the sick person's Ear on the sun and observe it; then if you see the blockage appearing, open it with a fine spatula whose shape is as follows: its end should have a small notch, part of which is sharp; and the rest of the spatula should be flat on both sides so as not to injure the Ear.
If the blockage is due to flesh born in the Ear cavity: then hold it with a fine hook and cut it out gently but powerfully until all the flesh is removed.
If there is an opening in the deep part of the ear: then take subtle radium, leno, and heat it slightly with fire; afterward send it into the ear's flesh.
If you find that the patient is weakened by illness with hearing difficulties, try to open it (the ear) easily; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Then place linen in the ear according to the size of the opening you made, wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed.
Or take linen and soak it in rose water, sprinkle powdered alum over it, and use it (as a poultice).
If you see that the ear is already suppurating: then it is necessary to remove the linen and allow it to be covered with another piece of linen, wrapped in a cerotto made with rose oil, until the warm suppuration settles; then take care of it until it heals.
If there is bleeding (occurring): then immerse sponges or cloths in cold water and place it on the ear; and use the rest of the treatment that removes the mentioned bleeding in the section on distillations.
Chapter on Altheli's Treatment for Eyes (Eyelids)
Chapter VIII.
These are the Althelils that occur in the eyelids, which are sometimes wet and are sometimes dry.
Therefore, you must hold them with forceps or tweezers: or with a hook, and cut them at their roots with a spatula. Then place it over the place of the bite, grinded.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a thin lentil-shaped cautery.
And it is better to cauterize them after the incision. They often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter on the care of the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter IX.
It often happens in the eyelids that something similar to a crab occurs, which is hard and tough, and because of this it is called a crab; and it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper eyelid, and the lower eyelid.
Therefore, the procedure in them is to examine if there is a crab emerging from it, which appears on the eyelid, and they move around in all directions, and its substance is soft.
Find a split on her (it) in width. Then scrape it from all sides easily, until it comes out. Then hang it with a hook and cut off the pouch.
But if its removal is not prepared for you unless after you pierce the eyelid with a small cut, then it harms the weak in some way.
If the split is large: then bring it together with stitches: and take care of it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. Ointment indeed restores and fleshes it.
And if the sand is turned towards the inner parts of the ear with the surface facing inside, then turn the eyelid inward and hang the sand grain with a hook: besides requiring a cut, press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is stretched out by an incision, no harm will come to you from it.
Then wash the eye after the sand grain incision with salt water: and care for the place where it is until the weak heals.
Section on the Care of the Eyelids.
Chapter X.
The translation is: "Axirnath is a cyst that is generated in the upper eyelid's covering; and it most often occurs in children; and it weighs down their eyes, and they get cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot see the light of the sun, because tears flow towards them due to this, and therefore you see them always lying on their faces, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are wet below the eyebrows, which have already been inflated; and the appearance of Axirnath is evident to the eye, and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel Axirnath among them.
The translation is: "The method of treatment for it is that the afflicted puts his head in your lap.
The translation is: "Then take a piece of linen cloth, and prepare within it a linen square according to the size that contains Axirnath on all sides. The translation is: "Then place it on top of the square and press it with your fingers from all sides, so that Axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
The translation is: "Then find in the middle of that moisture with a narrow incision made, and it should not be larger than the one made in phlebotomy in depth.
The translation is: "Or it is necessary that you find the entire skin, until you reach Axirnath, for in many positions Axirnath comes out of the incision in the shape of a white lump.
The translation is: "So pull it out with the cloth that you have inserted between your fingers towards the outside; and you turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses; and be careful not to add in the incision, so that you do not reach the eye with the spatula and harm it.
The translation is: "If Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the incision, you add a little more easily into the incision until it comes out. Then extract it, as we said.
Submerge the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the spot, then sew it with small threads.
And among humans are those who crush salt, and place it into the hollow of the crack, so that it softens what remains from that moisture.
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, a boil occurs at the spot, then care for it with soothing plasters until it heals.
[Heading: Methods of Ataxmir for the Eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft and weeps as it should not.]
Chapter XI.
When hairs appear in the eyelids that are in addition to the natural hairs and turn white: then they harm the eye and cause illnesses such as constant tears, softening of the eyelids, and cloudiness, until it causes the destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmir indeed is cured according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire. Or with sharp medicine, as was mentioned in the chapter on cautery. Or it is cured by incision and sewing (of the eyelid).\]   Aut curatur per emplastrum temperatum cum medicamento ad un or it is cured with a plaster made mildly warm with medicine as I will say. Or with reeds, as I shall tell you.
You must place the head of the sick person on your chest. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. \]   Et si vis bene curare Ataxmir, debes postea accedere ad incisionem, secundum
Therefore, if it has been turned, that is good. If, however, you wish to cure the Ataxmir well, then afterwards approach inc And if not: insert a needle into it where the thread is on the underside of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread above, near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, in which hairs grow: then pull the thread upward along with the eyelid, and turn it with a spatula.
Then find, within the internal part of the eyelid, under hairs added with a spurting spout coming from the greater lacrimal until the lesser lacrimal.
Then draw out the thread, and place a small speck of dust from boiled egg or cloth underneath the eyelid; then mark the eyelid with wax in the shape of a myrtle leaf figure.
However, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid; since it has been varied among humans for a long time.
From this [it is] one who needs to be cut from the eyelid in quantity large, according to the quantity which is softened by the eyelid.
Then with the spurting spout find above two lines which you marked, and start from the greater lacrimal until the lesser lacrimal, and let there be one crack near the natural hairs, as the thickness of a radius.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scour it all. Then sew together the two eyelids with a suture using a fine needle and thread, remove the blood, and make any excess from the threads adhere to the eyebrows with some binding materials if you wish to do this; but if not, do not worry about it.
Then release the stitches and threads for three or four days, then take care of it.
And if you wish, let the wound heal without stitches, and take care of it so that it dries and contracts. For the eyelid will rise when pressing on the wound and sewing it; but it will be better later.
This method of treating wounds was taught by the ancients (Ataxmir).
However, in this there is concern for the sick one, and it is from a good operation, but there is no fear in it.
And another method is in Ataxmir also: and it is, that signs on the eyelid a figure, which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have told.
Then pull the eyelid with three separated or gathered hooks, according to the following shape, then cut off what remains with small scissors, according to this shape, with equal cutting.
If it is not possible for you to hold the hook and it does not fit: then take a needle with thread, and insert it into the middle of the figure; and insert another thread near the greater tear duct, and another thread near the smaller tear duct; and gather threads equally between your fingers.
Then pull your hand with equal pulling; and pull the skin where it is marked by the cut, as we have told.
Then gather together two lips of the wound with stitching; and care for it until it heals.
If however an abscess occurs at your incision or your wound crack: bandage it with wool and similar things from healing ointments.
And sometimes the eyelashes also turn over.
Therefore, it is necessary that you use what we have said in the incision; but suturing both is more artificial. Chapter on the care of Ataxmir with teeth.
And it is to turn the eyelid and cut the crack that is inside, as I have told. Then make two teeth or two thin sticks whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and the width of them is less than the width of a fingertip; and you have already cut at both ends from both sides where you hold threads.
Then gather both together with thin material over what remains from the eyelid of the eye, and tie two teeth from both sides tightly with a strong stitch, and leave it for several days. The tightened skin will die and become darkened and rot until it falls off by itself.
If delayed [in healing], then cut it with scissors. Then take care of it until it heals.
When it has solidified, lift the eyelid and do not pluck the hairs.
And this is the form of two scissors, as you shall make according to this shape and measurement for length and width.
Chapter XII.
§ On plucking painful hairs from the eye with a sharp instrument.
The operation is that you take a subtle point and insert a fine silk thread into it gently. Then gather the ends of it and knot them both with a very subtle knot, and let the length of the threads be one palm [width].
Then combine another fine thread beneath it in a short distance, and knot its ends if you wish.
Then place the weak head of the patient on your lap and bring it close to the sun so that the operation may be clearly seen, because the operation is subtle or delicate.
Then insert the fine point with the scissors into the root of the eyelash and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you pull out the natural hair from above.
Then draw the hair up to the scissors and insert the scissors into the hair; if it is one, or two, or three, do not take more than that.
Then draw your hand with it until the hair comes out of the eyelid along with the plucked hair.
If the scissors are pulled out without the hair coming out of the eyelid along with it: pull the scissors downwards with the thread that you have prepared in it until the scissors come out from the upper opening and are visible to the eye; then, when you pull the scissors and the thread, draw both of them out, close the eye and let the closed eye heal for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and new flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either bind a long hair from natural hairs with it and lift it up together; or leave it alone until it grows out a little, and then lift it up.
Chapter XIII.
When this Alzacter's condition occurs in the eye, it is called Leporina.
And Alzacter's condition is either natural or accidental.
Therefore, the accidental form arises from the consolidation of a wound, a cut, a cautery, and similar things.
And the method of operation is to open that consolidation and to separate its edges, and to place a piece of linen gauze in it, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use in the treatment of this condition things that dry and tighten, for if you do so, Alzacter's condition will become worse than it was; rather, use soft things such as flaxseed: and embrocation with water, in which althea has been boiled, linseed seed: and ointment of djaquilon, which has been made liquefied with some oil: and wrap it with linen, and treat it with it.
And your treasure of healing is to strive with all your skill so that it does not consolidate again in its original form.
And this operation that we have mentioned is not other than a correction of Alzacter's condition, so that it does not return to its original form entirely.
On the care of Alzacter's condition that occurs in the lower eyelid, and is a ridge or contraction upward towards the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This Alzacter's condition that occurs below is properly called Alzacter's condition. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
From wound, or fracture, or cautery, and similar things it becomes accidental.
The way of the operation in it is that you receive the needle, on which there should be a double thread, and you dye it in flesh, and you make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh towards the upper part with a knife, and cut it with a broad lancet. If then the figure of an eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take radium, and place it in the fissure, and turn the eyelid with it; and make two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let their extremities be from the two angles of the incision, until they converge and form an angle: until when they come together a figure is formed, and it is a Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh to the extent of its sharp lower part, from what follows the eyelid. Then join the separated parts; or sew it with a woolen thread.
Then take care of them with what I said, with softening medicines and linen cloths, until they heal.
And if the Alxatratus happens from the fissure or stitching or cauterizing: then it is necessary to make a flat wound under the eyelashes, even as it was before. Then separate between two lips with linen cloth, as I said.
The summary of the discussion on treating Alxatratus, whether it is above or below, is that the treatment should be performed according to the preparation for the form of Alxatrati.
For indeed it has many diverse forms; and the skillful craftsman prepares his talent with whatever means is possible for him, until he brings back the figure to its natural form or close to it, and himself who is ill, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in various positions.
Chapter XV.
Chapter on the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many people so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the white of the eye, and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore it is necessary that you insert the end of the radius under the eyelid and lift it up; or stretch it with a hook; then cut the adhesion with a thin spatula without sharpness of the spatula cuts, but rather bluntly somewhat; so that the weak one will not be disturbed during the operation and the spatula will be removed and not harm the eye with its sharpness; and your incision should be like you scrape off that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the adhesion is healed completely.
Then pour salt water into the eye and wash it; or distill it onto him from sifon made of zinc dissolved with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a linen cloth; and place wool soaked in egg white over the eye; and after three days use zinc ointment and with salves, until it is healed.
Chapter on incision of nail and protrusion of skin around eyelashes.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the nail is of two kinds. Or it is nervous: and is similar to horn, but delicate. It is not a nerve, similar to the consistency of frozen white moisture; when iron touches it or one tries to grasp it with a forceps, it is torn away and the forceps do not take hold in it.
And neither of the kinds begins except from the greater tear duct, up until it gradually reaches the eye, until it fills the sight, and prevents light, and movement of the eye.
The method of operation in its incision is: that the sick person places his head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then collect a few double-spaced claws with forceps and extend them upward. Then take a spear and insert a horse hair or ox or sheep hair into it, let it be a thread, and slightly double the end of the spear point, and fix it in the middle of the claw; penetrate it with the spear and tie it with the thread to the claw, and extend it upward; peel off the side of the claw following the pupil as if you were holding it with the hair up until the end of it.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or small forceps; let the natural tissue of the tear duct remain, so that no persistent flow of tears occurs due to its incision.
And sometimes the claw is extended with forceps alone; or with a thread, as we said. Then it is scraped with a soft spatula, which has this form.
And be careful that the soft spatula does not touch the corn layer and cause a break there, and pierce the pupil.
Then after the incision, throw something crushed salt or made from chalk into the eye and let it stay until another day. Then take care of him with what is required, until he is healed.
If the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert a probe into it nor apply a clamp to it, then repeatedly treat this kind of nail with medications, and it will heal as I have described in the division.
If you wish to cut it, then open the sick person's eye and take a thin, soft, weakly sharp probe of this shape. And shave the nail from above with delicacy. If you see that it becomes rarefied and crushed, and press a razor into it, then drip from your hour (urine) into the eye made from seif or from ziniar, or from red seif ground fine: and keep the eye closed until another day.
Then repeat the operation on it until the entire thing is removed. Unless a hot abscess appears in your eye, then leave it alone and treat the abscess until it is healed.
Then repeat the operation on it with delicacy, until it is healed.
The growth of the flesh on the eyelash, if it causes great harm to the eye, is to be suspended with a clamp and cut off that part of it; not too deep so as not to disturb the flow of tears.
Then drip red seif or seif made from ziniar into the eye until it is healed.
Chapter on Incision of Albucasis and growth of flesh in the eye.
Chapter 17.
Sometimes in the eyes of men there grows red flesh composed or laid on top, covering the pupil or approaching it, or pressing against the eyelids and perhaps turning the eyelids toward the outside; and it resembles a balustrade rose.
The operation in it is also to place the sick head in your armpit. Then open his eyes and collect the entire flesh with suitable hooks to it; hold it with a single forceps or tweezers.
Then cut the flesh first, until you finish it all with a knife. Take care not to touch the eye during the operation; make your cut be such that it is made as we have described in the incision of the nail, or with tweezers like those used for asbestos, according to the shape it will take after this chapter.
When your incision is completed and the entire nail-root is removed, then fill the eye with salt solution; or drizzle into it red powder and similar substances from corrosive medicines; and place over the eye on the outside a cotton pad with egg white: to protect it from a hot infection.
If some of the nail-root remains and hot blood prevails, and you fear a hot infection; then leave the eye alone, and treat it with what soothes an abscess.
Then repeat the procedure over it until it heals.
And similarly do with any flesh that happens to be present in the eye of this kind.
Nevertheless, any weakening of the eye from a natural or accidental cause must be treated by cutting with iron; and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member is able to withstand this treatment.
Chapter on removing asbestos from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Asbestos are veins of red color that cover the eye and impede vision; they weaken the eye day by day.
Therefore, first you must consider if the eye in which asbestos is found is strong and there is no other illness except for asbestos; then collect the asbestos of it.
And it is that you command the sick one, that he places his head in your bosom.
Then suspend those veins with one or two needles according to your judgment: and let the needle be fine of double fold, according to this shape, or let there be two needles graduated in one body, according to this shape.
Then collect with fine forceps those veins and remove the blood by the hour, until you see the veins removed from the eye and resolved: and be careful not to hurt the eye with the tips of the forceps.
And let your work be at noon before the sun, and be very firm in your work: so as not to cut except those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye green or red: so that with its own acidity it burns what remains from the scalpel.
If it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then plaster the eye with that which soothes the pain of the eye: and leave it for some days until the pain subsides: and bind it with warm poultice: then again repeat over it according to the same method until it heals.
And this is the form of the forceps.
Chapter on reducing Arissatas (nasal polyps) to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
The surgeon is called Arisatha, and he treats the Fistula, which he cures with a cautery or with a medicine burning sharply, according to his narrative that has gone before.
If it is not healed, then there is no skill in this case, except to open a boil at its birth and remove all the moisture that is in it and the pus, until the bone appears.
When the bone is exposed, and you see in it corruption or blackness, then grind it with an instrument of this form.
And it is called Asperga for the head.
Make it from iron and round its head like a needle, pierced by the grinding of a file or a finely-pointed aliskilfer; place it on the corrupted bone.
Then turn it over between your fingers and press your hand a little, until you know that the corruption has been ground away; do this repeatedly.
Then restore the place with very dry ointments.
If the place consolidates and flesh grows in it, and the flow of pus is stopped; and forty days have passed, and it does not break open again, nor develop an abscess, nor does anything else happen in it; then you know that it has been healed.
If not, then there is no skill in this case, except to lead the fistula back to the nostril, according to this shape.
And it is to be exposed from the second bone with iron or with a sharp medicine; when the bone has been exposed, then take a gimlet according to this shape, its tip being made of iron, triangular: and let the wood of it be a pyramid extended to the end, as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself; let it be near the tear duct; and extend your hand slightly away from the eye. Then turn your hand with the lancet until it penetrates the bone and feels it weak; by this you will find wind coming out of it when you hold your hand over his nose.
Then restore the place with medicines that dry (or stop bleeding), as I have taught you.
When the flesh grows and the place hardens, then what was flowing out to the outside returns to the nose; therefore it is lighter above the weak one.
[Section Title] Reduction of an Eyeball Protrusion.
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes entirely and no harm or reduction occurs while looking at it: then it is necessary to loosen the patient; next, phlebotomy should be performed on him; afterwards, place cupping glasses in the neck without incision, but with suction.
Then place a liniment on the eye which is made from acacia, aloe, myrrh, and colophony. Then bind the eye above with plaster and many small stones.
And the method of the small stones is: take soft cloths, many, and cut all the cloth from them into four parts; make many from these; then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye requires; then bind them strongly with a stiff cloth.
And repeat cupping glasses with suction without incision.
Then remove the cupping glasses, and release the bound eye day and night.
If the binding again becomes soft, then it is necessary to bind it very tightly; then remove the binding after a day and night, as previously stated.
If you see the eye has returned to its original position, that is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster, the small stones, the binding, and the cupping glasses until it heals.
Chapter on the incision of the eyelid.
Chapter XXI.
When a rupture occurs in the tunica Vuea, it then protrudes and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of Vuae, and fouls the human form because of this; and there is desire to cut it: then surgery on it is necessary, as I have told; and it is to introduce a point into the root of Vuae from below to the upper part.
Then insert another point with a double thread from the lacrimal side, and make it penetrate; and release the first point according to its position.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie a piece of Vuae around it with the point; and tighten it strongly.
Then remove the point, and place wet wool on the eye's white; and leave it until the thread falls with the Vua.
Then care for the eye so that it is comforted, until the wound heals.
And sometimes the Vua is tightened from all sides with a ring made of cloth, until the eye protrudes greatly.
Then it is pierced with a fine spatula that reaches the depth of the eye, and moistens the white of the eye, and the eye sinks, and immediately enters; then tighten it until it heals.
[Title] On the cure of Alcomnat.
Chapter XXII.
This disease called Alcomnat is not other than pus that accumulates in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operation in this case is that you make the sick person sit on a prepared chair or straight-backed one.
Then take hold of his head with your hands from both sides and move him until you see the pus reach the lower parts of your eyes. Then it is shaped, and does not fall down, and the vision is cleared; and the sick person sees as he saw before: and if it does not fall lower, know that it is water.
If however the descent of pus is not prepared as we said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a thin probe and pierce it through the cornified panniculus continuous with the cornea at the junction with the tunica cornea in the corona, until the pus is expelled.
When it comes out, then pour warm water into which you have mixed honey over it; or hot water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey; then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter on the care of water that falls into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have already said the type of water in division and which is suitable for perforation in speech declaring and explaining it, then take the same according to its health.
Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit with your hands facing each other, opposite to the eye, near the sun; and tie the healthy eye, and squeeze it very tightly; then close the eyelid of the affected eye with your right hand, if the water is in the left eye; or with your left hand, if the water is in the right eye.
Then take your right hand with a large spoon, if the eye is the left; or your left hand with a large spoon, if the eye is the right.
Then place the almadga near the corona proximate to the apparent lachrymal of the smaller eye-socket; then push the almadga with force, and you will roll your hand together with it, until it penetrates into the white part of the eye; and you will feel that the almadga has reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that there be a measure for the journey of the almadga to the depth, a measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the blackness; and this is the corona of the eye. For indeed you will see it in the pupil of the eye itself, due to the clarity of the cornea coating.
Then place the almadga up until where there is water. Then press it downward once after another.
If therefore the water descends immediately, then the sick person sees immediately whatever opens his vision, and the almadga in his eye.
Then rest for a little while. If therefore the water descends, then put it down in the second place, beyond which the almadga emerges.
When it is clogged and does not rise, then extract the almadga with ease; and you roll your hand slowly.
Then dissolve something from salt in water of the gemma, and wash the eye with it. Then place over the entire eye all wool soaked in rose oil or linen and the white part of the eye; and bind it with a clean bandage.
We and those who are in our time place over him camphor powder with the white part of the eye.
If the almadga does not obey you in entering the eye due to its hardness, since it is from a man whose eye is very hard; then it is necessary that you take Spatholea (Alberid), whose form is as follows:
Perforate only the connecting tissue and not the final joint; and it is not to be done except to make a passage to a subtle place.
Then introduce almagda, as we have said.
Prepare for your procedure a well-made bed for the sick person in which he may sleep on his back in a dark room; and keep him free from movement, coughing; and put food for him that soothes his nature; and do not let him turn his head to either side at all.
And let the ligament remain according to its position until the third day.
Then dissolve that in the dark room and test his sight; and make him see things. Then bring back the ligament until the seventh day.
It should not be done during the hour of cure or immediately after cutting; rather it should be done by others because water rises quickly through a vehement heat.
If, however, an abscess occurs that is hot: then it is necessary to dissolve the eye before the seventh day; and rectify that with what calms the abscess until it is calm; then remove his sight from him and place on his mouth orally whatever regulates his sight during several days, while he remains in that dark room.
Then leave the house gradually and change into your clothes.
And know that a student is not allowed to be absent from view often; then he dares at the operation.
Now someone from those of Alayrach has arrived who said that a large perforation was made in Alayrach where water flows out.
Therefore I have not seen anyone in your country who has done that; nor have I read it in any old books; and it is possible that it is new.
These are the shapes and appearances from the hand, so that they may stand upon him who knows them not.
Make from bronze: and let their extremities have the same subtle triangular shape, and the extremity be sharp.
Chapter XXIV.
Treatment for the born flesh in the nose.
Sometimes in the nose are born diverse fleshes added, of which there is something similar to the many-footed scorpion; and from it there is a cancerous flesh, stony, dark colored; and from it there is one that is soft flesh, not dark colored.
In the one that is among these fleshes soft, not fraudulent, nor cancerous, you must make the sick man sit facing the sun, and open his nostrils, and thrust the hook into those fleshes; then draw them out to the exterior, and cut what you have grasped with a subtle spoon-like instrument sharp at one side, until you know that all the flesh is removed.
If anything remains from that one whose removal is not possible; then shave it with a subtle instrument with ease until nothing remains from it. If blood dominates you, or a hot boil occurs; then oppose it with the necessary remedy; or if it is among the malignant boils, then hurry to cauterize him, until the blood is removed and all fleshes are removed.
Then vinegar, or water, or wine is thrown into the nose after the incision. If the nostril opens and moisture proceeds to the palate, then you know that he is well.
If moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is born flesh within the upper nasal bones, to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Then it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen with some thickness and many knots; and place between every knot an amount equal to a digit or less; and make the sick one send out one end of the thread into his nose with a probe, or as he can do after he has done this, similar to the aze; and pull the scented substance until it reaches the cavity, and exit on his throat.
And indeed many times boys do this which is similar to that of Attomus in schools; and it is easy for him who desires it.
Then place two ends of the thread, one which exits on the nose and the other that remains in the nose. Then as a servant, sew together the flesh with knots that are in the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with the knots of the thread.
Then pull out the thread; and put linen in the nose after bloodletting which you have soaked in Egyptian ointment; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has completely corroded what remains of the flesh.
Then at the end, put a tube of lead into the nose for some days until it heals.
If however there is need for treatment to dry it, use that.
For the purge to be made with oil and other medications into the nose, make it of silver or copper; it should be like a small lamp, open as a shell and its opening similarly.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a tube.
And the shell instrument for the purge should be full, pierced; to which there should be a handle at the end of it, with which you hold it when heating oil or what you wish from juices and flowable things in it.
Chapter XXV.
Many times is born at the end of the nose, Thelul, and it swells, and grows larger with days, until its appearance becomes foul.
And because of that, it is necessary to cut it at the beginning of its appearance and to remove all of it. Then place on the spot either cautery or medicine burning in its place.
If the cutting of it is delayed until it swells, then consider if it is hard, stone-like, dark colored, and with few senses; then do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous boil.
For often I have seen that one cuts a boil, and great evil comes upon him who has it.
And if the boil is soft and not dark colored, and you see that it can be cut completely, then evacuate the weak, and cut it without fear, without dread; and take care of the place where it was with the remedy to draw it out and constrict it until it heals.
Chapter 26.
Section on the stitching of the nose, and lip, and ear.
Know that when there is loosening of continuity in one of these cartilages, the operation does not help much unless in certain men.
Therefore, when something happens to anyone from it, you should consider if it is a recent wound with its blood; and then gather together two strips of the wound with suture; then take care of it until it heals.
And if the loosening of continuity of the lip has already separated and each part is healthy; then it is necessary to remove all the edge from its visible skin until it bleeds. Then gather together the two lips with suture and bind them; then sprinkle over it the powder of dragon's blood and pulverized olibanum; and put on top of the powders a piece of an emollient plaster and any other consolidating plaster; and let it be bound for two or three days. Then dissolve it (the suture), and change the medicine: and let it be until the threads are separated by themselves. Then treat it with ointment, until it is healed.
The method of suturing is to gather the solution of continuity with needles, as we have said in abdominal sutures: or gather the solution with thread, as I have told you.
Chapter 27.
Chapter on the removal of neck nodes.
Many men occur, and often in the inner parts of their own lips, hard ulcers similar to grains of grain: and some of them smaller, and others larger.
Therefore, it is necessary that you turn the lip, and cut on top of every node of it, and hang it up with a hook, and cut it from all sides.
Then you shall fill the place after the cut with lime until the blood is separated.
Then it is scraped with vinegar, and the place where there is hardening is rubbed with it, until the wounds heal.
Chapter XXVIII.
Chapter on the incision of the flesh of a newborn on the gums.
Often flesh grows over the gum, which the ancients called abscesses.
Therefore it is necessary to hang it up with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut it at the root, and let the pus run out, or blood.
Then put on top of the place lime or other healing powders, drying.
If that flesh returns after treatment, which often happens, then cut it again the second time and cauterize it; for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter XXIX.
Chapter on filing of teeth with iron.
When the teeth accumulate on their surfaces from inside and outside, and between the gums rough, dirty, and sometimes they turn yellowish or greenish, until corruption reaches the gum and the teeth become foul through it.
Therefore it is necessary that you make the sick person sit between your hands, and put his head in your lap, and file the pulp and tooth, where the gums appear, and it is like sand; until there remains nothing of them, and similarly do for yellowish, greenish, blackish, and others, until they are cleaned.
If therefore that which is in them at the beginning of reason is removed, it is good: and if not, then apply reason to them on another day, second, and third, until finally study reaches what you desire.
And know that the tooth requires variously shaped razors of many shapes; according to which it is prepared for your operation: therefore, because the razor with which the tooth is scraped from below is different from the razor with which it is scraped between the teeth, according to other forms.
These forms of the razors should be prepared by you, which you see.
Chapter XXX.
Chapter on the extraction of tooth pain.
It is necessary that you cure Tooth from its pain with all your skill, and be not hasty in its extraction. There is not another to take its place when it is extracted: because it is a substance that rises high: until there is no excuse for its extraction, then if one who is sick must extract it, it should be made firm, and the tooth in pain should be certified by you.
Often pain deceives the sick man and believes that there is worm in tooth and extracts it himself: then the pain does not subside until the diseased tooth is extracted.
We have already seen that from phlebotomy. (referring to bloodletting)
When the tooth in pain is certified by you, then it is necessary that you make an incision around the tooth with a spatula containing something of virtue, until the gums are loosened on all sides: then move it with your fingers or with delicate forceps first slowly, until you shake it.
Then place the large forceps in that place with a good grip, and hold the head of the sick one between your knees: for what you have well held, so that it does not move: then pull the tooth according to its straight line, so as not to break it.
If it does not come out then take one of those instruments and introduce it below it from all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If the tooth is perforated or worn away then it is necessary that you fill that hole with a cloth and tie it with the end of a delicate radius so as not to break it during your constriction above it with the forceps.
And you must be careful when making an incision around the gums from all sides a lot.
And guard your strength so as not to break it and a part remains of it and returns to the sick one from that mischief which is greater than its initial pain.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant phlebotomists do in haste, and because of their arrogance in excision, except for what we have mentioned.
For many times they bring on great afflictions in men, which are difficult to break, and the roots of it remain all or some: or that they extract it with certain jaw bones: as we have often testified this.
Then it is to be anointed after excision with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If bleeding should occur from the places (for it often happens), then rub something from beeswax and fill the place with it: and if not, cauterize it if you do not have beeswax.
The handles of fine forceps with which the molar is moved should be long at the ends, short at the grip, thick, so that they do not split when pressed upon the tooth: as you see, those of the thick handles, until when you tighten them, they do not slip and do not split: the tips should be short and made of hard iron or well-made copper, pointed tips: and in their tips there should be teeth, some of which enter into some and hold tight with a decent constriction, strong.
And sometimes the tips are like the shape of a bird's beak, which is called a ciconia, and they are strong in constriction.
Chapter 31.
Chapter on Extraction of Teeth and Removal of Fractured Jaw Bones.
When something remains after the extraction of a tooth that is breaking, then you should place hot cotton over it for one or two days until the place softens: then insert algaster or forceps, whose tips are similar to the beak of a bird called ciconia. This form is forceps.
The ends of them (forceps) are made like a plane's edge, or as an aliskilfeghi (a type of forceps).
If therefore it (a part of the body) does not come out with these forceps, then it is necessary that you be careful on the root and expose the whole flesh and introduce an instrument which is called a small Palanca, whose form is this.
Let the end (of the forceps) be short, thick somewhat less: and let it not be filled with liquid, so that it may not break.
If therefore the root comes out through this (instrument), it is good: and if not, it is necessary to aid with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangular end, in which there is some thickness.
The form of the subtle triangular end.
And with other instruments and tools which have been mentioned in the ratio of teeth.
Also aid with this instrument similar to a large nail, whose form is the triangular twisted end with some thickness, so that it may not break: and let it not be filled with liquid.
And know that the instruments for teeth are many: and similarly other instruments are not accounted, and a skillful artist, subtle in his art, finds for himself an instrument according to what is signified by the operation and the illness itself.
Because from illnesses there are those for which the ancients did not find an instrument, due to the diversity of their forms.
If however the bone breaks from the jaw, or from other bones of the face, or it rots: then to investigate on it (the tooth) itself in its place with that which suits it from among instruments and forceps which I have said for extraction of roots, and aid with gesti whose form is this.
Place something of some thickness in it [the wound], gradually so that a bone can be held or tied to it, and it does not escape and move away, until the bone comes out: and restore the place with appropriate medications for it.
If there is a small rottenness in the bone, then shave it off from its rot, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter XXXII.
On the setting of protruding teeth above others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, an ugly shape arises from it; and this occurs particularly when it happens in women and girls, that is, in those who menstruate.
Therefore you should consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and does not settle or can be set, or its removal or trimming is not possible; then uproot it: and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this tool whose form is as follows.
It resembles a small beak and is made from iron with a very sharp tip.
And your cut should be such that you make the incision over many days and because of the hardness of the tooth so that another tooth is not disturbed.
If it is protruding and exposed to trimming; then trim it with a file made of iron whose form is as follows.
It should be made entirely of iron and the handle small with numerous sharp points like a file used to make a needle; with which you can trim the tooth gradually over many days with ease, so that another tooth is not disturbed and it falls out: then smooth it gently, in the end shave it off with certain rasps.
If it is a tooth that breaks off and injures the tongue; then it should be filed down until the roughness of the break is removed and leveled: and smoothed, so as not to injure the tongue nor corrupt speech.
Quid autem de extractione dentes in quibus
On the twisting of teeth with threads of gold.
In the case of teeth that have been struck or jolted due to blow or accident and the patient cannot hold what he eats without it falling out; and treatment with medicinal poultices has failed; then it is appropriate for them to be threaded with a gold wire, because silver turns green and rots after days, but gold never changes.
And the thread should be of medium thickness and coarseness according to its quantity that it may fit between the teeth.
The shape of the twisting is that you take the thread and insert its double between two healthy teeth; then wind it with its two ends between the moving teeth, whether one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side with the needle. Then wind again to the part from where you started; and hold your hand with delicacy and wisdom until it is completely removed; and your pressure when threading the wire should be at the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
Then cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors; and join both, and turn them towards each other; and hide these under the healthy tooth and the moving tooth so as not to hurt the tongue; then release it when tightly fastened.
If it loosens or breaks, thread them with another wire and it will remain in place for the whole time.
And this is the form of teeth and the shape of twisting two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you see.
Sometimes a tooth or teeth return to their place after an accident, and are held as we have said, and remain; this is not done unless by an experienced craftsman who is both wise and skilled.
And sometimes a bone from a cow is made suitable: and it is formed like a tooth and placed where the tooth is protected and tightened, as we have said; and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIIII.
Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural, with which a man is born, or accidental, from a healed wound.
The operation in this is to open the weak mouth of the patient in your chest, and lift the tongue; then cut that nerve ligament across its width until the tongue is released from its holding.
If there is something hard and knotty in it, and it is from the consolidation of a wound; then thrust a hook into it and pierce it across its width until you cut the ligament, and the knot is released.
And be careful that there is no opening in deep flesh, and do not cut an artery there and let blood flow.
Then it is washed with rose water or vinegar or cold water.
Then place a flannel of linen under the tongue for the patient to hold at all night so that it does not harden again.
If blood flows out, then place onion paste over the place. If the blood resists you, then cauterize the place with a flat cautery that is suitable for it; then care for it yourself until it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes a boil occurs under the tongue that resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function; and perhaps it swells so much that it fills the bone.
The operation in him is, to open the weak bone in the sun's presence: and examine the boil.
If you see him of dark or black color, hard, which does not have a weak sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancer.
And if it is hollowed out towards whiteness, in which there is wetness, then throw a hook into it and cut it with a delicate spatula and free it from all sides. What if blood presses you during your operation hour, then place upon it a piece of zinc until the blood is separated; afterwards return to your operation until you draw it out with its entirety.
Then cleanse it with vinegar and salt; care for the rest of the treatment as suitable to that until it is healed.
§ On the cure of two boils, the Molar teeth.
Chapter XXXVI.
When sometimes they happen near the throat, that is, the glands which resemble the goiters, which appear outside; and they are called the two Molar teeth: when you treat them as we said above in division, and they do not heal, then examine.
If it is a hard boil of dark color with few sensations, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing blood flow; rather let it be until it matures. And then either you will pierce it or it bursts by itself.
And if it is of white color, round and the root is subtle: then it should be cut.
The operation on it is, to examine it before the operation itself, if the boil has stopped being hot and quieted completely or has decreased slightly: then let the patient sit in the sun with his head in your lap; open his mouth, and take a servant between your hands and press his tongue downwards with an instrument of this shape.
Make it from silver, or brass, that it may be as delicate as a scalpel.
When therefore you press with it your tongue, and the boil is shown to you, and it falls upon the same (boil), then take a hook, and fix it in the boil, and pull it out as far as possible, except that you pull something along with it from the tunics.
Then cut it (the abscess) with the instrument which has the following shape: The forceps are to be made similar: however, the tips of it should be curved, so that the opening of each of them is directly opposite the other's sharp point: therefore, care should be taken that it is made of iron or brass coated with lead.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a pair of scissors having such shape. Let one part be sharp, not the other.
And after cutting one almond, cut the other according to the same shape of the incision.
Then, after the incision, the sick person shall rinse with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If bleeding occurs, rinse with water in which the peels of pomegranates have been boiled; or leaves of myrtle, and similar things from willow bark, until the bleeding stops; then take care of him until he is healed.
And sometimes boils other than almonds may occur in the throat. Therefore, cut them as I said for the incision of the two almonds equally.
And I myself have been cured of a woman who had a boil that was born in her throat, which dragged her to asphyxia, with few senses, which almost closed her throat; and the woman breathed through a narrow mouth, and she had already prohibited food for herself, and drink of water: and it was about to reach death, if it had remained one or two days.
The boil had risen only so much that it discharged two branches, until they came out through the two nostrils.
I approached quickly and fastened one of them with a hook. Then I pulled it, and a large piece came out.
Then I cut it where it was seized from the nostril.
Then I made that which came out through the other nostril hole.
Then I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue; then I fastened a hook on the boil; then I cut off part of it, but nothing else ran out except a little blood; therefore, the woman's throat was healed, and she began to drink water immediately, then ate food.
I did not stop cutting from the boil for a long time; and the boil grew in place of what I was cutting until it became too prolonged and with her, [it seems that] I have made it worse.
I made an incision and burnt the boil at her throat.
Therefore it stopped growing; then I went away from there, but I did not know what God did with her after me.
[Section on the incision of a boil in the throat.]
Chapter XXXVII.
When the catarrh descends to the throat and becomes a boil that is long; then it is called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, then it is called uva.
When it is treated with what I have said in the division, and there is no improvement; and you see that the boil has become warm and thin; then it should be cut.
And what has gathered around it is round and not long, and it is red, dark or black, and there is no sensation; then it should be cut off. For there is fear over the sick person.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have said from whiteness and length, let the sick person sit facing the sun; then press his tongue with the instrument whose description has preceded; then fasten a hook in the boil, and pull it downwards; and cut it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of two tonsils.
It is necessary that you not cut from it, unless what is added exceeds the natural limit without addition.
If you cut more from it, you harm the voice and discourse.
Then, after the incision, use what we have said concerning the incision of two tonsils and take care of it until it heals.
If the sick person is afraid of the incision, then it is necessary to use skill in cauterizing it without fear and cowardice.
The method of cauterization is not anything but with sharp water and it is, to place the head of the sick person in your lap. Then press the tongue with the tool that we have said. Then take water from the water that I have told you in the chapter on cauterization and melt with it an unquenched lump of chalk and do not make it thick or thin, but fill the hollow of this tool with it, whose shape is as follows:
Let the concavity at its end where the medicine is placed be concave like a conch shell's radius.
Place the tool with the medicine on the wound itself: let the sick person lie on his side so that the saliva from his mouth runs out through the internal medicine, so that something does not descend from it to his throat and harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. Then you apply it to the wound for the first time with a quantity of half an hour, until you see it darkened and the pain of the medicine subsided.
And if you want to take a piece of cotton and wrap it around the end of the radius, and pour the cotton with the medicine over it, and insert the radius into the canal above it until the cotton sticks to the wound.
Do this repeatedly until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the vein. Then let it go: indeed it dries up and falls off after three or four days.
If you need to apply medicine again, apply it again: and after cauterization, wipe around the area with a cloth soaked in butter and clean it with that which is in the surrounding area from the medicine: and pour cold water over it.
It shall be treated externally with plasters and internally with poultices until healed.
Therefore this method of treatment is healthier than surgery and less to be feared.
And sometimes the ulcer is treated with a method that is more subtle than cauterization and surgery: it is treated with fumigation, according to this method. Take calamus, hyssop, origanum, ruta, sassafras, chamomile, abrotanum and similar herbs: mix all of them or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and boil them: the pot should be coated with clay properly: there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which an instrument concave according to this method is placed.
Make it from silver or bronze: and insert the end, where there is a grain, into the sick man's nostril, until the vapor reaches the ulcer through the tube, until the ulcer is covered with a lot.
Then apply it many times over it until it dries up.
And beware not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the abscess's arrival. Usually pus is added to the abscess: and it should not be done unless at the time of the abscess's decline towards heat.
If this instrument is not available to you, then take a cannula and make a layer of ox horn at its end so that the sick man's bone is not burned: because the ox hide prevents the vapor from burning the bone: and this is a good treatment with safety.
On the extraction of thorns and bones from the throat.
Item, si quid in gutture positum inveniri sit,
Also, if anything found in the throat is bone or fish spine, or something else...
Therefore, whatever appears visible from among them [bones or fish spine], that must be extracted after you press the tongue with an instrument near the sun, and when it is made clear to you that it is in the throat...
And whatever is not visible and hidden in the throat, you should make a gentle vomit before the food is digested in the stomach... Perhaps it will come out attached through vomiting.
Or the sick person swallows a piece of nutmeg or radish root, or a piece of dry bread crumb; or he may take a soft piece of sponge dried and bind it, then swallow it... When the place where the spine or bone is reaches, and it is extracted, it comes out.
If it does not come out with what we said [vomiting], then use an instrument made of lead in this shape...
Let it be larger than a finger joint, and at its end, let there be a hook, which can easily be inserted into the throat; and it should have a head raised upward...
And be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so that it does not cause coughing and push the bone or spine with it, or a doctor may insert his hand...
But what the sick person inserts is better [for extraction], since he has knowledge of the place where the thing is attached; and he should push it down or pull his hand with the instrument upward, all according to the size that is prepared for him until it comes out...
On the extraction of leech.
Head, XXXIX.
When the leech (sanguisuga) is treated as I mentioned in the division of cure with medicines and it does not help, then consider if there is a problem in the throat of the sick person in the presence of sunlight, or after the sun if you press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
If therefore your sight falls on the leech (sanguisuga), remove it with a small hook or with fine forceps carefully.
If it is not possible with them (small hook or forceps): then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the sick person as far as the throat; then insert into the concavity of the cannula hot iron with fire. Do this repeatedly, and let the sick person refrain from water for the entire day.
Then let him take a vessel full of cold water, and open his mouth in it; wash his face with it, and swallow nothing from it; move the water one hour after another with his hand. For the leech (sanguisuga) immediately when it feels water falls off.
If it does not come out with what I mentioned, then fumigate the sick person with bedbugs or with asa with the instrument that I told you about for fumigation of the ear.
Do this repeatedly, because it will fall off by itself.
And the method of operation in fumigation is that you take a pot, in which there are live plums with fire; and let the pot be covered with a lid, through the middle of which there is an opening; and arrange the end of the instrument in it.
Then throw the fumigation, and let the sick person place his mouth at the end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not come out, until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech (sanguisuga). The bloodsucker falls immediately.
If it does not fall, then repeat multiple fumigations.
The sick man endures thirst, eats salt and other things, but drinks no water.
Therefore, it is necessary that he goes out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker is drawn from the throat when it falls upon the same eyesight.
It resembles forceps, as you see; but it has this curvature that is inserted into the throat. And the end of it resembles the beak of a bird called ciconia, in which there is roughness like that of a file; when it grasps something, it does not let go of it entirely.
[Title: On the opening of abscesses, and their section, and care in general.]
Chapter XL (40).
The species of abscesses are many, according to the remembrance of them, that is, one and one in this book; and they are diverse in their perforation, and their section from two modes.
One of them is of the kind of abscess within itself and because it contains moisture.
The second method is concerning places where it occurs from the body.
Because an abscess occurring on the head is different from an abscess occurring in the anus; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from an abscess occurring in joints: and each of them has its own judgment by operation.
And among abscesses there are some that should not be pierced unless after the maturation of pus in them and its completion; and there are some that should be pierced while they are raw and do not mature according to its completion.
As abscesses which are near joints.
Because when an abscess occurs near a joint and prolongs itself, until it becomes putrid perhaps the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted; therefore it is the cause of closer contraction of that member.
Or it is an abscess near a main member; because if you delay the piercing of it until it matures, it will harm either itself or through the main member.
Or it is near the anus, pierce it when it is immature; and it should not be pierced, if the abscess is raw, not completed digestion, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not become putrid deeply, and reaches the interior of the anus, and becomes a fistula, or becomes at its end which does not heal.
It is necessary that you know the hour of the piercing of the abscess when it is matured according to its completion; and this is in sedation of pain, decrease of fever, and diminution of redness, and pulsation, and sharpness of the head of the abscess; and the remaining signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower part of the abscess and with greater prominence: and the perforation should extend along the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of hands and feet, and in the regions of shoulders, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all places without reflection.
In those which are reflected, go with the perforation according to that limb.
When the abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better to leave the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to the completion.
Because if you perforate it before that (time), the course of the virus from it is prolonged, and there are many dirt and foulnesses, and perhaps its lips harden, and its depth increases.
And some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the body due to necessity, or according to that limb which requires it.
And it is necessary that you make a small perforation for small abscesses and a large one for large abscesses, or numerous cuts according to the size of the abscess.
And there are abscesses in which the skin must be concaved: and it should be cut when it has become like cloth, and made into a form that is already dead: such as what happens with boils and buboes.
And there are some which are to be cut through a section having three angles. And from it is cut in the form of a myrtle leaf (figure).
As an inguinal abscess.
And from it is administered a round cut and a crescent-shaped cut, and similar ones: such as those from cuts.
The thing which has no head, such as are soft ulcers on the surface, should be perforated with a shallow perforation, or only a flat one.
When the ulcer is large and already has collected much pus, and you have perforated it, so that it does not burst out and you extract all the pus at once: rather, extract a part of it from it. Then, remove the ulcer up to another day. Then, extract something from the pus again.
Do this often according to its progression, until it comes out: especially if the person is weak in strength, or a woman who is pregnant, or a small child, or an old man who has decayed: for the animal spirit is often resolved with the exit of pus: and perhaps the weak one dies, and you do not receive payment.
Be careful then, this chapter requires great caution.
After your perforation, which you make for these ulcers, it is necessary that you clean the wound and consider. If then the wound of the ulcer is small, or if it is a plain incision, then apply linen cloth or old cotton. If the ulcer is large and there are many perforations of the fissures, then you should insert linen into each fissure until they meet.
If you have cut off a piece of skin from the ulcer, or if you have hollowed out its circumference: then it is necessary to fill it with old cotton, or as when a cloth is sewn together, or made into linen yarn without moisture: and tighten it for three days.
Then throw it away, and care for it with whatever is necessary from the ointment until it heals.
If it should happen that there is a flow of blood during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar after the linen cloth has been soaked in them: and place it on the site of the blood flow many times.
If the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary to administer a regimen, treatment, and powders which I have described in many parts of this our book, and according to division.
If it is winter time and the place of the boil is many nerves: then it is necessary to pour warm powders with wine and oil, and place them on those areas.
And if it is summer and the areas are fleshy: then it is necessary to place warm powders soaked in water, oil or wine and oil, and all that cold. Until the third day, as we said, then it is necessary to dissolve the boil, remove it, and administer treatment for its healing until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary universally for the knowledge of treating boils.
According to the way of distinguishing it, I have already said about every boil, how is the path for its healing chapter by chapter individually.
Chapter 41.
Chapter on the cutting of boils that occur on the head skin.
In the skin of the head occur small boils, which belong to the species of nodules that are contained by bags, which are like they themselves have been sucked by a hen.
And their types are many.
From them are the fat ones: and from them are those that contain moisture similar to mud: and from them those that contain moisture similar to frozen slime and powders: and of such like, and from them are the hard stone-like ones.
And in cutting all of them, and their removal there is no fear if there is no contradiction to the artery in their sectioning.
And the operation in cutting them is that you try it with the instrument, whose form comes after this, which is called intromissum, until you know what it contains.
If it contains moisture, then dry it by section along its length using a surface incision: according to this form.
And start by making an incision from line b to line g. When moisture is evacuated, then scrape off the cyst that contains this moisture, and do not leave anything inside it.
For many times it returns if something remains from it.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt. Fill the wound with this mixture, and leave it until another day. The remaining part of the cyst corrodes itself.
Then apply Egyptian ointment to the wound again on the second and third day, as often as you need it, until you are sure that no part of the cyst remains, then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If an abscess contains a thick knot, then cut it according to this form, making the incision in the shape of a cross; insert forceps between the sections and scrape off the entire mass; and try your best to extract the layer containing it.
If it interferes with an artery, then do as I will tell you later.
And the same is to be done for an abscess that contains a stone, by cutting it out and treating it in the same way as described before.
The incision on an abscess containing a stone is easier because there is less blood and moisture. Sometimes there are such abscesses located on the head of certain individuals where there is no moisture inside them.
This is because I have made an incision on an abscess on the head of an old woman and found an abscess that was as hard as a stone, rough, white and unbreakable; if someone hit it with a blow it caused injury.
In other kinds of boils occurring on the head, except for boils that occur on children's heads and around the roots of ears, a section of them all should be a superficial incision.
Always make a perforation from the bottom part of them so that the flow of pus is directed towards lower parts.
Then care for it with what suits it from the healing process.
§ On the incision of goiters on the neck.
Chapter XLII.
These boils often occur on the neck and under the shoulders and groins; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And above the boils that occur on the neck, there is one and many; and they are generated one after another; and every goiter among them is within its proper tunica, as it is in nodes and boils of the head, as we have said.
The forms of these goiters are many. For they are stone-like; and some contain moisture; and there are also malicious ones that do not obey the healing process.
Therefore, when you see a good one among them, which has a good color close to the skin and moves towards all parts, and is not attached with the neck muscles, groin or artery, nor deep, it should be incised superficially from the upper part of the body to the lower part, along the line b to the line g. Peel it off from every side. Spread two layers of skin with a scalpel or several scalpels if necessary, as we have said for boils on the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is advisable not to cut an artery or nerve.
Let the scalpel not be very sharp; so as not to injure your hand during the incision or disturb the sick one, and cut what is not necessary.
If you cut a vein or artery, then stop the operation, then place in the wound alum powder or certain powders which coagulate blood, and suture the wound, and leave it, until the sharpness of the lancet subsides and the wound softens: or if it begins to rot.
Since the blood has been coagulated, return to your operation until you are finished.
Then ask with your index finger if there remains anything from the Strophulus or other small ones: if so, cut and clean them.
If there is a large vein in the root of the Strophulus: then it must not be cut from its root; instead, it should be tied with a double strong thread and left to fall out naturally without harm.
Then fill the wound with old linen that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it.
If the entire Strophulus is cut off, then it must be gathered with two pieces of wound edges: and sew it immediately, after you see that there remains no superfluity.
If you see that there remains some superfluity due to the size of the Strophulus, then it must be intended for cutting its root and pulling it out; and administer the suture as we have said.
And what contains humidity from the Strophulus, perforate it with a superficial perforation: so that you may see its maturity; and place the perforation below, as we have said.
Then administer after perforation linen with ointment and similar things, so that it corrodes what remains from the corruption, until when you see that the wound is clean; then take care of it with ointment for regenerating flesh, until it heals.
Title (Roman numeral): Chapter XLIII.
"On the section of the epiglottis due to strangulation within the throat.
"The ancients said this section was performed on the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; this is their writing.
"However, in those with synanchema (a condition where the epiglottis is stuck to the back of the tongue), it is necessary to perform the section on the epiglottis; because there will be no help through this procedure, as all veins and lungs are weak.
"In those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, throat or both tonsils, when there is no illness in the nostril, it is necessary to use the section on the epiglottis, to prevent the loss that occurs due to strangulation.
"Therefore, when we want to perform the section on the epiglottis, it should be performed under three or four rings of the epiglottis with a small section across its width, in that area between two rings, because the section should be made at the sifac (a cartilage at the base of the epiglottis), not in the cartilage; this location is suitable for the section as it lacks flesh and blood vessels are distant from it.
"If the physician is afraid, then he should stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. "Then he shall incise the skin until he reaches the nostril; he should drain the blood vessels if he sees any.
"Then he shall perform the section on the sifac as previously mentioned; it is noted that from the mucus that comes out of the nostril, when it is ruptured, and with the loss of voice.
"And leave an open wound for some time.
"When the hour comes when strangulation is feared, bring together two lips of the wound skin and only the skin itself (without cartilage).
Then administer medications that cause flesh to grow, until it heals.
Says Albucasis. In conclusion of the story we narrated, there is no explanation unless they see that one of these abscesses has already opened in the throat of the sick man: and he was raised up above death, and desired to be cut: they go to cut the Epiglottis, so that the sick man may breathe over the place of the wound with a certain breathing and save himself from death: and for this reason they ordered to leave the wound open, until the malice of the disease is consumed, and the malice of it lasts three days, almost as if it were itself: then they therefore commanded to suture the wound, and to care for it until it heals.
And what I myself have seen is that a maidservant took a knife and sent it into her own throat, and cut a piece of the trachea of the lungs.
And I was called upon for its treatment, and found her to groan, just as is the groaning of the dead.
Therefore I uncovered the wound, and found blood which had come out from the wound to be little. So I was reassured that she herself did not cut a vein or an artery: and air was coming out from the wound.
I therefore approached the wound and cared for it until it is well: and nothing happened to the maidservant except a cough in her voice: and she returned after days to a better state of health.
Therefore I say: that there is no fear in cutting the Epiglottis.
Chapter on the section of the hernia of the throat.
Chapter XLIV.
This abscess is called hernia of the throat, it is a large abscess, according to the color of the body: and it is much more common in women.
It is according to two modes: for it is either natural or accidental.
Certainly, there is no skill in the natural.
The accidental is according to two modes; one of which is similar to fatty knots. And the other mode is like a gangrene that occurs from the knotting of an artery. There is fear there, and it should not be presumed with the iron, unless in what is small; and you prove it, and examine it with the probe. If you find it similar to a fatty knot and not suspended with some veins: then cut it, as knots are cut; and draw it out with what contains it from the cavity, if it is in the cavity; and if not, then search the whole of it. Then take care of the place with that which is needed for treatment, until it heals.
Chapter 45.
Section on the cutting of knots.
There are many kinds of knots, and I have already said all their species in division; and it is necessary that here the difference between a knot and an ulcer be explained, since there is doubt about it.
Therefore, I say that when an ulcer is heat and fever and violent pains until the effervescence of the superfluity subsides and the putrefaction is completed, then the fever and heat cease.
But a knot is not heat or fever, nor pains; and it contains them within the body cavity or a sac which is proper to them; and it is closed like a pea or a gourd, and it forms like a bulging tumor, and it is major or minor.
And there are two kinds of them: either fatty; or containing moisture. The colors of moisture are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a knot, it is necessary that you examine it and inquire about it first with the instrument called Intromissum, according to its form as described in the chapter following this one.
The method of examining boils and all knots is to take this instrument and insert it into the moist place that you find in the boil; then move your fingers slowly with it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then, lay your hand on it according to the measure of the size of the boil.
Then remove the Intromissum and observe what comes out with it.
If what comes out running is moisture of any color, then cut it off with a surface incision as I have said in the treatment of other boils.
If no running moisture comes out of the Intromissum, then know that it is fat; so cut a cross-shaped incision over it as I have told you, in this shape, just as I taught you; and peel off the skin from all sides easily; and keep a container over it if possible to extract the pus with the knot.
If the container breaks during the operation and it is not possible to extract the pus, then extract it roughly until there is no more left of it.
For if there remains a little or much, the knot returns most frequently.
If it overpowers you and there remains a little of it, then fill the wound with certain corrosive powders; bind up the wound, place hot compresses on top of it where the boil sits, and take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
If therefore it is a large knot, then its two folds [should be] cut and care should be taken of it along with that which has grown together.
If it is a pulsating vein that is opposite to you, or not pulsating: then go near, and fill the place with soft wax, and leave it compressed for two days, or three, until the wound rots and the boiling of blood subsides: then return to cut what remains of the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
Chapter on External Instruments for Cutting and Perforating.
Of these (instruments) are the shapes of Intromissors, and there are three types.
One is large, one is medium, and one is small.
Make them from iron with square ends properly so that they can enter easily into the opening.
These are the shapes of Experientials, and they are named piercing instruments, and one of them is called Beris, which means piercing: and there are three types.
From these there is great, and middle, and small.
They meet so that they may be treated by lancing, excision, fistulas, and abscesses from the bone that is among them.
And some become rounded, smooth, blunted, like the tips of large needles which are placed on handles, namely, from jasper or brass or iron or silver.
The better ones of them are those that become from jasper.
And also experience is made from black lead which meet so that they may be tried for fistulas, the concavity of which are reflections, so that they may return with their smoothness to those reflections.
And there are again three kinds. Because from them are long ones, medium ones and short ones, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its narrowness.
The form of uncions (uncini), and they are of many kinds.
Because from them are simple ones, namely those with one curvature: and they are of three kinds as you see, large, medium, and small.
And from them are blind uncions (uncini): and they are of three kinds.
And from them are uncions having two curvatures, and they are of three kinds: and from them are uncions having three curvatures, and they are of three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of knives (scalpels), which cut and scrape nodules, and abscesses: and they are of three kinds: because from them is great, middle, and small.
The ends of them that make the cut are sharp, other ends are not sharp: and they are placed thus only so as to provide help in scraping nodules near the fear of incising veins or nerves: and so that he who is ill may be cured by it, and find a little tranquility from burning which he finds during the scraping of abscesses.
They are made of copper and resemble a radio, from which alcohol is made: at the end there is a hole called Spatumilis, which can be opened to allow it to run both internally and externally as desired, as you see.
The form of Spatumili that are hidden among the fingers for the perforation of abscesses: the weak do not feel them; they come in three species, large, medium, and small.
The forms of Ventosari with which the flow of blood is cut off: they come in three species, large, medium, and small.
Make them out of copper or citron, round, slightly shorter than you see, and be delicate.
And these species of Ventosari should be large and small at your disposal, so that you can cut off blood quickly when needed, and then when there is no medicine present for you.
However, do not use them to cut off blood in every part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy parts: such as thighs, hips, arms, breasts, abdomen, groin, and similar places, from fleshy, moist areas.
And sometimes they are made into small instruments similar to the gourd, according to their shape: with which blood is cut off when it flows from the site of phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery; and sometimes they are round in this shape.
Chapter LIV (47).
Chapter on the treatment of human breasts resembling female breasts.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell during sleep (that is, when they start to become dirty while sleeping), until they resemble female breasts; and abscesses remain filthy.
Who therefore shrinks from it, it is necessary to cut across the breasts with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this shape from line 'b' to line 'g'. Then scrape off all the fat. Fill the wound with a dressing made of incarnate medicine. Then bring together two lips of the wound with stitching, and take care of it until it heals.
If however the breast hangs downwards and softens due to its size, as happens in women: then it is necessary to make an incision in its two upper sides with two similar crescent-shaped cuts, of which one contains the other at their ends so that the larger encloses the smaller, according to this shape from line 'b' to line 'g'. Afterwards scrape off the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and administer what I said about suturing and powders, which is necessary for the healing process, until it heals.
If however you do not make the incision that is required to be made because of the agitation of the patient or due to bleeding: then it is necessary to fill the wound with a dressing soaked in a corrosive ointment, and leave it until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then take care of it until it heals.
Chapter on the piercing of an abscess, which happens under a tumor.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses that occur under a tumor are of the types of hard ones containing cysts and those containing moisture.
Those which contain moisture must be cut open with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this shape from line 'b' to line 'g'. When all that is in the abscess has been drained out through pus, then fill it with old dressing and leave it until another day.
Then remove the wound, and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the boil is of the kind resembling knots from thistles, then cut it over the top, as we have said when cutting thistles equally.
But if the wound extends such that it discharges pus, then administer cautery to it, as we have said in what has been discussed earlier.
Chapter XLIX.
Chapter on the incision of boils that happens due to an Artery and a Vein.
When an artery bursts and the skin above it consolidates, it often happens that a boil forms there; similarly, this also happens with veins so that a boil and swelling occur in them.
And the signs by which it is known that a boil and swelling are due to an artery or vein are: because when a boil is due to an artery, it is long and aggregated in the depth of the body; and when you press the boil with your fingers, it feels as if there is a grating sensation.
And that which is due to a vein, is round in visible parts of the body.
And incision over this boil is an error, and especially when it is under the armpits, groins, neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great. Therefore, its care should be avoided with the iron, and if there are any of these also in the extremities or in the head, it should be avoided.
Therefore, over that which is due to the swelling of the artery opening, make a cut in the skin lengthwise. Then open the incision with scissors, then the artery; and release it from the tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert a pointed instrument under it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread at two places, as I taught you in extracting two arteries which are in the temples.
Then pierce the place which is between two ligaments with a lancet, until blood that is within it all comes out, and the abscess dissolves.
Then administer a cure that produces pus until the ligaments fall off: afterwards care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
If the abscess is due to a cut vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand as much as possible of the abscess along with the skin from it. Then introduce a probe under the place that you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and there should be a double thread in it, until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess with a good ligament: as I told you before, on the ligament of the vein, at two parts with two ends, with two threads.
But if you fear that the thread will be drawn out, then introduce another probe with another thread under the whole abscess near the incision: press and bind your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in half, until when it comes out what is within it: then cut off the excess skin, and release that which is bound from it.
Then place a poultice made of wine and oil over it. Then administer a cure with linen cloths and suitable ointments until it heals.
Chapter L.
Chapter on the abscess that happens from the twisting of nerves.
As it happens with an abscess in an Artery and Vein, similarly it happens with an abscess in Nerves: which happens to them by a blow, or happens from excessive labor, and similar causes: and it occurs most often in places of joints, or the heel, and in every place where the connections are moved: and it is a heavy abscess.
Its color is similar to the rest of the body, and it is found in several positions without pain: and when it is pressed with violence, one feels weak, similar to faintness.
And it is not an abscess gathered deep within the body, rather it is under the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not reach forward or anteriorly, nor backward to posterior areas.
Therefore, what is in the joints, should not be invaded with iron. Perhaps contraction will occur.
However, in what is in the head or forehead, puncture the skin with a lancet. If it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then hang it with a hook and scab it; then remove it and close the wound with stitches: care for it until it heals.
Chapter LI.
Section of abscess, which occurs in the abdomen.
Occasionally, in some men's bellies, and in their other bodies, there appear growths called Fungalia, which resemble mushrooms in nature.
Their root is subtle, and the head of them is thick, and their lips are turned inwards. And there is a small one among them, and there is one that can be enlarged greatly.
I myself have already seen a man, and in his belly there were two growths, which were more like mushrooms than other things: there was no difference between them, white, with fine roots, and their lips were turned inwards, and they festered, and moisture always flowed from them.
I then cut them and found one to weigh approximately X VIII ounces and the other about VI ounces. The operation for cutting them is as follows: consider if the patient is weak or sick, and the growth is white, moist, and fine-rooted; then cut it with a broad spatula, and have cauterization irons ready in your presence.
For often much blood is expelled during the cutting; therefore, be careful if you are overcome by blood, then cauterize it.
If you see a weak, fearful, and timid person from the cutting with iron, then take a properly made lead thread, and bind it with it; the method is as we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then add lime to the lead stringing. Therefore, do not cease to bind lead, whenever it is pressed into the growth, until it is cut off and falls away without effort.
If the growth is large-rooted, then there is some fear and dread in its cutting; particularly since it is in the belly.
It is possible to cut the middle of it. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then heal it, until the wound heals.
And beware not to cut what is of dark purple color, with few senses, foul appearance; for it is a cancerous boil; and I will come again after this, when I remember the Crab.
Chapter LII.
Chapter on the treatment of hernia of the umbilicus.
A protrusion of the umbilicus arises from various causes. It comes out either through a hernia of the scapula (what is above the abdomen) and that is called an umbilical hernia or it comes out through the intestines, according to what happens in other ruptures. It comes out either from blood flowing from a vein or an artery, as has been mentioned earlier. Or it comes out due to a constipated gas there.
If it is due to a hernia of the scapula and it protrudes like a tumor: then its color is similar to that of an abscess or body and it is soft, without pain: and it appears in various positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestines, then its position, as we have said, is of a more violent diversity. Therefore, when you press it with your fingers, it is hidden; then it returns and possibly there is a sound; and it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath and causes severe pain.
If however it is due to moisture, it is soft; then when you press it with your hand, it does not hide and it is not compressed nor does it increase in size.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs appears an abscess that turns black at the root.
If it is due to flesh born (caused): then it is a heavy, large, hard abscess and it festers according to its size.
But if it is due to gas, then when touched, it is soft.
The procedure for this is to consider whether the protrusion of the umbilicus is due to blood from an artery or vein or gas; then it is necessary to prevent its treatment. For there is fear and dread, as I have taught you in the chapter where I said that abscesses due to an artery or vein are dangerous.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia: then it is necessary that you command the sick one, so that he holds his breath and stands extended and still. Then mark [the area] with hot wax around the entire navel. Then command him to lie down on his back under your hands. Then encircle with a broad bandage around the navel over the place you marked with hot wax. Then extend the middle of the incision upwards with a large spoon. Then bind him around firmly with thread or with silk cord: and the knot of the ligature should be a square knot.
Then open the extended incision above the ligature. If you then find it [the hernia] already caught by the ligature: then extract the hernia sac, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen: and if you find a hernia, then take it with the spoon, and cut off the excess.
If however it is an artery or vein [affected]: then bind it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles and insert into them two strong threads: and insert the two needles into the circle you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
Then tie the abscess in four places on the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the place until the rotten flesh extends: and falls by itself; or cut it when it becomes soft and rots.
Then care for him with what is necessary from ointments until he is healed.
If the protrusion of the navel is from a soft flesh or moisture in him: then hollow out the abscess as we have said. You shall draw out blood or moisture that you find in it.
Then take care of it with what solidifies the place.
Chapter LIII.
Chapter on treating Cancers.
We have already stated in the division of Cancer's species and the way to treat it with medicines: and beware when treating it with iron, lest it ulcerate. We also said that cancer is generated in the matrix, and warned against cauterizing its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is at a place where it can be eradicated. Such as cancer that is in the breasts or hips and similar limbs, which are to be extracted entirely when possible: especially when it is beginning small.
But when it becomes ancient and large, one should not approach it.
For I was unable to heal anyone from it; nor have I seen anyone before me who achieved that.
And the operation on it, when it is placed as we said, is to precede and dissolve a patient from black cholera several times. Then, if you find phlebotomy itself with obvious fullness.
Then prepare the patient with a preparation in which the operation takes place.
Then throw hooks that fit into the cancer. Afterward hollow out the cancer from every side with skin, as examined, until nothing remains of its roots; and let blood flow, but do not cut it quickly, rather press the areas, and remove all thick blood with your hand or if possible there with tools.
If however the flow of thick blood from an incision of the artery or vein opposes you; then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
[Section on the Cure of Hydropsis]
Chapter LIV. We now discuss the division of hydropisis species and how water accumulates; and the signs for each species and its treatment along with medications.
And that which is cured with iron is not but the asclitis species alone; it does not approach iron for the timpanitis species; nor deeply for the hyposarca species, since it is lethal.
When you have already been treated for this hydropisis species of timpanitis with medications and the treatment did not work; then consider. For if the patient has already become weakened or there is another illness besides hydropisis; such as if there is coughing or looseness of the bowels, and similar cases; then beware not to treat him with iron because it is dangerous.
But if you see the patient overflowing with strength and no other illness besides hydropisis; and he is neither a child nor an old man; then there is room for operation on him, that you lift up the weakened person standing between your hands, and afterward, the attendant presses his abdomen with his hand to force water downward toward the lower part of the breast.
Then take a thorny spoon in this shape: Let it be of two sharp parts, long, and sharp-pointed at the end like a spoon. However, there should be something short in it to prevent you from passing through with it during the operation as far as the intestine and damaging it.
Then consider. For if hydropisis generation is from the intestines, then it is necessary to extend with a section from the navel a length of three fingers downward directly above the breast.
But if hydropisis generation is due to liver illness; then make the section on the left side from the navel a length of three fingers.
And if its generation is due to the spleen, then let there be a section on the right side: and it is not necessary that there should also be a section on the side towards which the sick person wishes to lie, so that superfluities do not flow to that weak place.
Then perforate the entire skin with an instrument. Then insert your hand into that section, and scoop it up with a spatula between the skin, and scoop out, as if you are peeling it; let the quantity scraped off be the size of a fingernail or about that.
Then pierce the spatula until the spatula reaches an empty place: and that is where the water is. Then extract it, and insert the instrument into the opening, which has this form. And it resembles a cannula: it is made of silver, or copper, or brass, linen, cleaned; on the lower part of it there is a small opening, and on its sides there are three openings, two on one side, and one on the other; and the tip of it is slit, according to the way of cutting a reed, as you see: at the upper end of it there is a band.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately descends upon the instrument; therefore let out a moderate amount of water by the hour.
For if you let out more than is needed from it, perhaps the sick person will die by resolution of his vital spirit; or a syncope occurs which approaches death.
However, let out from it according to its potency, and according to the signs given to you by the pulse of the sick person, and the quality of his condition.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
That is because it is retained immediately due to the skin which holds the opening that is on the spatula; about which I told you to pierce it in that way.
Then repeat the instrument on the second day, if you see the patient able to bear it; and also remove a small amount from water.
Probe it for a few days without fear, and be careful to avoid error; until there remains only a little in the water.
If you fear for the patient and let out much water; then care for him with warm sand, many sweating in a bath and sun, and wait for his thirst; and care for him with most drying medicines, until he is cured; and cauterize over the stomach, spleen, and liver, after removing the water; as I told you in what preceded.
Chapter on the care of infants born in places where their urinary tracts are not pierced.
Chapter 50.
When anyone of the infants comes out of his mother's womb, and the head is not pierced by a lamb's forceps, or the opening is narrowed, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore, help him by immediately piercing with a thin spatula such as Spatumili.
Then place a thin nail made from lead into the wound and tie it; and hold it for three or four days.
When he wishes to urinate, remove it and mix [something] with it. Then bring it back.
And if you do not place lead, it is now possible that the urine which flows upon the area does not allow the wound to close.
But if his wound is narrowed, he is treated with lead as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
But those in whom the wound is not in its proper place are harmed. This is because the wound is at the end of the spine of the one who is born; therefore, he cannot mix it with urine towards the front until he raises the spine with his hand to the upper parts. Nor is there generation in him, because the semen cannot reach the womb according to the correct direction; and it is a very foul illness.
The method of operation in him is that he lies down sick on his back. Then extend the spine of his head with your left hand with a strong stretch, and cut off the head of the spine from the location of the glans, with a pointed or sharp spoon-like instrument; like cutting a reed, or as you radish something, so that the middle comes out similar to the head of the spine: and so that the wound falls in the middle according to what is necessary.
And beware of yourself during your operation from bleeding. It often happens that this occurs. Therefore oppose him with what causes the bleeding and care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter on Albater (inflammation, suppuration, rotting, blackening, and adhesion) occurring in the foreskin and head of the penis.
Head LVI.
These Albathers occur frequently in the string, and it is a prominence of foul flesh.
And from it one is malicious, and one is not malicious.
Therefore, the non-malicious one should be suspended with a fine hook and cut off until it is completely clean. Then place on it a dish immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it afterwards with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.
If the Albather is malicious and of foul color, then it is necessary to apply cautery after its incision and its root.
If the Albather is in the foreskin of a captive who has not been circumcised, and part of it is within the foreskin and part is outside: then it is necessary to remove the Albather that is inside first, until it hardens; then take care of it from outside. Because when you treat it at the same time, the foreskin will not heal without weeping.
Moreover, they also occur in testicles, and the scrotum turns black and rots. Therefore, you should hollow out everything that has already turned black, and what is about to rot or has already rotted.
Then put linseed on it after that with honey that has been crushed with flour of pomegranate rind and sieved herbs.
Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If there is a flow of blood, then apply cautery with lunar cautery according to this shape:
Cautery is useful in two ways at the same time, namely for a flow of blood and when a wound is torn apart.
If the head of the string is torn apart and destroyed completely within an hour: then it is necessary to insert a cannula made of lead into the meat of the penis so that the weak one urinates over it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis, and this kind of adherence does not occur, unless in him whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required over it: and sometimes adherence occurs due to a wound or an abscess. Therefore, it must be scraped off with a blunt spatula until the ligament dissolves, and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish between them, then it must be scraped off a little from the head of the penis and from the foreskin. Because when the foreskin is thin, it may be perforated quickly due to its thinness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a fine linen cloth which has already been soaked in cold water, so that they do not adhere again.
Then it is to be treated with wine until it hardens.
Chapter LVII.
Chapter on the purification of infants and their treatment due to mistake that has occurred to them.
Circumcision is not a solution to continuity, as are other wounds: but since it comes from our operation, with our will, and its use is specifically for boys, it is necessary that we mark a better outcome and an easier path leading to health in the procedure.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I have found a larger number of artisans and phlebotomists to use purification by circumcision with scissors and forceps: they use the treated, bound, and incised with a nail.
I myself have already tested all these methods, and found no better cleansing with forceps, and no better binding with thread.
Because, in cleansing with a new scalpel, the skin often escapes. Because the skin of the foreskin has two layers: perhaps the upper layer is cut and the lower layer torn: it is therefore necessary to make another incision, and pain will result. And when cleansing which is done with an alfecat, that is, a finger, as the tailors use it, it is not possible to make an incision at the extremity of the male member: because it may enter the opening of it.
In cleansing with a nail, perhaps the iron slips out and ruins your operation; and indeed the skin of a child is naturally short, and often occur in this way, that they do not need cleansing; and I have already seen it.
Cleansing with forceps and binding with thread, a good experiment has revealed to me: because the sharpness that is at the top is like the sharpness that is at the bottom. Therefore, when you press your hand, the two sharpnesses correspond, and they cut according to one operation at one time: and a compression forms, enclosing the skin with a rod from all sides, with which no error can occur at all.
And the method of your operation is to make the boy understand, especially if he understands a little, that you do not do it except that you bind thread on his rod alone: and leave him until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy in every way possible for you, from the fact that he receives understanding with his own intellect. Then make him stand between your prepared hands of the right size, and not sitting; and hidden forceps in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand to its shaft, and blow into the skin, and draw it up until the head of the reed comes out. Then cleanse it from that which accumulates in it dirt.
Then bind the marked place with double thread. Then bind a little lower with another ligature. Then hold it with your index finger and thumb, and retain the position of the lower ligature well, and cut between the two ligatures. Then lift the skin quickly upward, and extract the head of the reed. Then let the blood flow slowly (it is better), and place powder on top of it; and above the powder lay a cloth in which an egg has been boiled in rosewater, crushed with fresh good oil; and let it remain upon this until another day; and take care of it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
The form of the scissors for cleansing is as follows.
Let them have two pointed ends and let them be converging; let no prong of the nail come out at the ends; and let the length of the two points be equal to the length of two handles equally.
But error in cleansing is when the entire inner skin or a part of it escapes at the incision.
Therefore it is necessary that you stretch it out from your hour with your nail before the incision of the place; and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a pair of tweezers, and cut it.
If more than three days have passed and what remains under the reed is inflamed and unincised, then let it be; until the abscess becomes hot and scabs off easily, and cut it according to your preparation; be careful not to cut from the head of the reed. That will not harm him.
Treat that with it which consolidates the wound from the powders, as we have said in the treatise on powders; and if it cuts into the skin beyond measure, and goes upwards, it does not harm him even then.
Treat that with it until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
On the extraction of a retained bladder stone.
Retention of urine in the bladder, occurs from a blockage made from stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh born, and similar things from what we have said in modes of treatment, in division.
If the urine does not flow and you see that its retention is due to a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary that he who is ill be laid low on his knees. Then his feet should be placed upon his back, and he should stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and he should contract his breath as much as possible for him. Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is compressed to expel the stone, the urine flows out.
If it does not flow as we have said and a severe situation is over the ill person: then it is necessary to administer extraction of it with an instrument which is called syringe, whose form is like this: It should be made from silver, and be fine, soft, concave like the reed pen of a bird in fineness, long like the palm of one hand and a half: let there be a fine cannula at its tip.
And the method of urine outflow through it is, that you take a double thread and tie a wool or cloth, or good ligature at its end: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut with scissors if there is too much from the wool, but introduce into the cannula with force, like pulling.
Then anoint the syringe with oil, or with butter and egg white: and make him sit on a chair, and warm the bladder, and his own member with moist oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then introduce the syringe into the vein with ease, until it reaches the root of the vein.
Then fold it over at the upper part of the navel.
Then push the syringe into it until it reaches the bladder and feels it weak as it enters the empty space: this is not done according to this order unless because the pathway where it goes has a tortuousness.
Then gradually extend the thread with wool. The vein follows the wool.
Then draw it out, and let the vein run through the way of urine: and continue to do this, without stopping, until the bladder is emptied, and the weak relief is found.
Section on the quality of clysterizing the bladder with a syringe.
Chapter LIX.
When a wound occurs in the bladder, or blood in it freezes, or pus collects and there is a desire for water and medications to be poured into it: then let it be done with an instrument called Clepshydra, and this is its form.
It is deaf, that is, closed. And there are three holes in it, two on one side and one on the other side, as you see.
There shall be a hollow place where the thing that pushes is placed, according to the amount it requires without addition, until when something is pulled with it, it is attracted by humidities; and when it is pushed, with it is expelled to a distance: such as the Clepshydra does, which projects naphtha, that is, Greek fire in the battles of Mars.
When it is desired to pour humidities into the bladder, insert the end of the Clepshydra into the humidity and pull with it what pushes towards the higher part; for the humidity is attracted in the hollow of the Clepshydra.
Then insert its end into a rod, as we have said in the syringe. Then push the humidity with what pushes; for that humidity immediately reaches the bladder, thus the sick man feels it.
The form of a subtle enema by which the bladder is cleansed.
Make it from silver or gold; its head should be higher like the almakah with a small opening, and under it there should be a space for a cord to pass through.
Then take the bladder of a ram and put the humidity in it, which is to cleanse the bladder. Then tie it with a strong cord between two openings and heat the humidity slightly over the fire.
Then insert the end of the clisterium into the rod, subsequently wrap your hand over the bladder with a suitable moist binding until the sick one feels that the moisture has already reached the bladder.
If the bladder is not present for you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and pierce it entirely from its roundness. Then insert the thread into these holes as they are turned. Then gather the circle as if it were sewn together: when you put into it what you wish from moistness, oil, and water.
Then bind it with an instrument: and do with it as you did with the bladder by expression with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
§ On the Extraction of a Stone.
We have said about the types of stones, their treatment with medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in kidneys, bladder, and urinary tract, and its signs; we have also mentioned the operation on the stone with hand or section: this is properly a stone in the bladder; it is the one that hardens in the rod; I am telling you about this with clear explanation and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that a stone generated in the bladder most often occurs in children.
And among its signs is that urine comes out from the bladder like water in its fineness; and there appears in it white sand, and the sick one rubs his rod, and labors with it, and often hangs down. Then it is erected, and exits with it in many of them.
And the healing of children is easy until they reach fourteen years. It is difficult in the elderly. In young people it is moderate, since it is between that which heals quickly and that which requires a longer time to heal. However, in the one whose stone is larger, the cure is easier; but if the stone is small, the cure is more difficult for that one.
When we reach the cure, it is first necessary to clean the sick person with an enema, which extracts all feces that are within their intestines; for it sometimes prevents the discovery of the Stone during investigation.
Then let the sick person be taken with their feet, shaken and moved towards the lower parts; so that the Stone may descend into the deep bladder or rise from a high place several times.
Then let him sit between your hands, and his hands be beneath his buttocks; so that the bladder is entirely relaxed towards the lower parts.
Then examine him, and touch him externally.
If you therefore feel the Stone in a space, then immediately approach with section over it.
If it does not fall with your touch at all, then you must anoint the index finger with oil of the left hand if the sick person is a child; or the middle finger if he is an adult full-grown; and insert it into his anus; and search for the Stone until it is beneath your finger; and turn it slowly towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it outwards against the place of the incision; and command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another attendant, to lift the testicles with his right hand towards the upper parts; and with his left hand, to remove the skin that is under the testicles in the part where the incision is.
Then insert a probe cutting, whose form is as follows. Find within him what is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, to the side of the left: and let the section be made above the stone, and your finger be in the anus: and let the section be transverse, so that it is a broad section externally and narrow internally, according to the quantity in which the exit of the stone from there is not larger.
Perhaps the finger compresses the stone that is within the anus at the incision point and exits easily.
And know, that from the stone are those angles and margins, wherefore its exit is difficult on account of this.
And it is soft, similar to a gland, and round; and its exit will be easy.
To that which has angles and margins, add in the incision.
If it does not exit in this manner, then it is necessary to fissure above it; or to tighten upon it with a device whose tip is like the moon that tightens on the stone and does not slip away from it; or to introduce below it an instrument with a curved tip.
If you cannot do this, then widen the opening slightly. If something prevents you from doing it with blood, cut it off with a lancet.
If the stone is larger than one, then push first and foremost on the bladder bone. Then cut upon it. Then push a little after this; and do likewise if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then it is ignorance to cut above it with a great incision. Because it happens to the sick one of two things, either death or continuous flow of urine; therefore, because the place is not consolidated at all.
But administer its expulsion until it exits; or fissure its fracture with forceps, until you extract it piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with tar, aloe, and dragon's blood; tie it up, and place upon it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water; to let it sit and heal the hot abscess.
Then turn the sick one on his neck, and do not undo the bandage, until the third day. When you undo it (the bandage), apply balm to the place with much water and oil.
Then care for him with dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until he is healed.
If a hot abscess or ulcerous eruption arises in the wound, and it becomes corrosive, as if blood congeals in the bladder and urine is prevented from passing: this is known to be when blood comes out with urine. Insert your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood. For if it remains, it encourages decay of the bladder and its rotting.
Then clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and apply to it all kinds of things that agree with healing until it is healed.
And it is necessary during the entire healing period to bind two thighs together and apply, because of the medicine placed on the site.
If the stone is small and it is in the neck of the bladder and it obstructs the passage of urine, then care for him with what I have said before you reach the incision. For many times you are excused from this treatment during the incision, now I have proved that.
And you should take a perforator made of iron, its shape is triangular, sharp and fixed to wood.
Then take a thread and tie it to a rod under a stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Insert the piercing iron into the rod easily, until it reaches the point of the stone; and you turn the piercing iron with your hand in the stone gradually; and compress the piercing to make it penetrate from the other side.
The urine is discharged immediately.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outside part of the rod. It is broken and comes out with the urine, and heals the sick man.
If this treatment is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it from being done; then tie a thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut the rod over the stone between two bindings. Then remove it (the piercing iron or stone). Afterwards untie the knot and clean off the frozen blood that forms in the wound.
And the knot of thread under the stone is not necessary unless it prevents the return to the bladder; and another knot above, unless when the string is untied after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound; and this requires you to raise the skin over when you tie the upper string so that it returns to the incision and covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI (61).
Chapter on the removal of stones in women.
Not much stone is generated in women.
If a stone happens to one of them (women), then the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden because of the numerous procedures involved.
One of them may be that she is a virgin.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who will expose herself to the doctor when she is a virgin or married women.
Thirdly, because you do not find a woman well versed in this art, especially in surgical operations with the hand.
And fourthly, distance from the place of the stone: for it requires deep incision, and this entails fear.
If necessity calls for it, then one must take a woman physician who is well versed in this: but this is seldom found.
But if that is not available, then seek a chaste and skilled physician and a present midwife who is well-learned in women's matters or a woman familiar with this art: make her present and particularly instruct her to do everything you command regarding the stone.
Firstly, that if she is a virgin, then one must look to see if there is a finger that can be inserted into her anus and search for the stone.
If it is found, then twist it with the finger and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the weak vagina and search for the stone after she has placed her left hand on the bladder and press it firmly.
If the stone is found, then one must gradually move it from the bladder opening towards the lower parts with all one's strength until it reaches the root of the hip.
Then, it is to be cut on the side of the half vagina near the root of the hip from any part that is prepared for it, and one feels the stone in that place: the finger should not be removed from the stone while twisting it under it; and the incision should be small initially. Then insert a probe over that cut.
Then insert a probe over that cut. If it feels the stone, then add to the cut according to the proportionate quantity as the stone comes out from there.
And know that the appearances of stones are many. From this it is small and large, smooth and rough, long and round having branches.
Know therefore its appearance, so that it may be shown to you regarding the thing which you wish.
If blood conquers you, then add at its place zege tritum and hold it for one hour until the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out: and do, so that you prepare yourself with the instruments, which I said for the removal of stones in men, to help you in your operation.
If blood conquers you and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery which is cut: then put powder over it and tighten it with thread suitable for ligation; and do not move it; and leave the stone and do not pull it out. Perhaps a weak woman may die. Then care for the wound.
When the sharpness of blood subsides after days and the place becomes putrid, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
[Title: On the Section of a Watery Hernia.]
A watery hernia is not anything other than a gathering of moisture under the white membrane that contains the testicle: and it is called a sifac.
And at times it is in its own panniculus which nature has prepared for it in the part of the scrotum until it is considered as another egg, and it is between the white membrane of the testicle that we mentioned: and this does not happen often.
And indeed, the generation of this [abscess] in branches is due to weakness that occurs in testicles: therefore, this matter flows towards them. And sometimes it happens as a result of striking upon the testicles.
This moisture has many colors. Or it is of this moisture, which tends towards a citron-like yellow color, or red like blood, or foul like feces, or black, or watery white, and that is the most common one.
And signs by which it is known where there is an accumulation of water, are these. For if it is in the scrotum, which I have said, then the abscess is round and shorter than the figure of an owl; and the testicle is not apparent because moisture keeps it from every side.
And if the moisture is within its own bag [scrotum], then the abscess is round like part of an owl, and therefore a man will burst because it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the scrotum [bag], then it falls down.
When one desires to know the color of the moisture, then test the color of the moisture on an abscess with a square probe, whose form has preceded. According to that which comes out in the track of the probe, judge about what is between it [the moisture and the probe].
Since we come to the cure with iron [lancet], then it is necessary that you first order the weak one to be bled if possible for him, and observe his body to be full.
Then he lies on his back on a low bed, and puts many cloths beneath him.
Then you sit on the left side of him, and command the servant to sit at his right, who stretches out his stick [lancet] to one side of two layers of skin of the testicles, and to the region of the groin [of the abdomen].
Then take a broad spatula, and cut the scrotal skin in the middle along its length, almost up to the ridge: and make the incision according to a straight line equidistant from the one that divides the scrotal skin, until you reach the white layer enclosing it: and scrape it off and observe it, or take care not to cut it off: and let your scraping be on the part that hangs down more with the egg: and scrutinize with subtlety according to the quantity, as much as possible.
Perform a wide opening of the spermatic sac with water, and drain out all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with scissors and stretch the spermatic sac upward, without touching the skin enclosing the testicles: and cut the spermatic sac however it is possible for you to cut it, either entirely or partially, but especially the subtle side of it. For if you do not carefully examine, there is no certainty that water will not return through the incision.
If, however, an egg appears outside its sheath during your operation: then when you complete the incision of the spermatic sac, bring it back. Then attach the two lips of the scrotal skin with stitches.
Then treat it as other wounds until it heals.
If you find a rotten egg stained with blackness, then it is necessary to bind the vessels that support it, fearing bleeding.
Then remove the testicle with its supporting structure and drain the egg: afterwards treat it as I said.
If, however, water is gathered in two parts, then you will know that there are two branches: so cut the other part as you did with the other.
And if it appears to you that the operation should be one, then do it: afterwards cleanse the blood. And insert a linen thread immersed in oil or in rose oil inside the incision; and place an additional linen thread that you have soaked in wine and oil on its outside and expand it over both testicles, and search for the bowel opening; and place double cloths on top, they are poultices; and tie them up above with a ligament having six knots.
Then two pieces of linen are soaked in wine and filled with carminative herbs, shaped in this manner; the ends that are applied are pressed down with wet wool or linen; they are tied at the hips, and one end reaches from the anus to the back, while the other extends to the neck part; two ends are placed below on the thighs, and two more on the lower abdomen; all are tied in the loins of the arms.
And sometimes this branch is artificially healed with cautery at the incision site using iron; it is to take a small, sharp cauterizing knife and cut the skin of the testicles; it is lit, as we have described; until the white sifac containing water is exposed; then take the cautery in this manner.
It is similar to the Greek letter.
Then pierce it with that and set it alight until all moisture comes out.
Then pull the sifac with tweezers and scorify it with a sharp heated cautery, cutting as much of it as possible until you have removed the entire thing.
And be careful not to let the fire touch it (the wound).
And know that this operation is safer, more distant from bleeding, and better than the operation with incision.
If the opposite happens to you during the hour of incision or cauterization, if an abscess forms, bleeding occurs, or something else; then it is necessary to treat what opposes you with the appropriate cure, as previously mentioned.
If the patient is timid and does not await this operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what I have told you, and it is.
When it is informed to you by what we have said about meanings that the branch is watery, then it must be done that the patient sits on an elevated seat.
Then perforate the abscess in its lower part with a wide-mouthed spatula; and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide, until the water runs out completely.
Then place a cloth over the place, and bind it, and let it heal the remaining water; then take care of him until the wound is healed.
If there is an obstruction to the outflow of water at the hour when you perforate it, and this is not otherwise because a white membrane obstructs the opening of the wound and prevents the outflow of water, then it must be done that a feather or instrument with which the water of hydropic patients is drawn, whose form precedes, is inserted into the wound, or add a small amount to the wound operation.
And know that the water returns and collects after six months, or approximately these. When it has collected, then it is to be drained in the same way, and the patient will pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
Chapter on the care of meaty branches.
Know that in the section on this meaty branch, there is danger of death through fear in many dispositions. Therefore it seems to me that its release can be saved from this.
And I am remembering the operation in this and the form of abscesses.
Therefore I say that many abscesses occur in the body, from which the testicles are composed, and this happens for various reasons, such as.
From an abundance that is sharp or acidic, which flows towards the testicles. From a blow.
And an abscess's color is according to the body's color and no pain is found in it; it is a heavy abscess.
Perhaps it is a stone abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it comes from the knotting of arteries and their swelling; as has already been mentioned before; or from the swelling of veins.
What is due to the swelling of the arteries can be recognized by the position of the abscess, when it is compressed with your fingers. And it should not be touched completely.
But what comes from the swelling of veins is not discharged from it when compressed with fingers.
And now it is possible that a section may be made in this manner and on the remaining flesh; and it is to separate the skin of the testicles. Then extend the egg upward and remove it along with a white piece of gauze; and release the suspenders from the bladder, and tie the bladder; and cut the suspender after you have released it from all parts of the bladder.
If the egg is consolidated with the born flesh, then it must be drawn and cut.
And if there is an adhesion between something from the scrotum or within the bladder; then it must be released entirely, and cut with a round incision.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind; then it must be cut entirely and the egg should be drawn out, as we have said.
When your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; afterwards, take care of it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
Title: Caput LXIIII (Chapter LXIIII)
On the treatment of roots, which concerns vines.
An abscess enveloped by a certain swelling, resembling a cluster of grapes with the softening of the testicles, becomes difficult to move and exercise, as well as walk, for a weak person.
And in the treatment of this illness, there is caution due to the memory of what preceded it.
However, we must say the operation in it according to what the first ones did.
Therefore, I say that you should make a weak person sit on a raised seat. Then push the suspender of the testicles downwards. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, near the rods that are close by; and let another servant hold it and stretch it with a violent extension.
Then make an incision with a broad, sharp transverse cut on the rods, until the vessels are exposed.
Then remove all the scab from every part, as we said to you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert a pointed tool with a double thread into them and tie it at the first places where vines occur; and tie it again at the last of those. Then cut them in half with a straight midline incision along the body length and remove what has accumulated from foul and corrupted moisture.
Then take care of the wound with the treatment of other wounds where the worm is generating pus, so that the vessels nourishing one testicle are discharged. For it is not harmful through that.
If vines occur in all the vessels, then they should be removed for this reason from the testicles with the vessels; lest the nourishment of the egg is deprived, due to the incision, and it rots or burns and is not useful with them.
The head of the sixty-fifth chapter. I assume that this is a
On the treatment of Intestinal Worms.
The course (of treatment) for intestinal worms occurs from an incision that happens when the sifach of the abdomen is extended over the lower abdomen near the flank of the abdomen.
Why do the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from the hernia or its extension.
And these two types (of rupture) happen for many reasons: either from a blow, or from jumping, or shouting, or lifting a heavy object and similar things.
And a sign that it is from the extension of the hernia. It occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly; it is an abscess that is turned around deep within; for this reason, because the hernia compresses the intestine.
And a sign of it when it is from the hernia incision, because it causes intense pain suddenly from its beginning; and it is an abscess different, appearing under the skin near; and that is because of the exit of the intestine, and the course of it to the outside of the hernia.
And sometimes it comes out with a worm (zirbum); and this is called the intestinal worm (Ramex intestinalis) and worm (zirbia); and sometimes it happens with diarrhea.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine with feces and remains there; and that is with danger for the sick, because it causes pain to worsen, especially when it is compressed.
And in the treatment of the types of this disease with iron there is fear; therefore one must be careful with the risks in it.
And the method of operation is to command the sick person to push his intestine back into the hollow with his hand if he obeys the return. Then he lies down on his neck upon your hands; and lift up his legs.
Extend the skin that follows the skin upward and cut the entire skin of the scrotum in length. Then bind the hooks of the incision to two lips of the incision, according as you need to open the incision with them; and the cut shall be according to the quantity, as much as is possible, so that the egg may come out from it.
Then scrape the sheep's-wool sac, and what is beneath the skin of the scrotum, until the white membrane of the sheep's-wool sac becomes hard from all parts; then insert your thumb into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white membrane of the sheep's-wool sac, and between the folds, and without the adhesion which is on the back part of the egg.
Then with the right hand move towards the inner skin of the testicles; and with this stretch the white membrane of the sheep's-wool sac upwards with the left hand; and lift the egg from the sheep's-wool sac to the part of the incision, and command the attendant to stretch the egg upwards; and you dissolve the adhesion which is on the back part of the egg after the complete solution.
And search with your fingers whether there is nothing there from the intestine rolled up in the hard white sheep's-wool sac. If you find something of that, then push it down into the lower belly.
Then take the probe, in which is a thick thread, made of linen from ten threads; and insert it at the last part of the sheep's-wool sac, that is, the membrane, which follows the skin of the testicles after the incision; then cut the ends which project from the thread, until there are four threads. Then prepare something of them on top of something with a shape that is in the manner of a cross; and tie the egg-white membrane (alshifa), which we spoke of, because it is a strong ligament under the skin of the testicles, until no mucus, which nourishes them, can send anything to them; so that a hot abscess does not occur there. Place again the ligament second beyond the first ligament, distant from it by less than two fingers. After these two ligaments, let go of the sifach which is under the skin of the testicles, to the size of a finger; and cut the rest all around, and remove the egg from it.
Then, cut on the lower part of the skin of the testicles with a section where blood and pus run; as we said in what was mentioned before.
Then administer wool soaked in oil and place it in the wound; and administer the ligament as we said before. And sometimes burn the white sifach as was said, after its incision, fearing a flow of blood. For this often happens. Let go of the ligament until it falls by itself.
If the case delays, then boil with hot water; and place on top of it what was said before, until it falls by itself.
Then, care for the wound with the rest of the treatment for wounds, until healed.
Chapter LXVI.
Chapter on Windy Nose (Rhinorrhea).
In this windy nose, I have not seen anyone who dared to cure it with iron.
And first they said that it happens as was said in the windy nose that is with worms (infestation). That is to tie vessels after section above it with ease; then cut in the middle and care for later with what opens it itself, until the vessels fall out; and take care of the wound as we said before, until it heals.
Chapter LXVII.
Chapter on Disruptions that occur in the groins.
When there is a rupture in the groins as we said, and a place empties out, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles; and if it descends, it is too little, and it returns in every hour; but if this condition continues with that time, a fissure is added to the sifach (epididymis), until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And it happens from the extension of sifach, which is in inguinibus, as we said. That is, because sifach extends: then it softens, and the place is opened, and it drains.
And its care is with cautionery, as its narrative preceded.
And at times it is cured with iron, according to this manner: and it is that the weak one lies on his back upon your hands. Then cut the place of the rupture and draining, cutting along the width, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tie down the alsihafak and what are under the skin, until the white sifach is exposed, which is below the skin following it.
Then take a probe and put it upon the draining from sifach, and press it to the depth of the abdomen.
Then two draining points are raised on the end of the radius from sifach, and tie them together with a stitch; then extract the end of the radius.
And do not cut the alsihafak at all, nor touch an egg, nor anything else, as I told you in the treatment of the intestines' branches.
Then care for it with the wound healing method. And when you make a cut, clean it, and restore the wound, until it hardens.
For sifach contracts and no additional draining is added to the rupture.
And cautionery is better in this place, because it is closer to salvation.
Chapter LXVIII.
Chapter on the softening of the scrotum skin.
The scrotum skin is frequently softened in some men, because the flesh between it becomes soft and its appearance is foul.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat him, that he makes the sick person lie down on his back, and cuts through the entire softened skin over the natural skin.
Then gather the two lips together with stitching: and if you wish, or first of all remove the excess softened skin with three or four stitches, and a firm stitch.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then take care of the treatment of the remaining wounds until they heal and the threads fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
[Section Title: Castration]
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law: and therefore it would be permissible for me not to remember it in my book: and its remembrance is not necessary, unless because of two methods.
One reason is that it should be in the knowledge of a physician when he is asked about it: and so that he may know the cure for him to whom it happens.
And the other reason is that we often need castration of some animals for our benefit through it, such as rams, gazelles, and cats, and similar ones among animals.
Therefore I say that castration is done according to two methods. Or by attrition. Or by a cut and section.
In that which is done by attrition, the method of operation is this: we make the animal sit in warm water until his testicles become softened and relaxed, and hang down: then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and are not noticeable under touch.
In castration by cut and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of his testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensorium, and cut through everything with one cut until when two eggs come out: then cut each after you have scoured it, and do not leave anything on them except sifak for the subtle part that is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that by attrition because attrition may leave something from the testicles, which makes the animal desire copulation.
Then heal the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
[Section Title] On the care of hermaphrodites in two methods.
Hermaphroditus is from men according to two modes. One of them is that there appears in it the space following (?), or in the skin of the testicles, in what is between two testicles, a figure like that of a female womb, in which hairs are present: and sometimes urine flows out of that which is in the skin of the testicles.
In women there is one species, and it is a female womb above the comb (?), like the small testicles of a man, protruding to the exterior: one of them is like the prick of a man, and two like two testicles.
And the treatment of three species, two from men, and one from women, is: because it is necessary to cut the flesh added, until the impression escapes. Then treat them with the treatment of other wounds.
In the second species of men, from which urine flows out (?), which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor any treatment at all.
Chapter LXXI.
Chapter on the incision of tentigo and protruding flesh in women's ulcers.
A tentigo may be added on a natural matter, until it becomes filthy and ugly to look at; and sometimes it is magnified in certain women so much that it expands like in men, and reaches the point of intercourse.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold the excess of tentigo with the hand or with a hook, and to cut; and not at the end of the cutting, especially in the deep roots, so that there is no bleeding.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds, until it heals.
The flesh that arises is the flesh that is born in the opening of the womb, until it fills itself; and perhaps it comes out to the outside like a tail, and because of this some people call the illness 'tailless'. Therefore, we should cut it as we would cut a tumor, and heal it until it is healed.
On the treatment of an unperforated female breast lump.
Chapter LXXII.
The vagina should be whole, not perforated, or have a small hole. It is either natural or accidental.
The accidental [condition] is that which precedes the illness; it itself arises either from added flesh, or thin tissue, or fat; and it occurs either in the depth of the womb, or in its sides, or on its surface, either upper or lower; and it prohibits coitus and conception, and parturition, and possibly menstruation.
And the knowledge of this [condition] is obtained through the examination by an obstetrician, if the membrane rupture is nearby apparent.
If it is not visible, then seek it with your fingers, or with a rod.
If the membrane rupture is from thin tissue and is near to two lips, then expel it, and tear it apart.
And place a piece of wool on top of the two lips.
Then place your fingers of both hands simultaneously, and let the woman lie down on her back with her legs spread open. Then stretch the two lips forcefully, until the thin tissue is torn apart and the membrane rupture is opened.
Then take linen, and soak it in oil, and place it on the spot; let the woman anoint this place every day to prevent the area from hardening with a scab.
If the thin tissue is thick and fatty, then it must be cut with a broad sharp-edged leaf of myrtle.
If the membrane rupture is from born flesh, then suspend it with hooks and cut it; have medicines with you which stop bleeding without causing pain, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and pitch mixed with sheep's milk fat.
Then administer a wide cannula made of lead to prevent the wound from hardening quickly; hold it for some days; then administer dried flaxseed, and then treat the rest with the usual treatment until it heals.
And sometimes is born in the matrix a birth of fleshes of another kind: it is therefore necessary that they are cut according to this manner: while it is not an apostema cancerous, for an apostema cancerous which is in the matrix, there should be no opposition with iron altogether.
Chapter LXXIII.
About the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil and Bothor regarding red ones in women's veins.
Hemorrhoids indeed are an opening of veins' orifices, until much blood continuously flows out from them.
When hemorrhoids become chronic, they become thrombosed: and I have already said about their species and signs in the division of them; and here I will say what among them receives treatment, and what does not.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the matrix and do not appear to the senses, then there is no treatment with iron for them.
But those among them which are on the opening of the matrix above which sensation falls, are those that can be treated.
It is therefore necessary to introduce a woman into a cold house. Then extend Athehelil with forceps or with rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle powder over them near the flow of blood from one of the incisions without biting: such as ashes of incense, dragon's blood, thistle, and similar ones.
Then push his feet to the wall at hour one. Afterwards place her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumach, and bark of pomegranates, and gallnuts, and similar ones.
Then take barley flour, and knead it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it over his back.
If blood is cut with it, good; and if not, make adhesive ointments (to stick) to the back (wound) of blisters, and nipples, without incision.
Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of tarathith, or the juice of arnoglosso, or the juice of branches of alaulat (aglanter), that is, fig tree leaves, Pontic wine, and make it sticky with beeswax.
When the abscess remains quiet, then take care of the place with ointments until it heals.
Albath is red and resembles al-hassa heads, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore it is necessary to cut what appears from it (the Albath), as I said earlier on the thighs equally; and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter LXXIV.
Chapter on Perforation of the Exitura that occurs in the womb (uterus).
In the womb (uterus) many kinds of abscesses occur, such as cancer, stone-like abscesses, sores, adubelas, alekilas (herpes), fistulas, hemorrhoids, ragadias, thelils, and hot abscesses.
And indeed I have already said all these diseases and their forms, and the signs of them, and their cures, divided; it is necessary that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess that occurs in the matrix, when it is one of the abscesses which collect pus, and you wish to know how its opening with iron is made.
Therefore, consider. If the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with striking and flame, and fever; and you see it redden upon it; if pressure is applied to it, then do not perforate it; and treat it in that way which helps for maturation, until when quietness comes to the acuteness of the afflictions.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a chair with two armrests, and she reclines or lies on her back, and places her feet at the lower part of the belly; and let her hips be spread, and she puts her arms under her thighs, and ties both with a bandage fitting to it.
Then the midwife sits on the right side, and administers the tool for opening the womb's opening.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this tool, that you perforate with the point of a deep probe the womb of the woman, so that what enters from the tool is not deeper than the womb, and does not harm the weak.
If the tool is too deep, then it is necessary that you place powder on top of the deep part of the womb; to prevent the entry of the whole tool into the depth of the womb; and it is necessary that you place a weight, which runs in the tool, on the upper side; and that you hold the tool, and turn the weight, until the deep part of the womb is opened.
When it appears to be excised and is touched with the hand and it is soft and yielding, then it is necessary to cut off that [thing] near its head with a broad lance.
When the pus is drained, then it is necessary to place a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil that contains some resin on the wound: and lay the linen cloth, and draw out the incision deeply into the matrix.
Place [something] externally on the matrix and on the bone a clean wool cloth soaked in water in which wormwood has been boiled.
Then it shall be treated two days later with an ointment suitable for that, until it heals.
And sometimes the matrix and wound is washed so that it is cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of the lily or Aristolochia longa has been boiled: then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the matrix, then it is necessary to prohibit its treatment with iron: instead, treat it as I have said in the division [section].
Chapter LXXXVI (86).
Chapter on obstetrics, how to treat living fetuses that have left their normal position.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first the shape of a natural delivery.
Therefore, the signs of this [delivery] are as follows: when you see a woman pressing downward and desiring to smell air, and you apply pressure on her in the place of delivery, and she hastens the exit of the fetus: then know that this delivery is in its natural form, and it is an exit over the head of the fetus, and the second one with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press on her abdomen so that the fetus descends quickly.
When it [the surgical instrument] descends upon his head, it [the secondary one] also descends with it, and it should be purified from those superfluities by good cleansing.
However, that which is beyond this parturition, is unnatural, inadmissible.
For sometimes the fetus emerges with its feet first, and its body emerges before its head, and its feet, and one of its hands; or it emerges with its head and one hand; or it emerges with the umbilical cord, and perhaps it turns on its neck, and similar unadmissible figures.
Therefore, it is necessary for the obstetrician to be prudent, subtle in these matters, and to avoid error and deception; and I am showing all the figures from these, and how to understand them, and they are indicated by that, and they stand upon him.
When the fetus emerges with its head in its natural passage and it becomes difficult for him on the woman, and labor is strong, and you see his strength already weakened; then let her sit on a chair or women hold her; and let her drink warm water with fennel cooked in it, and with moist oils.
Then the obstetrician introduces a small spatula-like instrument between his fingers, and he finds with it the secondary one, and cuts it with his nail until what is in her from moisture runs out; and presses the woman's womb, until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then she must be cleansed with fennel mucilage, with oil of sesame.
Then command her after cleansing to be pressed; and make her sneeze with snuff, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. The fetus shall immediately exit.
If two hands come out first from the fetus, then it is necessary to draw them back gently. If it does not obey in entering (the birth canal), then place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then strike the chair upon the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall during the shock.
If the hands do not come out and the fetus dies, then cut them (the hands) off and take out the remaining fetus; bind its hand with cloth and take it out equally, for it will come out by itself.
The emergence of the embryo is on his feet. When the fetus emerges on his feet, then you should push them up; then turn the fetus gradually; afterwards straighten it equally.
Then take one of its feet and stretch it gradually.
When they (the legs) emerge up to the hips, then command him (the woman) to push and make her sneeze with a pinch; for it will come out if God wills.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then push the fetus back gently until you position it according to its natural form. For then it will come out easily with an easy delivery.
If it is forbidden as we have said (to perform the procedure), then take from althea mucilage, sesame oil and dissolved gum; grind it well in a mortar with good pounding; then anoint the woman's womb and below her belly with it. Then make her sit in warm water until she feels relief (from pain).
When you see that the lower parts of hers have become warm, then give her something made from myrrh and make her lie down. When then it holds an hour, then make her sit on a chair. Then make her sneeze: and bind her mouth and nose: and press the lower part of her abdomen with easy pressure. For feces will come out immediately.
Delivery over knees and hands. When it exits in this manner, then insert your hand gradually. Then the woman lies on her back, and let her feet hang downwards; and she lies down on the bed, and clasps her hands. Then press gently over her abdomen. Then take out what is under her feet from the pouches until it is prepared below. If the fetus does not come out, then take hold of her feet and move them with great movement. Then press gently what is above the pubis until the fetus rises to higher parts. Then insert your hand and press the fetus gradually; and tell the woman to hold her breath until the fetus is delivered.
Delivery of the fetus, hanging down broadly from the hands. Insert your hand in reducing her hand. If it cannot be reduced, then lift the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then let her lie down on the bed; and strike her legs with strong blows.
Then administer the ointment you have prepared from mucilages.
If she receives her delivery, then make her sit on a chair. Then strive to reduce the hand, and press the fetus according to its natural shape; and make her sneeze, and tell her to hold her breath until it is delivered.
Delivery of the fetus on its back, with spread hands, and its face to the mother's back. The obstetrician must hold the fetus and then turn it gradually with ease.
When it is evened [turned], then place upon its mouth as we have said from oil and mucilages.
Then command him to move slowly. When you have done that, then make her sit on a chair, and command her to lean towards the right side. Then command him to compress [the baby] and make her sneeze with powder.
The delivery of the fetus is prepared on the left side. When it descends to the mother's womb in this manner with the second membrane, then cut the second membrane with your nail until it is expelled by moisture.
If the fetus hangs over the face and its neck, then cut it from the navel so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus towards the interior until you place her as necessary; and command the woman to compress herself several times; for it will come out easily with an exit.
Delivery of twins or many fetuses. You should know that twins are often born; and sometimes three or four are born. However, this is an exception and rarely occurs.
But five is beyond nature and do not live completely; and it contains them, although they are multiplying, by a single second membrane; and they are separated by the siphac, distinguishing the tied one at each of their navels.
And sometimes they come out like a single fetus through the natural and easy exit, and they come out through an unnatural exit as we have said.
If some of them are difficult during childbirth and reach what we have said in the unnatural figures, then care for them as we have said: and let the midwife be subtle, and do what she does with ease and slowness, and invent every figure according to the one that is being prepared for him to save.
Recall that which forms in the womb from embryos, and they abort.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it is already proven with me that a woman has expelled seven and another fifteen, all of them being formed.
What was done by the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore, this entire matter should be in the knowledge of Obstetrics. Perhaps it may reach a similar one; therefore, confront it with that which is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus as I said in the division from medication, and it does not come out, and you will have to operate with your hand, then it is necessary that you consider.
If the woman is of good health and not with any accident from which it is feared for her loss: then it is necessary that the woman lies on the bed, on her back, and let her head be inclined downwards, and her legs lifted up; and the attendant holds her from both sides or tied to the bed, so that her body does not come out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the cervix of the womb with moist oils such as olive oil, almond oil, fenugreek and linseed.
Then the obstetrician wets his hand with these oils and mucilages; then he introduces it into the womb easily. Then he seeks a place where he can insert hooks on the fetus, and places that are suitable for it.
Therefore, consider then if the fetus is ready to descend upon its head; then insert hooks into its eyes, neck, mouth, palate itself, under its beard, in its collarbone, near the ribs, and below the hypochondriac regions.
If it is a descent (affecting) his feet, then make an incision in his breastbone and in the middle of his ribs.
And it is necessary that he holds a hook with his right hand; and places his wound on that which is between the fingers of his left hand; and introduces (his hand) with ease, and strikes the hook in one of those places which we have mentioned, until he reaches an empty space.
Then strike the hook another or third (time), if necessary; so that the constriction may be equal and not deviate to one side.
Then it is extended with an equal extension, and not an extension only in a straight line, but rather moved to all sides, so that the opening may be relieved; as it is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary that in that place, the extension may be softened. If a part is held back from it (the wound), then it is necessary that the midwife joins some fingers with oil and introduces them from that side to turn what is held back.
If therefore a part of the fetus comes out, then hooks are changed to another higher place; do this until the entire fetus comes out.
If therefore a hand comes out before the other and it is not possible to return it because of its bending; then it is necessary that a cloth be wound over it. Then extract it (the hand) until when the entire one comes out; cut it at the joint of the ankle or elbow; and thus it is necessary that you do this in both hands and feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or there is bending at its exit, or water has collected on it; then it is necessary that a pointed spatula be introduced between the fingers and pierce the head, and extract the water; or break it with an instrument called Almisdac, whose shape comes with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter following this.
Similarly, perform [the procedure] if the fetus is large-headed by nature, then it is necessary to cut the hairs off [the fetus]; or pull it out with forceps, as we have said. Then pull out the bones with forceps.
If the head comes out and is stuck at the neck, then it is to be split until the moisture that is in the chest is released.
If it does not twist nor yield for an exit, then cut the head intermittently, as you are able.
If there is an abscess below the womb or it contains water (hydrops), then pierce it through until the moisture runs out from it.
If the fetus is large-footed, then its extraction is easy and its direction towards the bone of the womb is light.
If it is stuck in the belly or chest, then pull it out with a cloth that you have wrapped over your hand; and split the belly or chest until what is inside runs out from them.
If other members are torn away and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the bone of the womb is open, then insert your hand deep into the womb and search for the head with it, and pull it out with your fingers up to the bone of the womb; then insert a hook or hooks in it and pull it out with them.
If the bone of the womb is stuck due to a hot abscess that has happened to it, then it should not be pressed upon it, but rather administer warm liquids and oil; and apply poultices; and sit in waters that soften and moisturize.
If the fetus is on its side, then it can be turned; then administer what was said for a living fetus.
If it is not possible to do that, then it should be cut piecemeal and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything inside the seconda at all.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then administer what we said regarding warm cauteries that occur in the wombs (uteri).
If there is a flow of blood, then it goes down in warm water and administer the remaining treatment.
I myself have seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus; then she became pregnant again with another one, and yet another stillborn fetus was found in her. After a long period of time, she developed an aposteme in the navel, which became swollen until it burst open and began to emit pus.
Therefore I was summoned for her treatment, and I treated her for a long time; but the wound did not heal.
So I put on it some strong adhesive plasters; and the bone came out of the place. Then after a few days, another bone came out. Therefore I was amazed when there was no bone in the womb.
Therefore, you thought that the dead fetuses were bones.
I asked about the wound and extracted many bones from her, while she was in good health; and she lived for a long time in this condition, and emitted little pus.
And I did not bind this foreign body here, except that it contains knowledge and help for what the skilled physician administers when healing with his hand.
Chapter LXXVII.
Section on the shapes of necessary instruments for extracting a fetus.
The form of the Spiral that opens the Matrix.
Here is the form of the Stricture Instrument, by which books are leveled; it has two equal spirals at each end of two pieces of wood. Nevertheless, this Spiral should be finer than the Stricture Instrument; and for this purpose, it may be made of ivory or boxwood.
And the width of all the wood should be about two fingers; and the edge of each of both is like one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and half; and in the middle of two pieces of wood there are two additions made of the same kind of wood which have already been hardened on either side, whose length is half a palm and less; and the width of each of them is about two fingers or less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the matrix, to open it when you turn the two spirals.
Another form similar to it but finer and lighter.
It should be made of ivory or boxwood, according to the resemblance of forceps. Nevertheless, at its end there should be two additions as you see here above; and the length of all the additions is like a palm; and the width of each of them is about two fingers.
When you wish to open the matrix with it, then have the woman sit on a bed, her legs being hanging down, and that which is between her thighs be opened. Then insert these two connected additions into the matrix; and you hold the end of the instrument lower between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, equally according to the amount you wish for the opening of the mouth of the matrix, until the midwife does what she wants.
Form of Dizziness Different Than That Which the Ancients Called Impetigo Fetus (Impulsive Presentation of the Fetus)
The form which breaks the large head: and it resembles a pair of forceps, having teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it becomes wedge-shaped, as a pair of forceps according to this form, as you see, having teeth like the teeth of a saw, with which it is cut and crushed.
The form of the scissors having one spine.
The form of the scissors having two spines.
The form of the spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two broad spatulas also.
All these instruments are used, and the more they multiply in variety, the more prepared they are by the craftsman, is quicker for its operation, and higher among men, because of their quantity.
Therefore do not despise one of these instruments, as if it were not prepared for you. For the necessity of them is inexcusable (inexorable).
Chapter 78.
Chapter on Second Extraction.
When the second is retained at birth, then it must be commanded to retain its breath. Then make her sneeze with powder: and press your hand on her mouth, and her own nostrils. If therefore it exits through this, it is good.
If not: then take the pot and pierce a hole in the covering; and place inside it herbs that open the cervix, such as calaminthe, root of ruta, anise, camomile, wood of senna, centaury, and linear cassia; take all these herbs or some of them, submerge them with water, and place them over fire.
Then place the infusion of rushes on the hole of the covering pot and another end into the cervix; hold it until the vapor reaches the concavity of the uterus.
Then make her sneeze, as we have said. For second birth it will exit easily.
If it remains after this treatment and does not exit: then order the midwife to submerge her hand in sesame oil or mallow gum. Then insert into the vagina and search for the second child. When she finds it, then take it and gradually stretch it out.
If it is attached deep in the uterus, then insert the hand as we have said until she finds the second child and extracts it gradually in a straight manner so that the matrix does not fall due to violent attraction; rather, it should be moved with ease to the right and left; then add more according to the strength of the attraction. It will obey then, and be saved, and exit from attachment.
If the cervix is constricted, as we have already said: treat it with sneezing and medicine from the pot with herbs.
If it does not exit with all that we have said, then beware not to tire her in the repetition of extraction.
It is necessary that what comes out from the matrix bone should be tied to the woman's hip. Then, enema her with the four-ingredient ointment. For it will corrupt and dissolve her after days, and will come out.
However, when it corrupts, raise a bad smell from her to the stomach and head, and injure that which is already weak. Therefore, it is necessary that appropriate fumigations be administered for this purpose.
Some of the ancients have already experimented with a fumigation of nasturtium and figs dried in the sun.
The shape of the instrument with which to fumigate the woman during the retention of the Second Stage and periods.
Make it similar to an alcamea vessel or a jar: and place the wide end over the fire: fumigation should be placed on plums: hold her while that fumigation is consumed: and repeat another one.
Chapter LXXIX.
Chapter on the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born, and the anuses of these babies are not perforated, which have already been opened by a sharp forceps. Therefore, the midwife must pierce it with her finger; and if she cannot, she must pierce it with a sharp spatula; and be careful not to touch the muscle.
Place upon it a cloth soaked in wine and oil. Then take care of it with ointments until it heals.
If one fears that it is obstructed, then put a lead tube into the opening and leave it for many days; and when the child wants to come out, it will be removed.
And now, obliteration of the anus also occurs due to healing of a wound or an abscess. Therefore, that consolidation must be cut off; then it should be treated as we have said before with the remedy and lead.
Chapter 80.
Chapter on the treatment of fistulas occurring in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are nodosity and swelling that occur near the anus outside; or in the space of one part; and it is a fistula or multiple fistulas.
When therefore that old knot is opened, watery white moistness or subtle pus flows out from it.
And at times these are penetrating fistulas. Therefore they are recognized by what comes out during discharge, and by wind when the sick person uses discharge; perhaps a worm comes out of them.
There are fistulas among these when they penetrate the space to the bladder and to the bowel of the penis. There are also penetrating ones that reach as far as the hip joint and the node of the tail.
From that which a penetrating fistula is recognized to the anus, it is also known from a fistula not penetrating, that you insert your index finger into the anus and insert a probe thin in the fistula made of metal or iron, without twisting, if there is no tortuosity.
If there is twisting [in the fistula], then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or the hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it to the bottom and nothing comes out from discharge or wind or worm as I said; then you will know that it is not penetrating, so approach for treatment.
And when a fistula is penetrating to the bladder or urethra; its sign is the outflow of urine from it and its prohibition from this, that the location be consolidated with medicines.
If it is penetrating to the hip joint or the hip bone; its sign is that a probe reaches up to there if there is no twisting up to the bone; and pain in the surrounding area, and that pus always comes out from it; and that medicine cannot be effective in it, nor does it consolidate with an ointment.
In these all penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all: and their cure is labor and futility to him, upon whom they are formed, from foolish physicians.
In that which is not penetrating and not old, healing is hoped for with the lancet: according to what I tell you, and I have already proven it: and there lies the sick one between your hands upon his back: and rub his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined toward his own belly. Then introduce the lead or copper, if there is a winding in the fistula, until you know where the probe reaches.
If the sick one feels it near the anus, then it is necessary that your index finger be introduced into the anus.
If you therefore feel the probe penetrate by itself, which is detected on your finger and between your finger and the fistula or flesh: then you certainly know that it is penetrating; so do not labor in it, because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
They say that flesh heals in some men, and the remedy by which they hope for help is to burn cauterization as thin as the width of the fistula, as before, and to introduce the burning into the fistula until it reaches near the anus. Then do this twice or thrice until you know that all those added fatty tissues filtered, which are like the quills of a bird's feather, have been burnt.
Then care for it with linen cloths in butter until those burnt fats come out: then care for it with ointments generating and consolidating flesh.
If therefore it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it is never cured with any other treatment.
If it (the tumor) escapes and does not reach your finger which is inside the anus, and there is a thick layer of flesh or scrotum between it and the tumor, or if you see a fistula on what follows the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you go cutting with the tumor that is in the fistula until you reach the point where the extension of the scrotum ends, and the scrotum is released and falls off.
Then clean those tissues which resemble the feathers of a bird's quill, so that nothing remains from them.
If blood prevails and breaks through between you and your operation, so that those tissues escape, then it is better and more speedy relief to cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Because the cautery with fire produces good results by applying heat to those tissues, charring of those added tissues, stopping bleeding, and drying out moisture.
Then treat it with linens wrapped in butter or cooked leeks until the place emits pus, and those burnt tissues come out into the pus.
Then treat the wound with strengthening ointments that produce hard flesh; there are medicines containing styptics and drying agents.
For when it is restored, then it is cured; do not fear repetition.
If the fistula has already reached deep into the anus and is stretched out by the body's excess: then insert your finger into the anus, and examine it with it.
If you feel a tumor, and there is a layer of scrotum or flesh between it and yourself, which is close to penetrating: then there is no operation on that unless it is according to the path of trust and hope.
That is, because it is administered in him one of the three modes: either to cauterize it itself, as we said; or to excise it, until you reach its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert a linen, and cure it from nearby. And do not proceed too much with the excision, lest you cut into the flesh containing the anus, and it happen by accident an unfortunate outcome of excretion without will. Then cure that with what I said.
For perhaps it will heal: or lengthen the same membrane and cleanse it after you have cut it up to near the anus, as we said, either with a probe or with another sharp tool. Then clean those fleshes filtered which are in the excision, as far as you can with examination.
Then strive for the healing of the whole wound with excision and superior opening where it heals; and the fistula remains open at the interior part of the anus, and it will be easier on the patient.
And sometimes the fistula is drained in this manner: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula; and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus; then take the probe perforated at its end, which is like the awl (aleskef), that is, prepared with calfskin, in this form. And insert into it a thread wound around five strands and around thereabouts. Then insert the probe with a thread into the fistula until you reach its concavity.
If it penetrates into the margin of the anus internally, then pull out the thread from that opening; so that you can insert your finger into the anus and pull out the end of the thread, and bring together its two ends; and tie each one and let it remain for one or two days; and the more the thread cuts into the flesh, the better tie it, until the fleshes between the two ends of the thread fall off and drop away; then cure the wound, until it heals and is cured.
If, however, the opening of the Fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate by any means prepared for you, unless it is in great depth. For you, there is no need to do that (make an incision) so as not to cut the muscle itself.
Then do it as we said, until it is healed.
Make the spatula for the spiny fistula, whose sharpness is very acute on one side and not acute on the other so as not to cut what is unnecessary, as you can see.
Chapter LXXXI.
On sewing hemorrhoids from which blood runs after being cut; and on the treatment of fissures (fissure in ano).
There are hemorrhoids according to two modes. Either they are inside the anus, similar to coal lumps or prunes; or like grains of wheat themselves. And from these there are small ones and large ones; blood always runs from them, and there is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those which are outside the anus, are for the most part few in moisture, from which runs either lemon water or a little blood with constant flow; and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of those which are inside the anus is to order the patient to sit on hot water, and it is expressed until it appears outside the anus and appears to you as athelia. Therefore, also hang them with hooks; or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
If they are not held by hooks due to their moisture and their own softening: then take them with a rough cloth or a glove made of double wool and remove them with your fingers. Then cut them (the vessels), and sprinkle some warm powders over them after the incision for them to remain in place of the cautery. Either cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization. Then take care of them with the rest of the treatment until they heal.
If the anus does not obey to evacuation, then enema should be administered with a slight purgative, so that the sick person is cleansed with what is in the anus, and the evacuation is quick when the sick person releases it.
If the faeces are outside the anus, then their condition is light and easy; it is good to grasp them with your nail or to grasp them with a tweezers, and cut them. Then take care of them with what I said before, until they heal.
And if the wound resists cutting with an iron, then it is necessary to apply suture to them in this way. Take a thread rolled up and insert it into the point. Then pull the faeces towards the top and make it penetrate with the point on its root from the other side; and wind up the ends of the thread around the point and let them be broad; and tie the faeces tightly with a strong knot. Then tie the thread, and pull out the point.
Do this with all faeces and leave one; do not leave yourself, so that excess of blood flows out from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch over the anus and place it on the anus; and order the sick person to rest. Then let him be until he falls asleep.
When the faeces fall, take care of them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they heal.
On treating fissures (or cuts). For they often happen due to the removal of feces and constriction of nature.
When they have become chronic and medicine is not effective on them: then it is necessary that you shave with a spatula or with your nail until they become moist, and the superficial layer which prevents their healing should be removed. Then care for them until they heal as required.
If they do not heal: then treat them more forcefully than the first time, until they bleed much, and after that care for them until they are healed.
On treating an anus that is not right (or abnormal), and one that is normal: and about ulcers (Athelil) and scabies (Formicae).
Chapter LXXXII.
Know that Almirmar is only a round swelling similar to the head of a nail, colored like the body, and it occurs throughout the body, particularly in the lower parts of the feet and fingers; and pain occurs during walking from it.
It is necessary that the part on the nail-like swelling be cut off and held with forceps or a nail, and it should be removed from its root.
Then care for that, and if you wish, cauterize it as described in the previous chapter.
From ulcers (Athelil), one is a small elevation, rough, filtered, round on the surface of the body. And they often occur in children's hands.
The treatment is to spread the ulcer (Athelil), and cut or prick it; or stitch it with silk thread; or pluck out the hair until it falls off. If you wish, cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine; and now the abnormal ulcers (Athelil) and normal ones are removed with a tool that I will describe.
The translation of the sentence is: "Formica (ant) is also a small prominent filtrate, thick, on the surface of the body, penetrating deeply: and when it is found, it feels like a bite from an ant all over the body, and it mostly occurs in the hands.
The treatment of it is to take a cannula from a goose feather, or strong vulture feather: and place the cannula over the formica, until the circle of the cannula contains its parts. Then rotate your hand with the cannula until it separates what is around the formica: and place it deep into the flesh, and pull out the formica from its root.
And if you wish, do this with an iron or brass cannula in this manner.
Let the upper part of the cannula be bent upwards, pulling a mute roll towards it, to be relieved by its grip and rotation itself.
And if you wish to cauterize the formica as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization in Athelil's text.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Chapter on the tools for fumigations applied to diseases of the anus, and solutions of the stomach, and colic.
Whence the clisteria is made of silver, gold, brass melted or hammered.
And sometimes these instruments are small and large, according to those in whom they are used.
Therefore, that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small: and for weak or painful anuses, so also the suppositories.
Large suppository.
The cannula's upper part where it is tied to the uterus should be wide according to this method: and it should have a distinct portion to be tied to the uterus as you see, and its lower end which is inserted into the anus, should be closed, that is, not open, soft, very fine, drawing towards subtlety: and on one of its sides there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the size of the hole be according to the thickness of rods, not too thick and not too thin, and let the uterus in which the medicines are placed be made from the bladder of an animal or from a sheep's parchment, shaped like a small asafetida bag, whose root is one palm.
And it should be perforated with many holes as is common, and the space between each hole should be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a thread, perhaps made from raw linen, which should be about ten threads or approximately that amount, and gather it with the uterus like an asafetida bag. When this is placed inside it, the upper part of the suppository should be tightly bound with two distinct parts by a strong constriction. Then apply the suppository with it.
And this is the circular form depicted here, and the holes.
The quality of making the suppository with it is as follows: fill the uterus or bladder with medicine that has been heated according to the tolerance of the sick person: and be careful not for it to be too hot or too cold.
Then the sick person lies down on his back, and lifts his legs upwards: and place beneath him something soft, that is, hide or linen.
Then anoint the extremity of Clisteris with oil, or with white goose fat, or with mucilage of fenugreek, or something similar. Then introduce it into the anus with ease. Then let the attendant receive the bladder with both his hands at once, and squeeze it with violence, until all that is in the Clisteris passes into the intestines.
Then remove the Clisteris, and the sick person lifts his legs upwards to the wall.
If medicine forces him to evacuate, then hold him as much as possible. And if he sleeps the whole night with it, it is more of a cure.
If you clisterize him with diseases of the abdomen and his evacuation is hurried: then clisterize again until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful sores in the anus, then let it be very subtle and soft, mild, from the Clisteris with which boys are clisterized.
And this is the form of a soft Clisteris on which the skin is stretched tightly.
Chapter LXXXXIV.
I have already said in the division of treating wounds that it belonged to a book, and I will say here the treatment with hands, and with medications according to the supplement.
Therefore, wounds are distinguished according to how they are made, and according to the place where the wound falls.
Therefore, wounds made in this way are like being struck by a stone: or cut with a sword or knife: or pierced with a lance, or log, or arrow: and similar things from many other objects.
Wounds that occur according to the parts of the body are such as a wound falling on the head, neck, chest, abdomen or back; and similar ones from these members.
And I am telling the cures of some wounds, so that I may place the reasoning and rule over the rest of the wounds.
And I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the recollection of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say. If it happens that there is a simple wound on the head and no bone fracture has occurred; consider then if it is due to a blow of a stone or similar object, and only the skin has been broken; and the wound is large, and you fear an imminent abscess of hot pus; then act quickly, and make a venesection of the head at once; and do not delay that; and draw out from him according to the potency of blood as much as possible, unless something forbids phlebotomy, especially if the blood flowing out of the wound is scant. Let the venesection be on the opposite side of the wounded part.
Let the venesection be on the opposite side of the wounded part. And let him be careful not to fill himself with food and heavy drinks.
If something prevents reduction, then reduce the food, but avoid meat and wine.
And put on the wound if there is a hot abscess, warm infusion of cooked food in rose oil only, or with wine containing saltpeter.
If you are free from a hot abscess, then put on the wound if it is recent with its own blood and has not changed air; and if the air has already changed, then put something over it as I will tell later; and if it has already changed air, then put some ointments on it until it heals.
If the wound is large, or it is from a sword cut and similar ones: and its edges are not brought together by pimples, then bring them together with sutures, as I will explain regarding the wounds of the abdomen in the matter of their suturing.
If the wound is already exposed from bone and hangs, and there is no retention of it unless in a small suspender: then cut it (the hanging part). Then take care of the wound with medicines, and restore hard flesh to it where there is skin deficiency, and instruct the sick man to eat foods with bulk, such as heads (of animals) and cooked wheat, until it becomes soft; and similar foods.
If you find putrefaction in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut out the putrefied part, and throw it away; then take care of it (the remaining wound).
If however, in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and it cannot be cut off by medicines: then probe for the artery (or vein). If you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula, or tie it up (with sutures). If necessity compels and you cannot do what was said, then cauterize it (the artery or vein) until the blood separates.
If however, these wounds are small and simple: then the matter is easy and light; so that you sprinkle this powder on them, because it solidifies them before air changes (their state).
Chapter on the Powder for Consolidation. Prepare one part of olibanum (frankincense), two parts of dragon's blood (a red resin used as a medicine), and three parts of unburnt lime: grind it thoroughly and sieve it; fill the wound with it, compress it well, until it adheres well on top, and coagulate it with blood.
Then bind it above with sutures, and let it be, do not release it until it remains so that it does not come apart. The medicine is not to be removed from him until he is healed.
And at times plaster alone does it when there is no olibanum and the blood of a dragon also does the same operation in many large wounds when it is suitable to be placed on them and they are bound, and the wounds are recent with their own blood, which has not been altered by air.
If the air has already changed it by some alteration, especially when it is in summer time, then there is no use for this powder: therefore take care of it with what I said, put some digestive ointments over it or make poultices from barley flour mixed with water and honey until pus is emitted. Then care for the rest of the healing until they are healed.
But if a fracture occurs in the bone with the wound and it is small, then extract it with trepan; and now I will speak of the treatment of skull fractures that will follow.
[Section on neck wounds]
If a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple wound of the head.
If the nerve of the neck or the artery is already cut: if it is a nerve, there is no skill in treating it except to turn the treatment towards avoiding violent stiffness, such as ziniar and zegi and similar things. Because they hurt nerves, and contract them.
And do not place anything cold on the wound at all: because the substance of nerves is cold and its continuation is with the brain, which is above the organs; therefore that which is to be treated should be made from soft medicines such as lime plaster mixed with sweet water several times infused with oil or rose oil, or pitch when washed even with sweet water; and other mineral stones in this manner, and moist unguents.
If the wound is large, then administer suture: or sew its edges with threads. Then care for it until it heals.
If the wound is deep or if a sinus has gathered pus at its lower part, then puncture it at a more depressed place.
If an artery has already been cut in the wound and bleeding has occurred, then separate or sever it and tie it; or cauterize it if there is a need for that.
If the windpipe has already been cut, either entirely or partially, and the trachea has been saved: then sew the lips of the skin over a reed for the windpipe, and do not touch the windpipe itself; on the contrary, support it and reduce it to its natural shape. Then bind it with a suitable bandage and let it rest for some days. Then, care for yourself with ointments that contain styptic and astringent properties until you are healed.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it. If there are fragments of bone in it, remove all of them or what can be removed: leave what cannot be prepared until the wound rots and separates, and the discharge subsides.
If the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder over it as I have described. If there appears to be bone in the wound and a fistula is formed: then care for it as described in its own chapter.
Chapter on Wounds Treated with Spatulas.
If it is a wound caused by a lance or knife and you see its depth, then consider the following. If gas is discharging from the wound when the sick person is breathing heavily, then know that the wound is fatal.
If the wound is not deep and is recent with blood, then do not apply powder to it immediately or press on it so that the blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart and kill the sick person: instead, place an attracting ointment on it and dissolve it twice a day.
If an attracting ointment is not available to you, then place a dry old cotton wool on the wound's opening to absorb what discharges from it due to moisture: make sure the sick person sleeps over the wound so that what collects there can heal.
If three or more days have passed since the wound occurred and there is no spasm, no bad heart tremor, no narrowing of breathing, and you see that the other signs are good: then know that the wound is healed. Cure yourself and with linen cloths, and the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
If the healing opens again, and it always opens up, then you should know that it has become a Fistula. Therefore, cure it from its root.
And if the wound is from a sword cut or knife, and it is simple on the chest or back surface: then treat it with the suture that preceded it, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already made an indentation on the bone and cut off fragments from it: then examine the wound, and hurry to pull out those fragments, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound rots, for the extraction of those will heal the wound.
As for other wounds caused by accidents on other limbs, the judgement of treatment is as we said.
Chapter on abdominal wounds and the passage of the intestine, and their discharge.
A rupture that occurs in the abdomen can be great, medium, or small.
From a great rupture, at times the intestine or number of intestines comes out.
Therefore, insertion and suturing of those is required, being more violent and difficult.
A small rupture can also be difficult in another way. Therefore it is more difficult to reduce it if you do not hurry in its insertion to its place immediately, because it swells, opens up and becomes enlarged, making the entrance difficult.
Therefore, a medium rupture is better because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is with these two types.
Know that suture of the vein is according to four modes.
Two commons [types of] sutures converge in the suture of the abdomen, and in the suture of other wounds of the body; and two other types of sutures specifically communicate with the remaining wounds. However, they are more proper with the suture of the abdomen; and I tell you one by one, along with its exposure and explanation.
Therefore, when the wound is small and something comes out from the intestine, and it becomes difficult to return it; then that is due to one of the two modes. Or because of the smallness of the rupture, as we said; or because there is distension in the intestine due to cold air.
When that is the case, then one should heat it thus, by immersing a sponge or a damp cloth in warm water alone. Or boil in water leeks, cumin, dill, and ginger with the intestine, until the distension is resolved.
Sometimes it does wine where there is stricture; and that is better than water alone for the resolution of distension.
When you see the distension is already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which ale or mead has been boiled. For through that the opening of it (the intestine) may be eased with a small thing.
If the return of it (the intestine) is expelled after this treatment, then close the rupture with a little bit, using an instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared, than the cutting; and it is not to be forced for cutting after necessity and lack of instruments.
Let one part of it (the instrument for the treatment) be twisted, sharp, and another part not sharp, and the tip should not be fine like the point of a needle, rather it should be a little blunt; and that is similar to a lancet, as you see.
When a wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, it is then necessary that its reduction should be according to its own natural form in its proper place, if possible over it; because it is better.
When the wound is wide in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make him lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place his head and his chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly if the wound is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then direct your attention and consideration always in this way, so that the part where the wound is is higher than the other part.
Therefore, it must be applied in large wounds and in middle wounds.
In small wounds, place it as it is prepared for you.
Then make sure that a devoted servant is present between your hands who holds the wound with his whole hand and sews the edges together. Then, cut some thread for the one who follows to stitch; and this is the common method of sewing one together.
And it is, that you take a needle or a number of needles according to the size of the wound. Then release a quantity of finger width from the end of the wound, that is, of the doctor; and fix one needle beyond which you insert the thread into both edges of the skin, with both edges of the flesh that are under the skin from inside, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have already sewn together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the flesh; and they become four rows.
Then sew together with thread twice around the needle several times from both sides until the edges of the wound are sewn together properly.
Then release the thickness of the finger also, and sew in them another awl; afterwards draw it straight with thread, as you did with the first awl. Do not stop doing that with the awls you require until you complete the contraction of the whole wound.
Let the awls be of medium size between thickness and delicacy; for delicate awls pierce the flesh too quickly, and large ones have a difficult entrance into the skin; therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size in delicacy and thickness.
It is not necessary that the awl be sewn at both ends of the skin close together; so as not to pierce the flesh too quickly, and open the wound before its consolidation, nor should they extend even with suturing, lest the wound be prevented from consolidating.
Then cut the end of the awl so as not to injure the weak person while asleep; and place little woolen balls on both ends of the awl from every side, which will hold the end of the awl; and release them when you know that the wound has already consolidated.
And this kind of suturing with awls is more suitable for small wounds. Because one or two needles, or around them, are sufficient for their suturing.
The second suturing is common, that you gather the ends of four: the ends of the skin, two, and the ends of the stitching thread, two, or in place of one, with an awl containing equal thread in delicacy and thickness.
Then when you pierce with the awl these four ends, withdraw the awl from the side where it entered, so that the thread tied above the wound falls; so that the suturing will be like that of cloth when they are sewn together, and place between every suture a quantity equal to the thickness of the little finger.
Men know this suture.
And with this suture, I sewed up the wound of my man which had occurred within his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the wound was larger than one palm: and out had come from the intestines about two palms from the middle intestine, and there was a rupture in the middle of the abdomen.
I therefore returned it (the protruding organ) after the intestine of his had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound had healed in the space which was about fifteen days: and I cured him, and he recovered: and he lived after that for many years, turned back to his duties.
And the physicians judged that it would not heal (get better).
And it was a miracle that I did not cure it with ointment. Because I was in a place where no ointment could be found, nor any medicine. I therefore put on the wound old dough twice a day, and attended to its cleansing with water of honey, until it healed.
I shall now speak of two kinds of sutures according to the narrative of speech.
And it begins with a sharp suture: and you insert the point from outside to inside.
When the point penetrates the skin, and along its length and width throughout the whole body: release the end of the suture at the side where you inserted the point, and make it penetrate to the other end from the inner part to the outside at the opposite extremity.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate thus in the same extremity from outside to inside: and release the end of the suture at the side where you are inserting the point, and make the point penetrate to the other end from the inner part to the outside, and make it penetrate with your penetration as you do it, until it penetrates completely.
Then also begin from the same side, and extract the point itself with its extremity, which is from the back on the other side, and pull out the tip that penetrated through the skin.
Then bring it back into the same skin, and extract its extremity from the other side with this extremity (the point), and pull it out from the skin on that side, and do it this way once, and then the other, alternating: and do it this way after the other, until you have extracted all of it according to that example.
The sum of this suture is that your sutures for the skin should be smaller than the skin itself: in such a way that you sew the points (the knots) of one side of the skin with one part of the extremity of the skin: and that you release it with the other part on the other side, until you have completed it.
The second species (type) of suture proper, as Galen said.
This discourse is told to you as it is done by some healers in the way that they gather all parts fitting each other according to nature: and apply the point of one side of the skin to the other side's point, and the point of the back (mirach) to the other side's point. And this is done as I tell you.
You must make the tip of the back (mirach) stick out at the extremity of the skin close to you on the outside, and let it penetrate only to the inside there: and release both points (extremities) of the skin. Then turn the tip, and let it penetrate from the outside to the inside into both points (extremities) of the skin, namely on both sides.
Then turn both, and let both penetrate from the inside to the outside, into the opposite points (tips) of the back (mirach), which are on the other side.
This method of stitching is better than common stitching and is a stitch which recalls remembrance.
Thus is the speech of Galen also.
And they said thus: The stitch of the abdomen is straightened with two hooks. The thread is introduced into each of them (the abdominal wounds) with one filament: and begin with the introduction of the hook from the part which is with you, and make it pass evenly along the skin stitches.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen: then the stitching of this (rupture) is more difficult than the rest of the places in the abdomen.
The judgment of the treatment of the wound is the judgment of other wounds.
The fact is that when you come upon a fresh wound with its own blood, before it changes by the air: and if you bring out the intestine, and wash it, and make it fit: then place it on powder of burnt flesh (or incarnate).
If the air has already altered the wound: then place some ointments on it which are present with you, until they make pus; and let threads fall (on the wound) and be pressed down with mullein leaves and myrrh. Then treat that as the treatment of other wounds until it heals.
If there are no medications present with you, then immediately place on it that which begins to emit pus, old cottons; and change it twice a day as I have taught you until it heals.
For you do not need another medication for the most part when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound may communicate to the main members in the injury, then it is necessary for you to immerse a soft wool in oil of temperate warmth or rose oil: and place it in the region around the groins, and under the armpits.
If it feels pain or punctures, or rottenness in its own intestines (for this often happens), then clisterize him with warm wine of pitch, black: particularly if the rot has already reached the intestine and an opening has been made penetrating to the depths of its concavity.
And know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal; and what is from the small intestines is harder to heal.
The intestine called Jejunum does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and their size, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If however what comes from the wound is yellowish and you seize it fresh: bring it back according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
If however it has passed a space, and is already greenish or black: then it is necessary that you tie it with thread above the place which has darkened from it, so that there is no bleeding. For in yellowish there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament and place two ends of the thread hanging from below on the lower part of the wound outside it: so as to alleviate its attraction towards you, and the extraction of the yellowish at the site of the wound, and the emission of pus from the wound.
Memory of the wound that occurs in the intestine.
When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people: because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a lance thrust and the wound was from the right side of the stomach, and it was an old wound: and a fistula was made, and it exuded purulent discharge.
I therefore left the treatment, until I was not confident in its healing; neither did I cease to probe it, until it was healed, and the place had been consolidated.
When I saw the place already consolidated, I feared an accident happening to the sick person in his belly; and no such accident happened to him from it. And he remained in better dispositions of himself, eating and drinking, urinating, and bathed, and exercised in his diet.
And some experimenters said that when an injury happens in the Intestine and is small, then it should be tied according to this method. And there is a way for you to capture ants with large heads. Then gather two lips of the wound and place one ant with an open mouth over the two lips of the wound. When its head is on them, and it closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it will stick to them and cannot be loosened.
Then place another ant near the first one and do not stop doing that until the ant matches the size of the entire wound.
Then return it [the ant] to its place, and close the wound. For those heads remain attached to the Intestine until it is eaten away and healed, and no harm comes to the sick person completely.
And now it is possible to tie the Intestine even with a fine thread; which has been taken out from the animal's Intestine and attached after it has been introduced into the point.
And there is a way to capture the end of this thread from the Intestine, and it should be scraped a lot. Then tie a fine linen thread at its end. Then insert the thread into the point and close the Intestine with it. Then reduce it to a dissection.
This method of suturing with worms and intestines, is not except by way of trust and hope.
Know that a large wound, especially if it is on one of the slender intestines, then there is no skill except refinement, and its healing is not possible at all.
Chapter on the care of the bladder, and fistulas.
Know that every wound or boil when it becomes old and decrepit, turns into an ulcer, does not consolidate, and always emits pus, and is not cut off: then it is called universally in whatever member it is, Fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
And Fistula indeed is a hard, white knot filtered, without pain, which has the hollow of a bird's feather: and because of this some call it Risa, that is, the feather.
And there are some hours when it is moist, which emits pus. And perhaps the moisture is cut off at certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is much and it is little; and it is thick and it is refined.
And I have already mentioned in division, when I said wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, nor flesh is born in it, it is not this for any one of nine causes.
Of which one is either due to the scarcity of blood in the body; or because it is malicious; or because there is hard flesh between it and its surrounding area preventing the growth of flesh; or because it is full of dirt and filth; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter that is sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient for its cure; or because corruption falling in the region is a kind of plague, as happens in Caesaraugusta: where digestion of illnesses is difficult and healing of boils is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone, or the number of bones.
I have already shown you all those causes and their signs, as well as the treatments for them with medicines in division. Here it is necessary that I make you know the treatment for Fistula and Strangulated Hernia, which is made through the way of surgery with the hand.
Know then, that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For these are the fistulas that reach to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or ligaments; or intestines, or bladder, or some of the ribs; or some of the vertebrae in the back, or some of the joints; such as hands, and feet: and these are those that approach the proximity of the main member and similar ones.
Which of these fistulas is according to this manner, is according to difficult healing and does not receive treatment, and the occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If there is any fistula of which the depth does not reach to the places I have said: and you hope, and trust in its treatment, and wish to reach the knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or copper, if the fistula points in the straight direction, and examine it with it.
If there is a twisting in the fistula, then investigate it with a thin probe of lead. Since lead, with its softness, is easily worn away and bent around twisting.
If the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to sign over it with a probe. Cleanse then one opening from among its own openings.
For the moisture with which you cleanse it, goes towards the other openings and runs out of them.
Then examine and investigate according to the way that is possible for you: so that you may know if there is a bone or nerve, and the fistula's concavity is deep or near; or it is a single fistula with many openings, and stands over all of it, with the strength of your own questioning, by which you question the weak, and inquiring pain under pressure with your hand on the place, and similar signs and incidents.
When you stand over all these matters in a true position, then proceed to treatment with confidence. It is necessary for you at this time to consider whether it is a Fistula that appears near [the affected area], or in a safe distant place away from the junction, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places that I told you about: then cut the Fistula according to what has been mentioned in my account, and remove whatever is inside it through filtration, and the corruption of flesh that grows in its opening, or pus, and similar things. Care for [the area] until it heals.
If the Fistula is deep, and it is straight: then it should be cut as deeply as possible for you. Then cleanse [the area] from all corrupted flesh of it.
Then administer a linen cloth wrapped in sharp medicines and insert it into the concavity of the Fistula that you have seized with iron: do this repeatedly until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the concavity of the Fistula due to corruption.
Then restore [the area] with unguents that promote healthy flesh until it heals.
If it does not heal through this, then cauterize [the area] as we have mentioned before.
If the cause of the Fistula is bone and it has been confirmed for you: then ask about it, and cut the bone according to what I told you. If nothing prevents you from doing so in a vein, or nerve, or major limb, as we have said before.
If a bone is revealed to you and there is some corruption or blackening in it: then scrape it until the corruption is completely removed. Then care for [the bone] with that which promotes healing until it heals.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as it was doing: then you know that you have not reached complete eradication of the corruption.
Excise therefore over it again, and inquire about its reason and cleanse it with all your strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, that is good; if not, then know that the corruption is in a deep part of the body which you have not reached. You therefore do not have skill in it, except to leave it to nature.
If the corrupted bone is small and it is possible for you, draw it out with fine forceps that fit to it.
If there are many bones, then inquire about their removal one by one, and do not leave any of them with your strength.
If it happens to you that something prevents you from any of the humidities and there is no fear or mistake in making an incision of them: then incise those humidities and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If you do not have the preparation for removing bones from your time, then place on the wound what causes it to rot itself and leave it until it rots what is around those bones from the flesh and humidities.
And keep the wound so that it does not consolidate. And tighten the incision which you made in your operation. Or place on it, if you are afraid, hot cottons soaked in ground sulfur with oil; or hot cottons soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any green ointments.
For when those (humidities) rot certainly and the bones are separated from them, the removal of them is alleviated, and their drawing out.
If a single large bone, such as the bone of the leg or hipbone, and similar to them, has been corrupted, and what is from it is a large part: then shave it with the final rasp until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If what is corrupted in it is a large part and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it must be sawn and cut through entirely until the point where corruption stops: then care for it until it heals.
And I tell you a case that occurs to a man in his leg: place it as an example and aid for your operation.
There was a young man about thirty years of age, who had pain in his leg, from a cause that moved upon him within the body, that is, from inside, until the matter reached the leg, and an abscess was made by an abscess, and it was not an external cause.
Then passed the time with him while the error of physicians occurred, until the abscess was opened, and many substances gathered with him. And his treatment was delayed until the leg became fistulous and many openings were made in it: which all emitted pus and moisture of the body.
Then a multitude of physicians cared for him about two years and there was no wise man in the art of hand in it until I was called upon, and saw his leg and the substances that were flowing from those openings at a large pace: even all the body of the man was already swollen, and his color was yellow.
I therefore inserted a probe into one of the openings and the probe reached the bone.
Then I examined all the openings: and found them to reach one another from every part of the leg.
I therefore made an incision over one of the openings, until I exposed a part of the bone; and I found it corrupt: which was already rotten, decayed, putrefied, perforated, until it had penetrated up to the marrow.
I therefore cut out what was exposed to me, and prepared it from the rotten bone.
And I removed, that there was nothing in the bone except that corruption, which I cut away. And I have already uprooted it.
Then I placed a dressing on the wound with consolidating medicines for a long space. And it was not consolidated.
Then I tried again, and exposed over the bone second above the first opening; and found a continuous corruption with the bone: and cut away what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I attempted to dress it. And it was not dressed.
Therefore I exposed again, and did not cease to cut the bone piece by piece, and attempt to dress it; and it was not dressed, until I cut from the bone about one palm's breadth, and extracted that with its marrow.
Then I dressed it with medicines, and it was quickly consolidated and healed; and this repetition was not necessary in the operation of his and the section of his, except for the disposition of his weakness, and the scarcity of his tolerance, and my fear over him of death; since it happened to him at all hours from an excess of evacuations with bad fainting spells.
Therefore he was completely healed; and there grew strong flesh on the site of the bone, and good arrangements were made in his body, and his strength returned; and he turned to his own dispositions; and he did no harm at all to him in walking.
If the prominent bone in the body is already fractured, then it is necessary that you grasp it in this manner: and it is as follows: to take a ligament, and tighten it at the end of the prominent bone; and command someone to stretch it upwards; and place another thicker ligament from wool on the first one. Then bind it to the flesh that surrounds the bone; extend its end so you can pull the flesh towards the lower parts; and you shall peel back the flesh over the place where you want to cut, so it doesn't get cut by the saw.
Place a wooden board or a table underneath the bone below; because when you do that, it is not forbidden to cut corrupted flesh.
It is necessary that the saw be slightly above the corrupted place, so that corruption is not in the concavity of the bone; and it should not appear to the senses in its view, and make another part serve as a substitute for the sawing.
If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, but rather continuous with another part, and corruption is in the middle or some part of it; then peel back the flesh from all its parts. Then place a wooden board underneath.
Then saw it from the first part where the corruption is, until the sawing is completed on the other side; and let the saw be slightly above the corruption, as we said before.
If the corruption is at a joint, cut the corrupted joint and saw the bone where it joins from the other side.
If, however, the corruption is between two joints, then there is no remedy but abrasion.
If the corruption is at the beak of the hand or foot, then it presents a very difficult situation. Nevertheless, you must find out what the nature of the corruption looks like to you. And file (or grind) her and clean her as well as possible for you, and when it is corrected by any means, it does not cause opposition to the Vein or Nerve for you.
And know that there are many cutting (instruments) and saws for cutting these bones according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their thinness, their size, their smallness, their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary that the tool should be suitable for every kind of operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you according to the type of instrument that you need when your study is lengthy. And the knowledge of the methods of this art is a sign of the modes of diseases; then you will find for yourself what suits it from the instruments for every disease.
And I am confirming for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments, which you will place as examples on which you cut, and the test by which you try it on others.
The form of another saw.
The form of a rasp for joints. Let the head of this rasp be shaped like the head of a star-headed nail; and its points should be shaped according to the form of the points of a file.
And it does not suit unless it is rubbed with it when the heads of the joints are broken, or if a large and thick bone is present.
Form of a larger razor.
Form of a broad razor.
Form of a razor with a concavity (convexity).
Form of another fine razor.
Form of another razor with a curved tip.
Form of a small, fine, bent razor.
This resembles a drill and its tip is similar to a saw: it is used at many places due to the reason of bones.
The form of a razor that fits for the purpose of cutting through bones.
Its tip is triangular and its angles are sharp.
It comes from India. And likewise it is necessary that all those things which I have said be made of razors, and chisels, and saws.
Section on the incising of extremities, and serration (cutting) of bones.
Extremities become rotten either due to external causes or internal causes.
Since you have treated the corruption with medication and it does not help, and you see that the corruption is spreading in a limb that nothing seems to affect: then it is necessary that you incise (cut) the limb up until where the corruption ends, so that the weakened part may escape death or the greater evil which is a defect of the limb.
And the sign for this is that the limb darkens (becomes black) until it seems to be dead; or the heat has burned it, or it becomes rotten after turning black: until the rot is cut through up until where it follows the limb and creeps throughout the entire body.
Therefore when you make the incision and likewise if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain venomous creatures such as marine scorpions, weasels, hedgehogs, and similar animals.
If therefore corruption or injury is at the extremity of a finger, then cut off the finger and do not leave space for corruption to spread, until it reaches the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it off from the root of the wrist, and do not leave space for corruption to spread, until it reaches the arm's bone.
And if it invades it (the bone), then cut off the arm at the elbow joint.
If however corruption passes beyond (the arm) and you see it about the elbow: then there is the death of a weak man. And over that (the dead arm), administration of remedy is its amount of virtue.
And similarly do with the foot, when corruption invades a toe, then cut it off at one of the joints: and if it reaches the heel of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. And if it ascends to the knee, then cut off the leg at the joint of the knee.
If corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no skill in it except to let it go and abandon the weak man to death.
And the method of cutting a member or sewing it is that you tighten the tendon below where you wish to cut, and tighten another tendon above the place. And stretch one of the tendons downwards, and stretch another tendon upwards towards the top. And you separate the flesh that is between two tendons with a broad knife until all the flesh is exposed. Then it is cut or sewn up.
And it is necessary that you place a linen cloth over all parts and not let the knife touch any healthy part; and an additional injury occurs to the weak man, and a hot abscess.
If however internal bleeding occurs while you are working on it, then quickly cauterize the place; or put some absorbing powders over it to stop the blood flow. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligament and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man on his foot, the same thing happening to him as I told you.
This is what happened to him, because his foot turned black due to a burn similar to fire burning it; the decay started with his toe and eventually spread throughout the entire foot.
Therefore, the man cut himself off from himself when he saw the decay spreading through his limb with great pain and burns; he cut himself at the joint, and healed.
And after a long time passed, the same decay occurred in the tip of his thumb on his own hand.
Therefore, he came to me and I tried to regain the loss with the remedy that I placed on his hand after cleansing his body; however, the loss did not stop, instead it spread to another finger, until decay started affecting his entire hand.
Therefore he called for me to cut off his hand; but I refused, hoping to cure the loss; and I also feared death for him during the cutting of his hand. Because the man was above his loss.
And since he had given up on me, he returned to his own land; and then he came back to me because he was afraid of dying and cut off his entire hand; and he healed.
And I did not bring this narrative except as an aid for that which falls under the genus of this illness; and to show what is signified by it, and according to how it should be done.
[Title] On caring for bladder stones and the quality of enema with medications.
When a boil occurs in some fleshy parts and the space of the boil extends until it makes collection of pus: then it bursts or is perforated and what is in it comes out as pus, and there remains an empty place like a vessel: and the skin that is above it has become thin like a cloth that has already been softened: and it does not reach the final corruption nor presses on bone, nerve, or ligament: it deserves to be called Sinus: and it is not called Fistula: however, if the space of it extends until corruption presses into one of these parts, then it is called Fistula, or ulcer.
And the care of this [fistula or sinus] is that you cut the entire skin as it is rolled up: and especially when it has become thin like a cloth: and trust that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
If you hope that the skin will adhere and the ultimate corruption does not follow from this: and if there is a thickness in the skin due to flesh, then treat it with Clisterium: and it is to be considered as a sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus that is emitted from it has a foul odor: then clisterize it with a medicine from Egypt, which is vinegar, oil, and zinziber, parts receiving equal amounts, mixed together in a vessel: and boil it over fire, until the medicine turns red: and let it become thick like honey.
Then take from it whatever is necessary for you: and dissolve it with water and honey, and clisterize the sinus with it: and tie up its opening, and let the medicine remain in it for two hours.
Then remove it by pressing: do this for days until the sinus is purified and the foul smell is removed.
And at times, one cleanses with water and ashes when this medicine is not present to you; and it is to be known that you receive the ashes of vinewood or ashes from holm oaks; and you throw water upon it. Then wash her, and cleanse with it until you are confident that the sinus is already cleaned.
If the patient cannot bear Egyptian medicine or water and ashes, then cleanse him with water and honey, to which something from crushed wine lees has already been added. Or cleanse him with honey and wine mixed together, because the property of honey is to purify and cleanse; and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness in the wine.
When you do that several times and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has been removed, then cleanse him with it which causes flesh to grow in it.
And it is to be known that you receive from the plaster diaphanicon; and you dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic wine; or cleanse him with certain medicines and other unguents whose properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
If the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot take a cannula for cleansing; then expand it slightly with iron; or place linen wound around an Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment inside it until it expands.
And similarly, if the opening is also wide, then bring together the edges with a suture; and allow the quantity of cleansing solution to enter it without addition.
And similarly, if the opening from which pus flows is elevated above; then cut it in a lower place within it so that the pus runs out below; because pus when obstructed in the depth of the sinus prevents flesh from growing in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the bladder lower than you wish: then try, so that you prepare the member with a preparation by which pus runs out from it easily according to your preparation. Try not to retain anything from pus within it: and take the consolidating medicines that are placed upon the sign, suitable for what you wish. Spread them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that there may be communication throughout the bladder. Then cut with scissors directly into the bladder opening, larger than the bladder opening by a little bit. Then spread ointments gently over another cloth, according to the size of the opening: and place it on top, at a distance from the bladder opening, in order to promote the outflow of pus from it: and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days, one by one.
He who is on top of the bladder opening, he is the one you remove at every hour, so that what collects in it from pus may come out: and know that, whether what flows out from it is much or little, digested or undigested.
And with this, again consider the place of the bladder itself, whether its master feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess there or not.
When your medicine is thus applied and you see the material that flows out from the bladder opening, then know that the bladder has already adhered or approaches adhesion: then dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change the cloth, and renew the ointment.
If pus flows out from the bladder after a long time with a subtle smell, then do not despair of its adhesion, for healing is approaching, since there are some people who slow down the regeneration of flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act contrary to this.
If however it comes out from the Sinus for many days as a putrid boil, then you shall know that the sinus is not adhered.
If the adhering sinus delays and its matter prolongs, then you shall add humid medicines with dry properties to it, as the doctors do; but they should be medicines that are moist in substance and dry in power, like dyafinicon ointment, when superfluous addition is added to it from zegi.
And from the last [part] that is treated, it is that you shall receive dyafinicon ointment, and let it be dissolved with rose oil, and rub over it aged wine equal in substance.
Then mix it with that and use it.
And now make one similar to this action, when you do not have dyafinicon ointment at hand, honey; when you boil it until it thickens, and use it. Or take myrrh, aloes, and olibanum; grind the whole thing and powder it over honey while it is on fire. Then lay a cloth over it and bind it to the sinus; and anoint with the honey you boiled until thickened, and powder its shape, and place it over the cloth and bind it.
And sometimes administered to him is long aristolochia, and the roots of celestial lily, and it is lily; and wheat flour, and knotgrass. Use them singly or combined, grind them and sift the powder; and sprinkle it over the honey I told you about, and use it.
If the matter of the sinus prolongs and does not heal with this treatment, then you shall know that there is corruption in its depth; or it has already made an impression on the bones or hard members or ligaments; then treat it with fistula cure, as mentioned before.
On the treatment of Panaritis and a worn nail, and the incision of a finger, and a section.
Aposteme which occurs under the nail of the thumb or big toe of the hand or foot; perhaps it also arises in other fingers.
When the matter of this (Panaritis) is prolonged and neglected, it becomes an aposteme that is treated with heat; it may rot and discharge pus until it corrodes the root of the nail; perhaps it rots completely, and the corruption reaches the bone, so that there is a foul smell; and the end of the finger becomes wide and darkens.
When you treat it (the affected part), and your treatment does not improve it: then it is necessary to cut with the iron the entire excess that remains from the nail. Cauterize the wound after that. For cautery is very beneficial.
If the bone is healthy and the nail also is healthy, and the hollow additions of the nail already press the flesh towards the inside and begin to pierce it and harm it: then it is necessary that you place subtle radium under the corner of the nail which pierces the flesh, and push it up: and cut the flesh easily, and place on top of what remains of the flesh from medicines burning, corrosive ones, until all of it is removed. Then heal it with ointments, until it heals.
If the corruption already presses on the bone, then it is necessary to cut that bone and extract it; for a corrupted bone never heals while it remains in there.
If you see corrosion and corruption advancing on the finger, then cut it at one joint, according to what was previously mentioned about its memory (anatomy). Then heal it, until it heals.
If there is wear or injury of the nail, and a violent pain occurs in it: then it is necessary to use leeches first. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula cut crosswise from above to below.
And keep, so that the cut does not reach the flesh which is under the nail, for you will cause a very violent pain to occur above it, and it will be a cause for the growth of additional flesh in that place.
Then heal the place with what soothes the pains.
A finger which is born in some human hands, perhaps it is entirely fleshy; and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them are born at the joint of the root, or its birthplace is in some joints of the finger. He who is born in certain knots of the finger, is not moved; and he who is born near the junction of the finger, perhaps moves.
The flesh that grows from them is easily divided. It should be cut at its root with a broad spatula.
But the treatment of one born at the junction of the root is difficult. Therefore, refrain from cutting it.
However, in the one born on the finger at the end of the knots, then it is necessary to cut its flesh with a round incision up to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws suitable for that. Then care for it until it heals.
The consolidation that happens between the fingers occurs frequently either from human birth, that is, being born with it, or from a wound consolidation, or burning by fire, and similar things.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut the consolidated part until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place a cloth or linen soaked in rose oil between them to prevent them from consolidating quickly and separate them; or place a thin lead plate between them until the location is healed as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation happens with some fingers at the palm, then cut the consolidated part as needed and conform to the shape of the member.
Chapter on the defect in incisions.
The veins are twisted, thick, full of melancholic excesses that occur in various parts of the body; and most frequently they occur in the legs, especially those who travel and work hard, and those who carry heavy loads.
It is necessary that you administer the lancing of the body from black choler several times by a strong lancing.
Then, phlebotomy (bloodletting) of the patient's basilic vein.
The treatment (of these things) with iron (lancet), is according to two methods. One method is to score it (the affected area) and to draw out black blood. And another method is to elevate the Vein and extract it entirely.
The incision of this [vein] is according to this method. Irrigate the leg first with much hot water until the thick, foul blood dissolves. Then bind the weak leg from the upper part of the hip of that [leg], up to the lower part of the thigh with a bandage. Then cut the vein at one, or two, or three wide sections.
Then lift (eleua), that is, draw blood from the lower part of the leg towards the upper part, and it should first be done by the leech for the weak [patient]. Then cut the nail with what is below it (down to its base): until the quantity of blood that you see is sufficient, and what strength the weak [patient] can bear.
Then bind (it), and command him to abstain from foods that cause black bile; and repeat the evacuation and leeching when the veins are full, for it may harm the weak [patient].
The lifting (eleuatio) of this [vein] is according to this method. Scrape the weak leg if there are many hairs in it. Then immerse it [the leg] in a bath, or irrigate it in the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; or exercise it with strong movements if there is no bath present for him, until the limb becomes warm.
Then make an incision along the direction of the vein in length: or at the end [of the vein] near the knee, or at the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with the scalpel and scrape off the vein from all sides until it is felt: and at its appearance, it will turn from red to blackish-blue. When it comes from the skin, it appears white as if it were a cord.
Then insert the Radium under it until it is raised and comes out of the skin; suspend it with a blind hook, soft.
Then cut another section near that section with three fingers. Then peel the skin from above the vein until it appears. Then lift it up with the radii as you did before, and suspend it with another hook as you did at first.
Then cut another section or several sections if necessary for that one. Then peel it and cut the last section at the heel.
Then extract from the section above that one.
Do this until you extract it from the upper or highest section, or all sections until it comes out completely; then cut it.
If it does not obey you to be extracted and lifted; then insert a lancet with a strong thread twice, tie it and extract it yourself or insert the radii under it and turn your hand over all parts until it comes out. And be careful not to cut it. For if it is cut, it will become very difficult for you to lift it up and it may enter into the wound from that causing harm.
When you have extracted it completely; then place a linen cloth soaked in wine and rose oil or olive oil over the wound site and take care of it until it heals.
If the vein is contracted having a winding with coiling to parts and it is not as we said according to the straightness; then you should make an incision over all its winding parts and the sites of its coiling.
Then suspend it with hooks until you lift it up completely; and be careful at your incision site not to cut the vein or wound; for it will become very difficult for you to lift or extract it. Preserve therefore your prudence.
The method by which a vine is healed (or treated).
The shape of the blind man's (catheter) cup.
It is not narrow like other catheters nor has a sharp tip that would injure the vein; rather it is rounded and flexible because if it were too fine, it would pierce the vein with its fineness; on the contrary, it should have excess roundness, as we said.
On the extraction of a leg vein.
This vein is generated in the legs of warm lands, such as Alizegi and Arabia, and in dry, warm lands of little softness, that is, where no plant or tree grows.
And perhaps it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And indeed its generation is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, such as happens within snake and ascaris worms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And a sign of the beginning of this vein's occurrence is a violent inflammation in the leg. Then the area is blistered. Then the vein begins to come out from that blistered area, as if it were a root of a plant or an animal. This is followed by a series of further instructions on how to safely extract the vein, including using hot irons and cauterizing the surrounding tissue. The translation ends
When its end appears, then wrap a piece of lead weighing one keil dram around it, up to two and a half drams; and let the suspended lead hang from the leg. This is part of instructions on how to safely extract the vein by wrapping it with lead to prevent it from collapsing or breaking during the extraction process.
Whenever something comes out of it towards the exterior, wrap it in lead and tie it up. This instruction is likely meant to prevent infection during the extraction process by keeping the vein covered and contained. The translation ends here. If it extends too much, then cut off that part and turn up the remaining part. Do not cut it at the root before it has emerged completely. Because if you cut it, it contracts and enters into the flesh; it causes an abscess to appear, and pus at the site, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it should be treated gently and drawn out slowly until it has emerged entirely from its end, and nothing is left in the body from it: and this vein emerges from some humans that is as long as five palms and ten. And now it has come to me, because it has emerged from a man of twenty palms.
If it is cut during your treatment time: then insert a ray into its opening and pierce it with a long hole along with the body until everything that is in it from matter has been evacuated; and administer the rotting of the place with medicines for several days. Then cure it with treatment for abscesses.
This vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself; and holes occur in it, and a branch comes out from every hole.
Therefore, take care of it as we said in the division, and with what was mentioned earlier.
Section on worms generated under the skin, and this is called Bouina's disease.
This disease is called Bouina's disease in a certain land among us; because it often occurs in cows, and there is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it travels through the body, moving up and down; and it is detected by the senses during walking of a limb to another, until it bursts anywhere that it bursts on the skin, and comes out.
And its generation is from the corruption of certain humors. As it happens with worms and snakes, that is, earthworms and roundworms in the abdomen.
And feared from its malignancy. Because when it moves in the body and is raised to the head and reaches the place: then perhaps it opens there, and goes out, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Therefore, in order to cure it and remove it, this is not done except during its movement, and the perception of it by the senses.
Therefore, one should tighten what is above it and what is below it with a strong ligature. Then cut above it and remove it.
If it penetrates into the flesh, and you do not find it: then place a cautery over the spot with fire until it dies.
And what is feared more, is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If, however, you see it already having reached the head near the eye, then tighten under it with a good ligature above the eyebrow. Then cut above it and remove it.
And the sick person should use cleanliness of his body, with medicines dissolving corrupting bad humors.
And let him avoid foods that cause corruption.
Chapter on the incision for the disease of Nakir.
This disease is called in our land Nakir; it is a pain that occurs in certain members, and then changes from member to member.
And I myself have seen this, as I am telling you. I was called to a sick woman in certain villages. And she extended her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And when an hour had passed, I saw a swelling move with a rod, as a worm moves, quickly ascending to the man's shoulder: it was like living silver running from place to place.
Therefore, pain left that place and was fixed in the shoulder.
After an hour it ran through the rest of the body until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that it was rotating throughout its entire body, as I had seen.
Therefore, I was amazed at the swiftness of the change from limb to limb. And indeed, before that, I had never seen this sickness appear to my eyes in such a way. However, I saw many who found the pain change from limb to limb; and I did not see it with my own eyes as I did in a woman.
And I do not think that it was anything other than the fact that she was from those who are dry of body vessels; hence, this appears to indicate a windiness changed.
And it is necessary that it does not appear in those who are sweet-smelling and moist bodies of concealed veins.
Therefore, when you wish to cure it and the patient feels that pain; then if it is apparent to you, as we said, then press on it quickly and below it; cut above it until that windiness pressed out; and cauterize the place.
If however you do not see it with your eyes; then cure it by expelling the body and that which expels windiness; and crush them with foul pills and pills of myrrh and similar substances.
Chapter on Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows are differentiated according to their types and the places where they fall on the body.
However, the diversity of ears is as follows: because among them are those with large tips and small ones; and concave ones, and those without openings. And among them are those with three corners. And among them are those with tongues (projectile points). And among them are those with stars (points with multiple prongs).
But those which fall on the limbs, are according to two types. Or the limbs are hollow, like the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When therefore it falls in one of these members, and signs of death appear to you, which I tell you afterwards, then it is necessary that you devote extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows it in whom it is, in many dispositions. And when these signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then extract it, and take care of the wound.
From the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates a bone, and exits above the brain, are: since sudden headaches occur from this, and blindness, and dizziness, and redness in the eyes, and swelling, and redness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of intellect, and vomiting of cholera. And perhaps blood comes out from the nose, or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And moisture comes out from the wound's place, white like plaster. And it comes out of it resembling a meaty fluid.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not come out by itself.
The signs of the arrow when it falls on the heart are: that it is close to the left nipple, and one feels as if it were fixed in a hard object, not in an empty one. And perhaps the arrow's movement is similar to a pulse movement, and black blood runs from the wound. And it follows that coldness of the limbs, and cold sweat, and fainting occur. Know therefore, that death is descending without doubt.
And the sign of an arrow wounding the lung is the exit of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels that follow the neck are to be cut off, and the color of the sick is to be changed. And it exhales a large, deep breath and seeks attraction of cold air.
If an arrow falls into the lung, which is in the chest; then it is near to small ribs: and a great panting with intense pain, with sigh, occurs; and all limbs of shoulders move.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested comes out through the wound from food.
And if an arrow falls into the abdomen and pierces it: something of feces comes out through the wound, or pus, or an intestine that is already ruptured. Therefore there is no hope for his cure, nor for the removal of the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder and passes urine: and something passes out from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger upon the sick; then you know that it is fatal.
Remaining members, such as the face, neck, throat, spatula, aid, dorsal spine, fork, hip, leg, and similar limbs are saved according to several arrangements: when the arrow does not hit an artery or a nerve; and the arrow is not venomous.
And I tell you what I have seen of these arrows, to indicate to you by that on your cure.
That is, because a man had an arrow fall into his eye socket near the root of his nose. Therefore I removed it myself from the other side, under the cheek of his ear; and he was cured, and no harm came to his eye.
I also removed another arrow from a Jew that had fallen on his eye under the lower eyelid; and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not get hold of it except for its small end, with which it adhered to its wood; and the arrow was large among arrows of Turkish bows, with soft iron, in which there are no ears.
The Jew has been healed, and no accidental evil has happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
The arrow was Arabic, and it belonged to those with ears [i.e., humans]. So I cut through him on top of two windpipes; and by now he was drowned within his throat. I was sharpened with that [instrument], until I extracted it; and the Christian was healed.
I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his abdomen; and we thought he would die because of it.
After thirty days had passed and nothing changed in his condition, I made an incision over the arrow; I sharpened myself upon it and extracted it; and he was healed, and no accidental evil happened to him.
And I saw a man who had an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound was healed over it. After seven years it came out [of the body] from the root of his hipbone.
I saw a woman who had an arrow lodged in her abdomen, and the wound was healed over it; but the arrow remained within her, and nothing changed in her condition or caused her any harm in her natural operations.
I saw another man who had an arrow lodged in his face; the wound healed over it, and there was little pain for him; and similar things happened to many others.
I extracted an arrow from a nobleman of the King who had fallen into the middle of his nose and had already deviated slightly towards the right; but the entire arrow was hidden.
I was called to treat him after the fall of the arrow for three days. I found therefore a wound of an arrow very tightly closed.
I probed it with delicate tweezers and did not feel it: and himself he found a puncture and pain on his right side of the ear. I hoped therefore that it was this puncture from the tip of the arrow.
I applied a plaster to the place with a drawing ointment having an attracting and dissolving property, trusting that the spot would open and show me the sign of the arrow so that I might cut above it: and it did not happen at the place where it should have happened, showing that the arrow had passed through.
I stayed with the plaster over him for many days: and it did not happen as expected, and the wound hardened in the meantime: and he remained weak from the extraction of it for a space of many days, until he felt the arrow one day within his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I placed over the wound medicine that was sharp and corrosive for many days until it opened: and when I probed it with delicate tweezers, I felt the fine tip of the arrow sticking to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound with this sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared clearly to us: and it passed me with that space of time about four months.
Then when the wound had swollen and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move it, it did not obey to come out: then I did not stop probing, and devising on it with means of ingenuity, until I began one day with correctly made forceps according to the form that they will take at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I healed the wound.
And physicians indeed judge, that the nasal cartilage does not restore. I therefore restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient recovered with complete health; nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you the quality of extraction of some arrows: that you may place that rule and meaning on what I did not say.
Because the parts and distinctions of this art are not comprehended with the narrative; nor does that book contain it, and a wise craftsman compares little with much; and with what is present, concerning what is absent; and finds a new operation, and a new instrument in the descent of foreign matters of this art when they occur.
Therefore I say that arrows do not exit from the members to which they are fixed, unless according to two modes. Or by attraction from the place from whence it entered. Or in reverse direction of another part.
And that which goes out from whence it entered is an arrow proceeding into a soft place; and it is attracted and exits.
If it does not obey for an exit from the hour at which it falls: then it is necessary that you leave it for some days, until the flesh which is around it rots away; and the attraction of it will cease, and its exit.
And similarly if it strikes a bone, and does not obey you for an exit, then leave it also for some days; and move it with attraction and motion every day until it comes out.
If it does not obey you for an exit after days, then it is necessary that you bore around the arrow in the bone on every side with a subtle chisel until the arrows swell. Then attract it and draw out the arrow.
If the arrow is already hidden within the body and concealed from sensation, then search for it with a probe. If you feel it (the arrow), then attract it using certain instruments suitable for the task.
If you cannot reach the arrow due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow being deep; and there is no bone, nerve, or vein in that area: then pierce it (the arrow) and wait for the wound to expand so that it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
If there are ears that hold the arrow fast on all sides: then free the fixed flesh from them by any means you can; and if you cannot lift the flesh due to a fracture of the ears or twisting of them, wait until it breaks out.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location, then use the twisting of your hand with pliers for all parts; until it breaks out: and with great subtlety to avoid breaking the arrow, making its attraction difficult and the extraction itself.
If you cannot reach it (the arrow) for an hour: then leave it for some days until the things around it rot away. Then probe it again; for the wound will close itself, but if it causes blood flow contrary to you: then administer what I have said in its treatment in its chapter; and protect your strength from cutting a vein, nerve, or tendon.
And administer your art in every way possible to the removal of an arrow: and let it be with ease, calmness, slowness or firmness as I told you.
And it is necessary that when you pull out the arrow, it should be weakened according to the form (shape) by which it was lodged inside (the wound). Because it is more helpful (for the patient's recovery). If however, that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to shapes (arrowheads or arrows of different types).
The arrow that comes out from the opposite side of the other part or has already proceeded outwards, or makes a hump at the end of the arrow by a sensation on the upper part of the skin nearby, and you see it protruding: therefore, cut above it, and let the incision be according to the quantity that forceps can grasp in it.
Then pull it out: for it becomes easy to come out by itself.
If however it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand according to its roundness, until the arrow presses against the bone and widens itself: then pull it out.
And if it does not (come out): let it be for some days; then try again until it comes out.
If the shaft of the arrow is in it (the wound), then push it out with the shaft.
If however the shaft has fallen out, and you wish to administer a push: then insert an instrument with a hollow (concave) end into it so that it enters the concavity of the arrowhead; then push it out with the same (instrument).
If however the arrow is concave, then push it out with the instrument inserted into it. For the arrow will be loosened by that (method).
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to excavate all the flesh in which the poison is, if that is possible for you. Then care for her as is fitting until that point.
If an arrow is falling into the chest, or into the belly, or into the bladder, or into the side: and it is near by what you touch with the probe, and it can be cut through it: then cut through it, and be careful not to cut a vein, or a nerve, and pull it out.
Then suture the wound, if you see it, and care for it until it heals.
And this is the shape of the forceps with which arrows are pulled out.
The ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, made of iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not let go of it.
And they are made in many shapes: large, small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and its narrowness.
The shape of the impeller is concave.
And the shape of the impeller is deaf.
This is a deaf end like a radius, so that its entrance into the concave arrowhead is relieved, and it is driven with it.
Chapter on venous bleeding.
Veins for bleeding, whose custom has run in the body, are thirty.
In the head there are sixteen: two pulsating veins that are behind the ears, called two herbs; and two arteries, appearing in two temples; and two veins which are in the two tear ducts of both eyes, called "Aspicientes"; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the end of the nose. And two jugular veins, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are the veins called Algecherich. And two veins that are under the tongue.
However, the veins that are bled in arms are five in every arm.
One of them is Cephalic and it is from the forest side; and the common people call it vein of the head. And Fusca. And it is the middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and a branch of the cephalica; and they call it the vein of the body in common speech. And Basilica, and it is placed on the domestic side; and it is also called Titillicaris. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And [it is] the arm vein, and it is placed on the fork: and this is where phlebotomy is performed, and this is that which appears above the thumb by a manifest protrusion.
And the little Saviour: and it is the vein which is between the anular and the cube [bone]: and there are to it two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot, there are three veins. One of them is that which is under the bend of the thumb from the side of the little finger. And the second is the saphenous vein: and its place is at the heel from the domestic side. And the vein of Nessus: and its place is at the heel from the side of the forest.
And in another leg, there are three veins similar to these.
Chapter on phlebotomy of two veins after the ears.
The phlebotomy of two veins which are after the ears, is helpful for old catarrhs, and hemiheadache, and scrofulas, and old sores on the head.
And the quality of [the procedure] is according to what I have said [before]. And it is, that the head of the sick person should be shaved: and the nape of his head should be rubbed in the place of two veins with a rough cloth rubbing good. Then the sick person should tighten his neck with a bandage until the two veins appear. And their places are behind the ears, in two depressed places of the head. So seek them with your finger, and where you feel their pulsations under your finger, mark that place with the branding iron.
Then take a phlebotomy knife, and this is called the Incisor. Then insert it under the vein into the flesh, until the phlebotomist reaches the bone. Then, extend your hand with the vein and skin towards above, and cut the vein with an incision that includes the skin. And let the length of the incision be the size of two joined fingers, or about that: and let out as much blood as you want.
Then, tie it with sutures and release it until it heals.
And now, the excision and cauterization of these (vessels) begins at the start of the book.
The phlebotomy of the two arteries which are in two times is helpful for an old hemigraine: and for a painful sciatica, and for a constant headache: and for the flow of superfluous fluids that are sharp towards the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomy (phlebotomizing) them is as I tell you. Let the sick person tighten his neck much until two veins appear clearly to the sense through visible manifestation: and let the pulsation of them be shown under your finger. Then, (make) signs with the cauterizing iron.
Then, extend the skin above the vein towards above with your index finger and insert the lancet from below: and extend the vein towards above. Then, cut it as you did with two other veins: and let out blood according to your need.
Then, loosen the constriction of the sick person, and place your finger on the vein at the hour position. Then, place a linen cloth over it and sutures: and tie it tightly above with strong constriction: and release it until it heals.
And now, the reminder of them, and their excision, and their extraction begins at the start of the book.
Remedy for phlebotomy of the front vein is after phlebotomy in the head, for old facial diseases: and for migraine, and redness: and for foul ulcers.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is as I tell you. Tie the sick man's neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "Fossorium".
Place the prominent tip at the end of the Fossorium on the vein and strike it with a peck or with another tool in that manner, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish. Then dissolve the wound of the sick man and tie it until it heals.
And sometimes it opens with a wide phlebotomy. However, the phlebotomist should not be sharp-pointed as the other phlebotomists, rather it should be wide-mouthed. And the phlebotomy should be made across [the vein], since the bone is nearby; and perhaps the phlebotomist will break it when it is sharp.
Remedy for the two veins that are in the two tear ducts of both eyes is for an eye with a scab or redness: and for swelling in the eye, and facial diseases.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that the sick man ties his neck with a bandage. Then phlebotomize them [the veins]: and you stand over his head.
And let phlebotomy be performed across [the vein], to a length less than usual, when phlebotomising little, incise slightly wider, for there is no flesh in that place. If one who phlebotomises is subtle at the end [of the vein], perhaps it will be broken.
Then make run out as much blood as it is necessary for you. And place a bandage over them, and tie them up at night, and loosen them.
The veins of the nose are phlebotomized to treat acute fever, and severe swelling, and diseases of the face, such as hemigraine and redness that occurs on the face; especially when it is old.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that it tightens a weak neck [of a person]. Then hold the nose of that person with your left hand, and take a subtle, long lancet; and place it in the middle of the nasal cavity, between that which separates the nose according to its correct alignment. Because the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that your hand be at the end with the lancet slightly; and make out as much blood as it is necessary for you. Then tie it up at night. For it recovers quickly itself.
The phlebotomy of the two veins in the back (of the head) has two beneficial effects: it helps to constrict coughing and the beginning of leprosy, and diseases of melancholy, and impetigo, and bad ulcers, and those that are corroding, i.e., herpetic sores or eruptions.
The quality of phlebotomy is that it binds the sick person under each neck with a ligature; and the craftsman should stand over the head of the sick, and the sick person should be sitting on a seat.
Then phlebotomy vein to the length of phlebotomy wide a little shorter. Then draw out an appropriate amount of blood, or according to what you see is necessary for that purpose. Then do the same with another vein.
Then release the ligature and bind two veins together tightly: so that the sick person does not faint. And let it be until morning. A wound heals.
Chapter on the veins of Albucasis. The veins of Algeberich are helpful for phlebotomy because they contribute to alcohol in the mouth and corruption of gums, and ulcers, and fissures in lips, and ulcers, even those that are in the nose and around it.
The quality of phlebotomy is that you should have the sick person sit before you: and bind his neck with a bandage. Then roll back his lip and look at two veins; one of which is on the right side of the lip, and the second on its left side: and the demonstration of each is evident through their blueness. And it is true that around them are small veins, black. Therefore cut both with an incision.
If there is doubt about you and you do not know which of them it is: then direct your attention to the larger incision, and that will be clearer.
And do the same with two veins that are in the upper lip; and it is most common to use this procedure: and cut the two veins in the lower lip.
On phlebotomy: vein under the tongue after cephalic phlebotomy. For the two veins that are under the tongue, phlebotomy is beneficial: it is because cephalic phlebotomy is for conditions in the throat and sickness of the windpipe, and sicknesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is that the sick person should be seated in front of you with his hand on the sun: and loosen his tongue, and look under the tongue on one side for a vein, and on the other side for another vein: and the color of both declines towards blackness.
Therefore, phlebotomize each one: and be careful not to injure your hand while phlebotomizing them. For under it are the arteries, and possibly there may be a flow of blood from these arteries.
The three veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow, these are the ones for whose phlebotomy there is a custom among all men.
And phlebotomy of them is done according to two modes. Or pricking with a broad phlebotome made of myrtle: or letting it open to the subtle point of decline: or cutting with a sharp phlebotome, and this is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from these there are wide and thin forms according to the width and tightness of the veins. The shape of the phlebotome made of myrtle should be wide, as you can see. And it fits for opening veins that are hollow, full, proceeding, appearing, thick, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this phlebotome is of smaller width and more subtle in cutting.
It is appropriate for phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain delicate lemon-yellow blood.
Phlebotomy of the basilica is helpful for one of these three veins' phlebotomy. Because it drains blood from ailments that are under the throat and neck, following the chest and abdomen; therefore, the phlebotomist should be careful with it, since an artery is beneath it. If, however, the phlebotomist makes a mistake and adds in the puncture, he will cut the artery, and there will be blood flow. Therefore, the phlebotomist should not puncture it; rather, it should be cut by Alnesil.
If the basilica does not appear with a manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you exchange it for another or seek one of its branches; or you replace it with the vein of the arm, the phlebotomist. It is itself obvious and cut it when Anesil the phlebotomist does so, as we have said.
If, however, you wish to perform phlebotomy on this same one, then it is necessary before the tightening of the arm, that you touch the place, until you recognize the pulsed place. Then mark the place with a sign using hot wax, afterwards the arm; and cut the vein with a concave incision, the phlebotomist Alnesil, as we have said. And be careful that the puncture does not fall into the space from the location of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, an inflammation at the place that you have marked with hot wax; then that inflammation is inflation of the artery; therefore, avoid it.
If you see blood rise during phlebotomy, like the urine of a boy, and it is thin, red: then you will know that it is from the blood of an artery. Then draw back and place your finger over the spot at a distance, then remove your finger. If the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off), then bind the arm and let it be; let the weak one avoid moving it; and there should be fear of it.
And do not move it for a few days until it heals.
But if the blood does not flow off and binds you, and there is no medicine present at your moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For its ends contract, and the blood flows off.
Or take the bark of a fig tree, cut it and take one half, bind it over the place where the vein is constricted with a string and bandages until another day.
Then if the blood flows off, it is good. And if it does not: then care for it with the remembrance of that place from where powder is removed to cause blood flow, and removal of the blood from that vein is not difficult in many positions due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of binding from the arm.
The phlebotomy of the Blue Vein is helpful because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower body; therefore, since it is composed of a branch of Basilica and a branch of Cephalica, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist that it should be feared from its phlebotomy, because under it is a nerve. If a nerve is struck during phlebotomy puncture, and it causes fainting, the healing process becomes difficult, and perhaps it may not heal completely.
And this nerve appears to sensation often. If it is concealed in some individuals and is subtle and not evident: then you must place your lancet where that vein is, along with a small incision and avoid the nerve with all your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
Chapter on the Vein of the Head. The assistance of phlebotomy for the Vein of the Head is because it draws blood from the head and contributes to eye ailments.
And it is proper in this vein that if you wish, the lancet should be anointed with olive oil or myrtle oil before pricking, because it is safer than all the veins, since it is not near an artery nor a nerve.
However, it is suitable for you in phlebotomy that you avoid the head and arm only, and seek a more comfortable location: and it does no harm if it is not found at the first prick, but you may return to it several times with the lancet.
However, perhaps an abscess may form in some individuals when it is not pricked at the first prick, but it does no harm to that abscess in any case.
Chapter on the Usefulness of Phlebotomy and the Cautions Observed in It. The nature and accidents of phlebotomy, which you must consider for its correction.
First of all, you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in the conservation of health and its persistence, and with caution to avoid illnesses.
And it shall be done venesection on one of the three veins that are on the elbow, namely, Cephalica, Fusca, and Basilica. And it shall be done venesection at the beginning of Spring after fasting, in truth, and summer; in autumn, and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
Venesection shall be done on the first or third day, after three hours have passed from the previous day.
Venesection which is administered in diseases does not have a specific hour; but when the need and appropriateness for it arises, it can be done at night or day, and at any hour, and at any time.
It is not necessary to perform venesection on boys until they reach fourteen years of age. Venesection shall not be performed on pregnant women except from the fourth month up to the seventh. Venesection shall not be performed on the elderly who have already passed sixty years.
When someone wants to perform venesection for any reason, it is necessary to clean the intestines before venesection with a soft enema, if there is much fecal matter retained in them; so that during venesection, the veins are not attracted by putrid waste from the intestines harmful to the main organs.
Venesection shall not be performed on the patient who is intoxicated, that is, suffering from sickness of satiety or nausea; nor on one drunk or vomiting due to drunkenness until it has passed from them. Venesection shall not be performed on a patient with dropsy.
It should be avoided to perform venesection again after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, multiplication of coitus, labor, exercise, sleeplessness, fasting, or anything that dissolves the strength from the body or an animal.
Then consider in fineness of humors before that, if blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medications: if it is possible for him to do that.
Then enter the bath, unless it is forbidden by something: or exercise in some way, so that blood may be made more subtle.
And place phlebotomy on his chest, on the third day, as we have said: and endeavor that his chest is evacuated of all evils that day: such as pain, anger, fear: and of all bodily ailments, such as labor, punishment, excess, and similar things.
And let him have present the things that are used in custom among men from their fragrance, and scent, and joy, and similar things, according to the quantity possible for him.
Then let the phlebotomist sit on a stool higher than the stool for phlebotomy: afterwards he will draw out his arm and rub it with his hand two or three times. Then bind the ligature with a cord, and wind it around twice.
And let the ligature be moderated, because if the ligature is unequal or excessive in the ligature, then it prevents the flow of blood: or in softening, it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then after tying, it is necessary that the person being bled rub his hands together until the veins swell and are felt.
Then the phlebotomist cleans the puncture point with a little oil, an old one properly.
Then he shall place his index finger of the left hand on that vein at the place where he wants to make a puncture, slightly: so that the vein does not escape and the blow is not wasted. Because it is from the vein as you find it, similar to a fleeing cord, during phlebotomy; and from these there is what is full of windiness; and when you place the phlebotomy instrument upon it, it contracts under the phlebotomy instrument, and deceives the phlebotomator, and the phlebotomist does not open the vein; and if he opens it, it is tightened: therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomator should be firm, and careful in all these matters.
Draw or incise the phlebotomy instrument away from the vein. If the vein is opened by one cut, then it is good. And if not, then make another cut a little below or above the same place with haste; but if it is not possible to make another incision.
If it cannot be made another incision or the weak person faints, then leave him for a day, or two days; and do not tighten the bandage. Perhaps the abscess will attract heat. Do not enter the bath.
Then make another incision if necessary.
If the opening is small or blood runs subtly, then be afraid that not enough blood will come out; then make another incision in the same hole according to the straight line, and add a little more in the procedure.
And do this quickly before the abscess is removed, for the place of the abscess is in many people during small operations.
If you see that the abscess has already been removed, then do not go over it at all, for it does not cleanse anything in your hands. And put something of olive oil over it, because it eases the flow of blood. And it is better in this place than olive oil itself and other oils.
And similarly administer oil faeces in every phlebotomy of yours, where phlebotomies veins are against the prohibition of blood circulation; and they do this by Tyriac Albaharik, and sagzenea, when it is placed over one of them.
Blood is made subtle and dissolved, when it is thick.
If it happens in the place of phlebotomy a large abscess, for it often happens, especially to those who are not phlebotomists except at that time, or there is a small opening of vein; then hasten and put over the place a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated slightly; and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood leaves from that vein itself, when its completion, or from another vein.
If something remains in the place after several days of blackness or greenness, it does not hurt it; and if you wish, put over it something of aloe, or myrrh dissolved; or something from mint juice, that is, camphor or similar to it.
Often abscesses and protuberances happen at the phlebotomy of the Basilica.
Put then your hand over it; if you find softness under the pressure of your hand on it, then that protuberance is bad. Be careful to put over it something from what I said. For perhaps blood from an artery flows out of it.
But make a plaster to it with what is there for the swelling, so that the place becomes hardened. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
And it is necessary that you draw blood from every man according to the amount of its virtue. And what appears due to a color prevailing over blood.
If the blood is black, then let it come out until it turns red; similarly, if you see it thick, let it go until it becomes subtle; and similarly, if it is sharp, let it be removed until its sharpness disappears.
It is necessary for him who is full, strong and in need of bloodletting with one vein to be amplified, and the bloodletter should be on the side; and it should be contrary for him who is weak.
It is necessary that it be drawn from the veins and that there be a narrow opening; and it is better that which is administered in bloodletting through the vein be a cross-section rather than a puncture.
This method of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood and from the cutting of nerves; and it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting through breadth and length.
And to whom this is accustomed to come upon bloodletting syncope, it is necessary that he eat before bloodletting with a little bread soaked in water of muscatel grapes or dried if heated; and draw out from his blood in three veins, or four.
And if it is of cold constitution, then let him take before bloodletting bread soaked in syrup of honey or scented honey with spices or aromatic syrup.
If syncope occurs during bloodletting and the cause is the outflow of blood, then it is necessary that he drink meat water and subtle aromatic syrup; and use aromatics with algae and let his chest be wrapped with it; and use the rest that we said in division in the chapter on syncope through evacuation.
Whoever wishes to amputate his arm and let out blood in the second [stage]: it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is for evacuation of much, and the strength of whose phlebotomy is weak, to let out blood gradually by the quantity of strength in continuous days.
Whoever wants to amputate his arm and let out blood in the second [stage], and it is his body (i.e., he is doing it voluntarily): then he should do that after seven or nine hours from his first phlebotomy.
Whoever wants to draw blood from his body towards the opposite part that it flows to: it is necessary for him that it be let out on the second day or third day.
In whose body there is much blood already heated and sharpened, and causes a fever to come on: it is necessary for the blood to be let out in a single instance, and a large quantity drawn: and the opening should be widened until there occurs fainting: after you have observed all the conditions of phlebotomy: and so that you place your hand upon his pulse near the flow of blood, so that death does not occur from the fainting. For often it happens when the phlebotomist is unaware, and falls through carelessness.
And it is not necessary when you wish to amputate the arm and let out blood in the second [stage], if the opening of the vein is already closed, and the exit of blood becomes difficult, that you press on it violently and the area around it be quickly extended. For this is very bad indeed, rather let it alone until the second [stage of] phlebotomy.
Or remove with the sharpness of the phlebotomy that which has coagulated from blood in the vein opening, and place something dissolved salt in water on top of it. Place something made from turiyakh alfarokh or sagzena on top of it, and apply gentle pressure until the blood comes out.
If the vein has already been cut, then leave it alone, and do not cover it, until the boil settles down.
If it is necessary to let blood for any reason and there is no excuse, then either perform venesection at that location or in another vein in the other arm.
The arm should be bled at the location of Fuscus and Basilicus, since they are not found and are concealed because they are composed of them.
The manner of venesection is as follows: the weak person should insert his hand into hot water until it turns red and the vein becomes visible.
Then, a bandage with moderate constriction should be tied above it. Then the venesection is to be done obliquely gradually, neither horizontally nor vertically; and let the incision be wide, and let your venesection be made over the joint of the hand a little.
If the outflow of blood is forbidden, then immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you meet your need.
But if it is during the summer days, then you are excused from immersing your hand in hot water. Above all, the flow of blood into hot water is recommended during wintertime.
The venesection of this vein is healthier than all other veins because it is not a pulsating vein and there is no nerve under it.
Venesection of the Saluatella in the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases.
The manner of venesection is to tie a ligature around the thumb with a bandage or your hand, after you immerse it in hot water until the vein swells and becomes very sensitive. Then make an incision across the vein (phlebotomy). And if you cut it completely, it will not harm her in any way.
And keep, lest you amputate your hand while performing phlebotomy. For under that (skin) are the nerves of the fingers exposed from the flesh.
Then return your hand to hot water and let the blood flow there. For if you do not return your hand to hot water, the blood coagulates in the vein opening and it stops flowing.
Since you will draw as much blood as needed, then place oil and salt on the vein to prevent it from coagulating quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary that you do this with each constricted vein.
However, the remedy for this phlebotomy is from the left hand, because it alleviates diseases of the spleen; and similarly do this for his phlebotomy as you did for the second one equally.
The remedy for the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body such as female diseases (menstrual problems), kidney diseases, old sores on hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that an invalid should immerse his foot in hot water and make friction on it until the veins are full; then tie above the ankle with a bandage. The location of the vein is near the heel, visible towards the thumb; and it branches out from there into multiple veins on the face of the foot.
Therefore, perform the phlebotomy on a larger branch of it or near the heel in its cluster; because it is better and safer.
If a phlebotomist performs it on the face of the foot, then be careful not to injure the nerves that are beneath the surface of the foot.
Place your phlebotomy instrument across it, as if you wish to cut through it; let the phlebotomist be Nesil.
If the flow of blood is forbidden, then immerse his foot in warm water; and let the blood flow out into it until it is evacuated.
If the vein of the phlebotomist strays in the first try, then he should repeat with the phlebotomy at a slightly higher location; for that spot is safe, and you need not fear harm from it, as long as you are careful around the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
The location of the sciatic vein is, as we have said, near the calcaneum on the side of the forest [of the foot].
And the remedy for this phlebotomy is to alleviate pain in the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that an unwell person should enter the bath and hasten; then bind his leg from the side of the ankle to above the calcaneum with a thin, long plaster; for it does not appear except for that reason.
When it appears, then perform the phlebotomy as your skill allows, either with a cut or across; and it is better to make an incision or to sever [the vein] with a section. For that spot is safer, and the vein is hidden very deeply in many people.
For that spot is safer, and the vein is hidden very deeply in many people. If you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the senses; then perform a phlebotomy on one of its branches, and that which appears on the back of the foot and turns towards the ear; be careful around the nerves, and let as much blood flow out as you wish.
Then loosen the stricture, and place skin over the site of phlebotomy, and tie the site. Swiftly it heals.
On Ventosection and its Quality of Use.
They are made from horns, copper, and glass.
Ventosection is indeed performed in two ways. With incision and bloodletting; and the other is ventosection without incision.
And this ventosection which is without incision, is performed in two ways. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the places of ventosection which are administered with incision and bloodletting are fourteen on the body. One of them is Ventosection of Alnocrates, and it is the last on the head; Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; ventosections of Alhagdahim, and they are two plates on the neck from both sides at once; ventosections of the brain, and it is under the jaw in the lower part of the mouth; ventosections of two spatulas; ventosection of Alachosos above the tail end; ventosections of two foci, and they are in the middle of two arms; ventosections of two legs; ventosections of two knees.
And ventosection does not draw blood from small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore its virtue does not fall out of them, as is the case with phlebotomy. It is not necessary that ventosection be administered either with fire or without it in any disease caused by congestion until the entire body is evacuated.
If necessity arises for ventosection due to disease or habit, it is administered at any hour during the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle, and at any time whatsoever.
That is, because there is one of men who, when multiplied within him the blood, until it needs drawing out through ventilation, finds in his head a swelling and sores.
And there is one of them who finds repletion and redness on his face, his head, and his neck. And there is one of them who finds itching on his face and forehead, and darkness and dullness in his eyes.
And there is one of them who scratches the place of his ventilation. And there is one of them whose laughter is multiplied. And there is one of them who finds the taste of blood in his mouth: or the tongue is spitted out and the blood is spat out. And there is one of them whose sleep is multiplied. And there is one of them who sees in his sleep blood and redness, and the dead, and wounds, and things similar to those.
When we therefore see something of these, and properly if it is in the third month: we command then ventilation to be made, after two or three hours have passed.
The remedy for ventilation of the neck is: because it brings about heaviness in the head, and what is expelled goes to the eyes. But it should be that this is after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventilation is in place of a cephalic phlebotomy.
And it should not be used by one who is of cold temperament, or in whom there is catarrh. Because it brings him great harm.
And for that reason it should not be used by the elderly, and in whose head there are cold diseases.
But he who does this frequently generates forgetfulness over him.
And therefore, you should instruct the Anesthetist to place his hand momentarily towards the lower part when letting go, fearing from forgetfulness due to generation.
Anesthesia or Alkehel, is in place of phlebotomy Fusca, and phlebotomy Basilica, and because of this it causes sneezing, constriction of breath, breathlessness of instruments, cough, and filling.
It is necessary that the anesthetist Alkehel should be pushed momentarily, because if it is placed lower, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
But anesthesia alhagdahim causes headaches, attacks, migraines, and perforation; and it is in place of phlebotomy Basilica.
And you should instruct the anesthetist not to press his hand during scarification; so as not to cut the artery and cause bleeding.
But anesthesia below the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, decay of the gums, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is instead of phlebotomy aleherich, which are on the two lips.
But anesthesia with spatulas causes toothache, which occurs from pressing and heating.
But anesthesia of the internal parts of two kidneys causes help for phlebotomy of three veins, Basilica, Fusca, and Cephalica; because it attracts blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh; and these small veins draw blood from larger veins until the attraction reaches to veins three.
And you should instruct the anesthetist not to proceed too far during scarification; because the area is exposed with flesh, and under it are nerves and arteries.
The ventosa that inflates over the alchausos is beneficial for hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary to advise the Ventosator that the ventosa should be large and made of air: since the place requires strong suction and perhaps fine ventoses may break; and let it be cut with a deep incision.
The ventoses of the legs diminish by a manifest reduction: since they draw blood from the whole body and they contribute to ancient pains in kidneys, womb, and bladder; they provoke menstruation, and contribute to bloating and dropsy; and they are in place of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body much, and cause fainting in many men.
And the help of the ventoses for alhorcobeni is near the help of the ventoses of the two legs.
The quality of the positioning of the ventoses is that you should place the ventosa first in an empty place and perform a moderate suction; and do not prolong the position of the ventoses, but place them quickly and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the place at equal speed: and do not stop repeating this and continuing until you see the place already redden and inflame, and the redness appears to be blood; then scarify, and repeat suction slowly. Then consider in the arrangement of bodies.
For if a man is of soft flesh and few pores, it is necessary to scarify him only once, not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And advise the Ventosator to expand the scarification and make it shallow; and moderate the suction in ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is a swelling in the blood, then it is necessary to lance it twice. In the first instance, an opening is made for the subtlety of the blood and its thinning; in the second instance, a thorough examination is made for the extraction of the thickened blood.
If the blood is very impure, then lancing should be done a third time: to achieve the final result.
And finally, when we wish to extract blood gradually or in small amounts, a single lancing is sufficient for us. If we wish to make multiple extractions of the blood, we should perform multiple lancings.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to perform a deep lancing; and the depth of the lancing, equal to the end, is the depth of the skin.
[Paragraph] What should be administered from the oils when in the position of the Ventosas (Venetians), and what one should avoid with the Ventosando.
In the case where the skin is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are constricted, it should be anointed with the Ventosas places using open, soothing, resolving oils: if it is during the summer season, as alkali oil, or olive oil, or oil from sweet almonds, or cucumber seed oil.
And if it is in winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or sulphur: and similar things.
If there is excessive fat that is cold, then use oil of amaracus, or oil of balm of Gilead, or oil of almond, or oil of dittany: and similar things.
If there is a windy discharge of large pores, soft flesh: then it should be prohibited from using oil, and the places of the windings should be washed with rose water, or cold water, or salt water, or water of squash, or water of purslane: and similar things.
But for him whose blood is abundant with moisture, wash the windings with vinegar, or water of myrtle, and sumac: and similar things.
For him whose excesses are thick, wash the windings with old wine, or sage water, or anise decoction, or chamomile: and similar things.
And it should be careful not to wash the windings in a bath, or in the foot of a bath, but rather it should be administered after leaving the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not good if anyone sleeps after washing.
What should be used to control the windy discharge, or the blood-letter before washing?
And after that, it should be considered first: if the patient is windy or blood-let, and his acuity and inflammation are choleric: then it should be given cooling things, such as grapes juice: also a bladder with vinegar and lettuce, and roasted onions, and yolk: and similar things.
Place his food before the chickens, and cook the mutton pieces, and set prepared food with herbs: and similar things for them.
If it is a cold complexion, let him drink syrup made from honey, or from almiua, or ale made from seeds; and let him drink moderately strong wine, which is between old and new; and let it be prescribed that he should eat sparingly. Place his food before the chickens and dogs; and let him have small birds, that is, little birds; and let the pigeon chicks be crushed.
It is necessary that the drink on the day of venesection and bloodletting should be more than food; and it must be given in certain men at hours tyriaca or alfaroch, or a medicine made from musk (muscata), or ale of elderberry (alesselithe) before venesection; and before or after: to strengthen the main limbs, and to make the blood subtile. And it is not necessary that they should drink it in a hot drink.
Chapter on venesection without scarification. Venesections without scarification are those which are applied on the liver, spleen, foot-affliction, and on the abdomen, umbilicus, places of kidneys, and on the ankle; because these limbs cannot endure scarification upon them.
And by these there is no search for anything, except that it draws blood from one limb to another; as we place the venesection on the breasts in the affliction of nosebleed. And we use them to dissolve the venosity of an unwanted cold in a limb; as we place the venesection on the abdomen and umbilicus. For it makes the limb rarefied, warms it up, and removes pain for this reason; because it has dissolved that venosity.
Also, it is placed on the kidney when there occurs an ulceration or stone in them. By virtue of its attracting power, perhaps it opens the ulcer, or expels the stone from its place.
Similarly, when it is placed on the liver and spleen for the treatment of windiness in both cases.
These are administered empty with a mere incision only. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered with warm water in cases of pleurisy: this is to fill the Ventosa and make it large, only with warm water, or water in which certain suitable herbs have been boiled.
Form of the Ventosa administered with fire.
The diameter of its opening should be two fingers apart, as we have made it; and the depth should be half the size of a palm; and on its side there should be a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it with an awl; it should be made of copper, tin, leather, or linen, equal thickness, cleansed; so as not to harm the body during its placement upon it; and in its middle there should be a crossbar transverse from copper or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And now it becomes this swollen one large, greater than we said before, and yet not much smaller than that (swelling), according to the illnesses and age of the one who uses it.
Swellings in children are different from swellings in men, and those of larger bodies.
The quality of placing this swollen one with fire on a limb is to ignite linen with fire from flax or a small candle from wax: and place it on the middle of the crossbar which is in the middle of the swelling: so that the fire may be kindled below the swelling, not to burn the body of the weak one.
Then it is to be placed on a limb, and the finger shall be on the hole which I said, as long as we hold the swelling: when we need it, we remove the finger, and the vapor comes out through that hole, and the swelling is immediately relieved.
Then linen with fire according to its manner, and repeat it if you need it.
In the swelling administered for the illness of pleurisy with water, there is no crossbar nor hole: it is not administered unless it is filled with water and placed on a limb only.
And this is its form.
And this swelling, the larger it is, so as to hold more water, is better.
Chapter on Suspension of Sanguisugums.
Sanguisugae are not administered in many places except where the position of swellings is not possible due to their smallness, such as the lips, gums, and similar parts. Or in a bare member, such as fingers or nose, and similar parts.
And the quality of using them is that you come from Sanguisugis which are in sweet waters, clean from putrefaction.
Then they should be let for day and night in sweet water until they are hungry, and nothing remains in their stomachs. The body is first evacuated with venesection, and with emetics. Then the sick limb should be washed until it turns red. They are then placed on top of it.
When they are filled and fall, and it is possible to suck the place with a syringe, then it is more helpful; if not, then clean the place with vinegar. Then it should be washed with much water, rubbed, and squeezed out.
If the course of blood is prolonged after bleeding from leeches, and it becomes draining; then soak a linen cloth in cold water, place it on top, until the drainage stops.
If there is an increase in blood, then sprinkle on it powdered alum, gall nuts, and similar things from the poppy; until the bleeding stops.
Or pieces of stripped beans can be placed on the place; and they are left until the beans stick to the place, for the blood is stopped.
And it is necessary that if leeches need to be repeated, when possible, to change them.
If leeches are forbidden from being hung up, then clean the place with fresh blood. Or stick a needle into the places until something comes out of the blood. Then they are placed, for when they feel something from the blood, they will stick immediately.
When you want them to fall, sprinkle something from powdered aloes, salt, or ashes over them; and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of a fracture, and dislocation of accidents in bones.
Know ye, O sons, that many foolish doctors and the ignorant boast of this chapter, and those who have never examined an ancient book nor read from it a letter.
And for this reason it happens that this method is lacking among the skilled [people] in our land. And I have not encountered it [the method] at all in good form, and I have not obtained it from it anything except what I obtained due to the length of reading ancient books and diligence over understanding them, until I extracted that knowledge from them.
Then I adhered by experience and diligent study throughout my life.
Now I have described to you from that [method] in this chapter all that my knowledge contains: and beyond what my experience has exceeded, after I have abbreviated it for you, and have freed it from the occupation of abbreviation, and have abbreviated it at the point of abbreviation, and have shown it at the point of declination: and I have formed many shapes from the forms of the instruments that are used in it, since it is by addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Title II.
It is necessary that we say in the prologue of this chapter the main points, and chapters, to which understanding is first required of the craftsman at his station over their truth: namely that you, and those ready for it, know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say therefore, that when a fracture, dislocation, twist or fall occurs to someone, then it is necessary, firstly, to hurry towards bleeding him and loosening him, or both at the same time: unless something forbids it, such as weakness of strength; or it happens to a child or an old weak person; or it is a time of intense heat or extreme cold.
Then let him be content with his food, cold vegetables, beans and heads; and forbid wine, heavy meats, and being filled with any food or anything that fills the veins with blood. Until he is safe from a hot fever and does not fear the outflow of matter to the limb; then let the sick one return first to his usual regimen with which his custom was accustomed.
When the fractured bone begins to heal, then it is necessary that the sick one eat nourishing foods in large quantities, thick, heavy, in which there is viscosity; such as food made from cooked wheat with water, rice, heads and feet, entrails of cows, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. And with this regimen, the healing of the fracture is done more quickly and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in men who are in the first old age and decrepit, it is not possible for them to be joined and consolidated according to their nature always, because of the drying of their limbs; and the bones which are from these are consolidated and united at the end of gentleness, like the bones of small children.
Nevertheless, nature connects something similar to glue around the broken bone from all sides, in which there is thickness, with which it adheres and tightens it until they are consolidated against each other, and tied together until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until it does not forbid it something because of its operations; and because of this cause, it is necessary that you put the food of the sick in heavy foods, with thickness and viscosity, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse, according to the differences of the limbs; since a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the backbone; and similarly all other members are different from each other; and I come with the reminder of all types of fractures exposed in their respective chapters distinct from one another. The species of fractures themselves are also diverse.
Since a fracture occurs curved, except when stars appear in it. And sometimes a fracture occurs along the length of the bone; and there are its splinters, that is, stars, and additions proceeding from them, as are found in a pen when it is sharpened for writing with a knife. And not proceeding; and there is a fracture with wound and rupture at the head; and there is a small fissure fracture.
And to each type there is a skill or specific tool for its restoration, according to which its memory will come, distinguished in their respective places.
And from that which is known about a bone fracture, it is its crookedness and prominence; its appearance to the senses; and its sound when you press it with your hand.
When therefore no crookedness appears in the place, nor does a sound occur to your touch when you press the bone with movement, nor does it cause great pain; then there is no fracture at that place, indeed it may be a crookedness or small fissure; therefore it is not necessary to move it with the hand and complete compression, but rather place medicines over it, whose memory comes after the time appropriate for the place; then a bandage is tightened with a fine string.
And know that when the place is bent and divided, except for what happens in it as satagiae, nevertheless remove all parts from their comparison: then it is necessary for you to begin from your hour for its correction, equating it before hot ulcer occurs.
If a hot ulcer occurs, then let it be for some days until the ulcer subsides. Then equal it according to whatever method is possible with gentleness and skill.
And know that the restoration of it and its equating is easier than bones, where satagia occurs.
Then tighten it, according to what comes to your recollection of it.
If satagia occurs in a bone, then extension of this broken member is necessary from two parts, if it is the hand or foot: or with your hand, if the member is small: or with two ropes, or with a rope and your hand.
And let your position be that in which you place the member over an equal place, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the broken member extend: then try to make those additions with all skill and according to whatever method you can in their places: and take care according to your strength, so that pain does not occur to the weak due to your operation or injury: and try according to your strength to apply one of two bones with its partner, according to the best forms.
It is necessary at that time for you to test and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your strength.
And avoid a violent extension and a strong compression, as many foolish people do. For often they cause a hot ulcer or constriction in the member through their operation, as we have already seen from their operations many times.
Then attach after the incision, and proper surgical procedure, and the compression of that member, and peace, and calmness: and warn the sick person about it. And let him be careful not to move it during the hour of his watch, and sleep, at its revolution, and agitation, and at its discharge, and all movements during the last strength of his power. And let him be careful that the position of the member is not one that follows pain. This is because when he feels pain or injury in the position of the member, then it is necessary that he moves himself to another position from which he does not feel pain.
And be careful that his position is equal and straight: so that no curvature occurs in the member when it heals.
And the quality of the compression for a broken member is as I have said.
Know that fractured members differ according to their size, and their magnitude, and their shape.
Those that are small, such as the arm, finger, club, and similar to them, then it is necessary for there to be a soft, subtle wrapping of cloth. But those that are large, such as the thigh and leg, it is necessary for there to be a wide, firm wrapping of cloth.
Because a broad bandage connects a large member and compresses it from every side with equal compression so that no spot is left bare.
Then after your evacuation, place the suitable linen on it from the incision, on a soft cushion above the fracture site. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the fracture site three or four times, according to how deserving the member is: and compress your hand slightly with the bandage.
Then go with him to the upper part from the place of the break, and tie less than your previous binding, which you bound the broken place with. Then draw out a little further from the place of the break, and soften the binding slowly until you take a large amount from a healthy place.
Then take another plaster, and apply it again to the broken place with bandages. Then go downwards with the bandage towards the lower part from the break. And let your work be in binding and softening of the bandage, and in the manner as I said in the first bandaging above.
Then place between the bandages pieces of soft flax or cloth, equal to the curvature of the break if there is any curvature in it; and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then apply another plaster over it. Then place stars evenly spaced immediately above these bandages, if there is no swelling or hot abscess in that place.
But if there is swelling or an abscess there, then place that which sits on the abscess and remove the swelling; and let it be for several days. Then bind those stars over it.
And let the stars be made from the middle parts of thick reeds, shaved and skillfully formed; or let them be made of wood from which cribra are made, which are made from pine, yew, palm tree branches or calingi; and let the width of each star be according to this form and this same shape.
However, the star that is placed over the trace should be a little larger and wider than the other stars; and the length of the star should be according to what is allowed by the member in terms of size and smallness.
Then bind over the Star with another ointment, according to the first binding. Then bind firmly with threads, as we have said concerning binding; and it should be that your binding is stronger over the place of the break, and the farther it is from the break, the less the binding should be.
The threads must be of moderate thickness and fineness, and made of soft linen.
Since if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of fools placing their own twisted cords of rough linen, it is a great error; since the binding falls off with them beyond quality.
And thin threads again do not suit; because you will not achieve with them through the binding what you want.
It is not necessary that there be less than a finger's breadth between one star and another.
If the sick person is hurt by the extremities of the stars after binding in healthy places: then place under them soft wool or camlet, until nothing is hurt from that.
But when there is a break with a wound, and rupture occurs in the skin, I will come back to it with its own discussion in the second chapter.
And know that not every broken member needs to be bound with stars from the first day. That is because when a member is large, it is not necessary to place stars on top of it unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your safety from the occurrence of cold abscess.
And this is the method of plasters that the ancients used, which are placed on a break and displacement.
The common method of plaster, restoring a break, suitable for many constitutions, especially women and children; since it is from that which heat does not overcome nor cold.
And it is that you receive from mill-dust, and it is the marrow of flour which hangs on the walls of the mill near the movement of the millstone: and you shall make it as such, except that sieves it with egg white: and place its mixture not thick, nor subtle. Then use it.
Another method of plaster, for the healing of a fracture, dislocation and twisting. Take almess, laudanum, acacia, enula and mugath: and macerate all with ten parts of myrrh, five parts of both aloes and twenty parts of alethil. All should be crushed and sifted, and mixed with water of alethil, or with egg white if the plaster is applied to a weak person who is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is a good composition, it quickly heals broken bones and helps many people.
Another method of plaster, which also helps for fractures and twisting. Take mugath, mess, white alteae, all with ten parts of myrrh, five parts of both aloes and six parts of acacia, a pound of Armenian bolus twenty times, all should be crushed and sifted, and made with water or egg white: and administer them.
Another method of plaster for joining bones and those separated from their places: it soothes the pain that occurs to them, and the separation of a bone, and a fracture. Wool juice is taken, and it is immersed in vinegar and boiled oil: and it is placed on the place.
And indeed, this plaster does not have the virtue of healing, but it is good for the soothing of a hot boil: and it expels pains properly.
Method for applying a plaster, which restores a broken bone. Take leaves of the fig tree that is deaf and leaves of wild parsnip: grind all of them, and make a plaster from both.
Method for a speedy application of a plaster for the restoration of a broken bone, and when you want to dissolve the remnants of an abscess. Take equal parts of the root of althea, chamomile, marigold flowers, herb flour, all in one part: grind all of them, and make a decoction with wine if the member is not heated.
If it is heated, then make it with coriander water or with water and use it.
Another method for a stronger plaster in the resolution, stronger than the first, when a hard abscess occurs during the restoration of a member. Take equal parts of the root of althea, flax seeds, boxwood, licorice root, sampsucke, marigold flowers, chamomile, all in one part: grind all of them and make a decoction with willow water or sweet water or wine. Apply it according to the heat of the member and the calmness of its warmth.
Hippocrates himself did not say in his book that anything should be placed on a broken member during its restoration except a preparation made from wax and oil; nothing else. And he said it should be of a medium between thickness and subtlety.
Galenus, however, thought that things should be placed on a broken member during its restoration which have the heating property, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense, and similar things from those mentioned before.
Method for a plaster that promotes injury and pain. Make a paste of equal parts of ground chickpea, human hair or goose feather, and althea (marshmallow root), along with salt: grind and sift it; then make an ointment from this mixture.
The amount required to make the bandage remain in place is such that if there is no pain or itching, nor does the bone move from its place, then do not dissolve it for many days. If itchiness, distressing pain, or swelling occurs at the site, then hasten and dissolve it within an hour, remove the ointment from there; take a soft cloth or seawater sponge, moistened; immerse it in warm water and wash the area until the itch subsides and the pain is alleviated.
If itchiness, distressing pain, or swelling occurs at the site, then hasten and dissolve it within an hour, remove the ointment from there; take a soft cloth or seawater sponge, moistened; immerse it in warm water and wash the area until the itch subsides and the pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour. Then place on it (the limb) wool soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil; tie it over it at night until you are free from the danger of hot infection, and let the swelling of the limb subside and the pain be alleviated.
Then repeat the same process for a delicate binding and a small amount of ointment; do not bind it tightly with your first bandage or with a delicate one until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling and all other symptoms have been completely removed, and you require an ointment and binding, then repeat the same procedure as before equally.
If nothing of what was mentioned happens to the limb, then do not dissolve it before three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is permitted after twenty days according to the appearance of the dissolution of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the coagulation of the flesh near it; add also more binding in your bandage than your first one completely; and also increase the intake of food for the sick person, as much as the memory of the previous advice suggests.
If you see that the place of fracture is already drying out and shrinking too much: then you will know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Therefore, anoint the area with warm oil and water at every spot where you dissolve it, and let it be for all three days, and apply a little softening agent to relax it slightly.
By this procedure, nourishment flows to the member, and it heals quickly.
What foolish restorers do instead of restoring the fractured member by what is proper, when they do not restore it first as required, and restore it according to its curvature, is an error in their procedure, and there is great fear: and if it were correct, the ancients would have said so in their books, and they would have operated with it.
And I have not seen any trace of theirs whatsoever in that matter, and it is better not to do that.
Chapter on the making of a fracture in the head.
Types of fractures are diverse, and their shapes are numerous; causes of the same are distinguished.
For the fracture that occurs from a blow with a sword: the blow removes the bone completely until it reaches the siphac, which is below the bone, just as an ax cuts through wood: and for this reason, the species of fracture is called Axial.
Or the sword cuts something of the bone and cuts its face, but does not penetrate through to the end of it: and this type of fracture is called Kalan, that is, Absolute Lever.
And a wound from two types of fractures, either great or small.
And the fracture that is crushing or grinding: and its cause is a blow with a stone or falling on a stone, or similar things.
This fracture is also penetrating, which is approaching the padding that is under bone: or it is on the face of the bone: and this wound belongs to these two kinds of fractures, whether small or large.
This fracture is hidden within the bone in the subtlety of hair: and it is a small crack, for which reason this type of fracture is named Capillary Fracture.
Among these [types of fractures] is a fracture that occurs due to an accident or being struck by a stone, and these cause the bone layer to enter into the interior, forming a hollow: as it happens with the crucibles of metal, when they are struck and a part of them enters into the interior.
This is most often found in the moist bones of the head, such as those of children.
All these kinds of fractures are set separately, and I will return with the explanation of this [entire matter] in its proper place.
We know all these kinds of fractures through examination of it, and investigation of them with probes, and removal of the corrupted flesh that is over them.
The Capillary type is known through this: that it is revealed on the bone, scraped, and lined up on top of it with pitch: for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, first consider the condition of the patient: then if you see signs from his condition that indicate fearfulness, such as vomiting cholera, extension, loss of intellect, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, eye problems, redness of eyes and similar signs in many other conditions, without a doubt it will not heal: and if you see the patient's conditions are not terrifying to you, and hope for recovery: then begin its treatment.
If a wounded person comes to you in the first instance and is wounded: and it happens during winter days, then it is necessary that you study bone excision before the fourteenth day according to every arrangement.
If it is during the summer days, then it is necessary that you hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before it becomes rotten under the bone from the tissue, and such accidents occur as we have mentioned.
If the bone fracture has already reached the tissue touching the brain and is accompanied by pieces and pulling: then it is necessary that you cut the broken and smoothed parts according to what I have told you.
It is necessary that you shave the head of the wounded person and scrape over the bone as much as possible for you, according to the shape of the wound and what is light over the weak.
If it happens to you during the scraping of the bone a flow of blood or a hot abscess: then put what is necessary against it. And it is necessary that you fill the place with soaked cloths in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess settles, and be secure from blood flow. Then begin the healing of the bone, and the removal of it.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
The first method is to cut the bone with a knife having a narrow blade: and this is its form.
And administer another knife wider than the previous one a little: and this is its form.
Then also administer another knife even wider than the second one.
And the second method is that there should be a number of knives of different sizes among you; some of which are wider than others and some shorter than others: and they should be at the end of sharpness extremities, and made of Indian iron or copper, and use them with ease in striking the knife so as not to strike the head and hurt it.
If the bone is hard and tough: then it is necessary that you perforate around its circumference before you administer Incisoria, with Terebris which are called Terebra not penetrating deeply; and they are not so named except because they do not pass through the bone's flesh to what is beyond it; therefore, because the Terebra has a rounded end above that which is beneath its head, and a small circle prevents submerging, and passing through the bone's thickness.
And it is necessary for you to take a great number of these Terebris, one of which suits the thickness of the bone, until there is for you all the Terebra that fits the skull; whose sharp end's size in length and width should be according to the thickness of the skull.
And this is the form of three kinds of Terebris or Trepans.
The quality of perforating the bone's circumference after it is broken, is that you place the Terebra on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has already been penetrated. Then change the position of the Terebra to another place, and put in its place what is equal to the size of a finger or approximately that.
Then cut with Incisoria what is between every hole in the bone; and do it more delicately than you can on the top of it, as we have said, until you excavate the bone, either with your hand or with some other tools which you have prepared for that purpose: such as tenaliae and delicate forpices.
And you must be careful with all caution, lest the Terebra or any Incisoria touch something from the skull.
When you perforate the bone and it has been separated from the skull, if it is continuous with it and you extract it, then it is necessary to scrape and make equal the end that remains in the bone with another tool similar to an Incisoria. It is necessary that it be thin and delicate more than other incisors.
If something remains of the small bones and cartilage, then take it with ease, along with what is at hand from your instruments. Then care for the wound after that with linen cloths and unguents as we said before.
Another method of operation is easy, completely distant from fear; which Galen said and praised greatly; and this is his saying. First, you must begin to expose the bone piece from the place where the fracture is more violent and clear; until when you have exposed that part and placed under it the end of this concave incisor, which has this form.
The concave part does not cut anything; and the sharp part of it facing in both directions along its length, as you see; so that the concave part is attached to the bone, with the sharp part incident on the bone.
Then strike on the incisor from one side with a small hammer, until you cut the whole bone with ease, as it is turned; and be careful that no cloth (panniculo) from you happens to fall into what is happening, which you fear completely.
And if the physician were not more foolish than men and ignorant of this, nor was he sleeping, then if something remained attached to the bone from the cloths in some places, he would cut it off with the end of the concave incisor itself and release it easily. It is released from it without harm and without fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate to the cloth, and what is cut off from the bone is its face, and roughness and delicate cartilage remain in it; then it is necessary that you grind down the roughness, and dig out the delicate cartilages with fine rasps, which you have prepared of various sizes, so that it is possible for you to apply them more suitable and correct ones in every place according to what leads you the operation, and the fractured bone itself, and its shape. It is necessary that you administer [the operation] according to your own judgment, firstly cutting the bone, more widely than those who scrape it off. Then use a finer tool after that.
It is necessary that you administer [the operation] according to your own judgment, firstly cutting the bone, more widely than those who scrape it off. Then use a finer tool after that. And do not stop doing it continuously until you reach the point of administering it more thinly and finer than all of them.
In every one of the remaining small fissures and a fine fracture, it is necessary to administer care, according to that which leads to its correction.
And there is a matter that does not hide over all, to whomever has any interest in this art, and it stands on what we have written and shown in large fractures.
If a membrane is found to be retained when you remove the bone: then it is necessary that you take linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another doubled or tripled cloth, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth: and do that as easily as possible on top of it, so that it is not burdened by moisture.
Then administer a broad ligament over it: and do not tighten it, unless for the amount that holds the wound only: and release it with this care for one day or two days, until you are certain about the hot inflammation. Then dissolve it, and administer afterwards medicines with which excess dryness is needed: such as the roots of garlic, and wheat flour, and frankincense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things: and there is, that you make from these medicines a powder, which is dusted over the wound like dry ones.
And universally administer all medicine in it of the nature that cleans and does not bite. "And be careful according to your virtue, so that the wound may be clean during your treatment: there should not be dirt from ointment, nor dirtiness.
"And be careful according to your virtue, so that the wound may be clean during your treatment: there should not be dirt from ointment, nor dirtiness. "Do not allow pus to accumulate at all: since when pus accumulates on the brain tissue, it corrodes and rots it, causing great harm to the sick person afterwards; and this has already happened with the skull, when the bone is being cleaned by him, especially when care for it is neglected. A blackness appears on its surface.
"Therefore, if the conditions that I mentioned occur in the sick person, know that it is surely fatal.
"And if blackness does not occur, except from the medicine applied to him and it is effective in its action so that it makes this blackness: then one should take a portion of honey, three portions of rose oil, and anoint with them a cloth. "Then place it on the skull; afterwards take care of him with the means of healing that are appropriate, until he is healed.
"On the restoration of a broken nose.
"Know that the nose is not broken except when both of its upper parts are broken at once or only one of them: because it consists of two bones; since below it is cartilaginous and does not break, but only becomes bruised, distorted, and crooked.
"If one of the two parts is broken, then one should insert a small finger into the nose and push the fracture back with the index and thumb to its normal shape; this should be done skillfully. "And be careful that pain does not occur in the sick person during your operation.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach it with the finger: then, it is necessary to align the extremity of the radius, where there should be a small swelling.
If the fracture is in two parts, then make it similar to that one: and bring together with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, at rest with the cauterization of warm lard.
Then insert a piece of flax from linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part: or insert two pieces of flax if the fracture is in two parts: and let there be a swelling on the flax of such size that it fills the nostril opening.
And some of the old restorers said, that the flax should be soaked in butter and changed every day. But this does not seem to me, rather it is necessary that the flax should be soaked in egg white, made with flour mill powder. Then release the flax when the bone hardens and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes a feather of the goose is inserted into the nose in place of flax after it has been covered with soft cloth: and this makes it so that the feather holds the fracture of the nose more firmly, and so as not to prevent the weak from breathing.
And this is not necessary. If you want, do it: if you want, do it with flax.
If the nose again forms an abscess while treating it with warm cautery, apply a nasal plaster with pitch, or with pitch soaked in rose oil, or a little with balsam of Mecca.
But if no abscess forms with the warm cautery, then it is necessary to apply plasters made of sesame flour and incense powder mixed with egg white. Then place a soft cloth upon it (the wound), and do not tie the nose with anything at all.
If however the nasal bones are broken or crushed, then it is necessary that you make an incision over them and extract them with instruments suitable for the purpose. Then apply a suture and take care of it with that which causes it to heal, using ointments or plasters suitable for the purpose.
If a wound occurs between the nose, then it is necessary that you treat it with linen and administer a lead cannula until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured.
When the lower jaw is fractured and the fracture is not accompanied by a wound: then observe whether the fracture is only on the outside and is not broken into two pieces, and bends inward: then its diagnosis is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the weak jaw: similarly, if the fracture is in the left lower jaw, then insert your right index finger: and press with it the protrusion of the fracture from inside to outside with ease using your other hand from the inner part of the bone correctly, and equalize it.
If the fracture of the lower jaw has already separated into two pieces, then administer traction from both sides according to straightness: until it is possible to equalize it.
If however a loosening or displacement of the teeth has already occurred, then tie them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk. Then place a soft cushion on the fractured lower jaw. Then place a double cloth on the fractured lower jaw, and place over it a large star-shaped cushion made properly: or an equal piece of skin from a sandal in length to the jaw bone.
Then bind it up from above, according to how you prepare its ligature, and let it rest until it is healed: and instruct the patient to be at peace and rest: and put for his food softened meals.
If however you think that something is changing in the figure by any means: then be quick, and dissolve it on the third day. Then correct whatever has been changed from it, and apply plaster made of milled flour with egg white, or with sifted wheat flour, after you have removed the scabs: and place soft wool on top of the plaster.
While that plaster remains attached to it and the bone arrangement does not change, let it be, without removing it, until it is healed: or bind the fracture. This fracture is bound many times in three weeks.
If however a warm abscess occurs in the meantime: then administer what I said many times for its reduction, until the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider it. For if a piece of bone is separated, or from a sawing: then be subtle in this, to remove those pieces of sawing with what suits you for the removal of them from the instruments.
If however the wound opening is narrow: then enlarge it with a leech according to your needs.
Then when you remove the sawing, and nothing remains of them: or if the wound opening is wide: and if not, place on it from plasters that suit for this, and let it heal until it is healed.
Chapter on the restoration of a Fork, when it breaks.
The fork is broken most often from the front part from the shoulder, and its fracture is made according to one of three modes.
For it is broken and separated into two, except that there occur in it suppurations: and it is more easily restored to its state.
For such as occur in the bone, suppurations: and it is more difficult to restore.
For such as is a fracture with a wound.
And the operation in it when there is a fracture without a wound, is that you make two assistants present, one of whom holds the splintered furcula, and the other stretches the neck towards the opposite side.
Then equalize the fracture with your fingers until its form is made, according to what is required: and let there be neither prominence nor hollowing in it.
If you need more extension, then it is necessary that you place under the neck of the weak one a sphere made from cloth or wool: and let its size be according to your need: and stretch, lift, and squeeze the sphere with your hand until you equalize the fracture, according to what is required.
If you cannot pull the end of the furcula outwards because it has reached deep: then it is necessary that the weak one lies down on his neck: and place under his shoulder a beam in size, and press the minister under his arm towards the lower part, until the bone of the furcula which is deep is lifted upwards: and then correct the fracture, and equalize it with your fingers.
If, however, you feel a suppuration from the furcula and it moves: then it is necessary that you make an incision over it, and extract the suppuration easily.
If it remains in the bone, then make a handle on the incision of it with one of the Incisorium which you have prepared for that purpose, after you place under the furcula an instrument which saves the saw: and it is an instrument made from wood or iron. This is its form.
It resembles a snail shell without a concavity.
And let its width be according to the need of that bone's size and proportions. The length of it as much as possible for your operation.
And have two extremities, as you see; and one extremity be wide, and the other narrow.
If the wound rupture which you split when extracting satheiatum bone is wide, and your cauterizing iron is hot, then gather two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the rupture is small, or fear hot cauterizing iron; then fill the wound with cloths and wool, according to the amount of the wound's cut.
If it happens that hot cauterizing iron occurs, then pour oil of roses on the cloth, vinegar, and wine, and place it on top of it.
But the fixation of bone without a wound and without cutting is, to place plaster on the bone made from flour milled with egg white. And put soft wool on top of it. Then place a sphere under the wound if it is needed. Then take a leech, that is, the roll which the Saracens hold, which is very long; and its width should be as wide as one palm, or approximately that. Then place a double piece of wool on top of the soft wool and plaster. Then take a needle from fine wood, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then thread the needle with cloth. Then thread the cloth with the needle in the place of the leech which falls on the fracture and the wound. Then place the leech on the fracture as it is rolled, and thread it over its neck, and under the healthy wound, and under the sick wound; and return it over all parts, and so that the fixation holds the fracture properly; and this is what must not be hidden from you, and completely, so that the needle does not move over the broken bone. It is necessary to observe the sick person every day. Whenever the ligament becomes soft and you see the knot being removed, then correct it and tighten the ligament.
Then place the sick man's sleep on his back and place a small pill under his pillow at night so that when he wakes up, his aid may be raised from his side. Therefore, raise the fracture of the collarbone by elevating the shoulder.
Either bind his arm to his neck and do not loosen the bandage unless it happens in a place that is swollen due to itching or from an abscess, for twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see his face turning towards it. And add to the constriction and release it until it is restored and healed.
The fracture of the collarbone is bound and supported for up to twenty days; it may be less in some people.
Chapter on the restoration of the Fractured Spatula (Scapula).
The scapula rarely breaks in a wide place; it does not break except at its edges.
When it breaks from there, and breaks in the middle of it, and it is not known unless by touch, then make the preparation according to the shape of the fracture. And reduce it to its natural shape in every way possible for you.
Then place flour of milling with egg white and soft wool over it and put a pillow made of double cloth on top. Then place the wide knot under it from a thin board according to the size of the scapula or larger but not too much.
If there is a concavity under the knot at some place on the scapula, then fill it with soft wool until the knot descends to the same level.
Then apply a tourniquet above with sufficient tightness and firmness, until it is no longer moved from its place.
And consider the bandage daily. Whenever therefore the bandage becomes soft, tighten it, and equalize the pressure if it is moved from its place: let the weak side lie upon the healthy one.
The spatula is restored in twenty or thirty days.
When this number is completed, then loosen the bandage: and be safe. For it is from bones whose fracture is not feared nor their separation.
If however it protrudes from the bone and punctures under the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. And do as I have said in the treatment of a fracture of the neck of the femur by hot poultice, if anything occurs from it.
Chapter on the restoration of a breastbone fracture.
The chest is sometimes broken in the middle, and this happens rarely. However, its extremities are broken and crushed more frequently due to accidents of it.
When the middle of it is broken, which inclines towards the lower part, and a violent pain occurs in it, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing; and perhaps blood vomiting occurs, and the hollow in the fractured bone is evident to the sense, and not covered: the restoration of this is that the weak side lies upon its back: and place between its spatulas a cushion.
Then press the shoulders and join the ribs from both sides or flanks with hands: and grind it evenly, according to every way in which this can be done and fits together, until the figure of the bone returns, as required.
Then place on top of it an ointment and a powder, and place on top of that a thin star-shaped piece made from willow or boxwood, or similar materials, after you have rolled it up in a cloth. Then wrap it around the broken bone, so that it is not removed: and go with the bandage following the roundness to the back several times, and bind it tightly enough.
Then consider the bandage at every hour and whenever it becomes soft, tighten it; and if its necessity causes it to dissolve due to itching or corrosion that occurs in the place, or pain, or abscess: then hurry, and loosen it, remove the ointment, and correct what happened with the treatment method.
Then reduce the ointment if you see it going to that face; and join a tight bandage until healed.
Chapter on Restoring Costal Bones, when they break.
Know that a costal bone fracture does not occur except in large areas that follow the back and from their extremities on the front side. And it is not caused by friction, unless because they are cartilaginous. And the detection of this is not concealed from touch during examination with fingers.
And the restoration of this is done so that the break can be aligned with fingers to the best possible extent until it matches the shape as required. Then apply an ointment and bind the broken bone with a star-shaped piece if necessary.
If the costal bone fracture is towards the interior: then it causes a strong painful sensation, and puncture, like the puncture that occurs in pleurisy; because the bone pierces the membrane, and also there is difficulty breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of blood many times; this is difficult to treat.
And the ancients have already devised that remedy with many devices: and among them are those who say to put foods for the sick which generate inflammation and gas, so that the stomach is inflamed, and it is stretched and driven outward in order to heal a fracture from outside.
We reject, that it should not be caused quickly to make a hot abscess, unless it happens. If it has already happened, then add it (the treatment) into it (the wound).
And some of them said: place a windy substance on the place, then apply suction with force, and it is similar to reasoning. However, there is fear that windy substances will attract excess into the place, due to its weakened condition.
And some of them said: the place should be covered with wool which has already been soaked in hot oil: and lice (puluilli) should be placed between the ribs until it is filled: so that the bandage is equal when you wind it around according to its roundness.
Then the sick person is treated with a remedy for pleurisy from food and medicine.
If the affliction presses too hard on the sick person and hurts him with a sharp instrument, piercing his flesh by wounding it, then we fear for the sick man: then it is necessary that we cut through the place and expose the broken rib. Then we will place on it (the wound) an instrument that heals a sifac, whose name has been mentioned before: and we will cut the bone with ease, and we will cut it (the sifac).
Then we will join together two lips of the wound, if it is large with suture: and we will treat it with plasters until it heals.
If a hot abscess should happen meanwhile, then hurry and pour lice into rose oil, and place it on the spot: and the sick person is treated with what is suitable for treating an abscess.
The patient should also lie on the opposite side until he is cured.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Spine and Neck.
Fracture sometimes occurs in the bones of the neck, and it rarely happens that they are rubbed [against each other]: and similarly with the spondyles of the back. If this happens to someone and one desires to know whether it can be healed or not: then examine [the case]. For if you see the hands already softened, stunned, and dead; and it cannot move them, nor extend them, nor contract them; and when you press them with your fingers and prick them with a needle, it does not feel this or pain in them: then know that it will not heal, and in many cases it is mortal.
If it moves them and feels the pressure with your fingers and the prick: then know that the neck bone is sound, and that the weak one will heal with treatment.
If it happens with the spondyles of the back similarly to this case, and one desires to know whether it can be healed or not: then examine his feet; then if you see that they are softened and this happens in them as it happened in the hands; then when he lies on his back, he expels wind and faeces involuntarily; and when he lies on his abdomen, he expels faeces involuntarily; and when he lies on his back again and wishes to urinate, but cannot: then know that it is mortal. Therefore do not labor in treating it.
But if nothing of this happens to him, it is lighter [in nature].
And the treatment for this is to apply heat with a mustard plaster [to the affected spondyle]: so that you place oil of rose over the rubbed spondyle alone; or with hog's lard heated.
Place it on that place several times a day until the hot abscess is assuaged; then place one of the strengthening, drying, and binding plasters over it, and bind it with a ligament; and order the sick person to rest quietly and in peace. He shall not sleep on the part where he found pain, until it is healed.
If it happens due to the rubbing of a bone (sathaim), or something that is already separated from it: then it is necessary for him to cut across the skin and remove it. Then gather together two lips of the wound, if it is large, with suturing. Then care for himself with some soft dressing, from ointments, until he is healed.
If however the last bone (alhaws) of the shin splint is broken and it is the end of the heel: then it is necessary to insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus, and with the other hand to align the broken bone as much as possible, according to what is possible, and in a second alignment.
Then place him on it (the bone), and remove it; and care for the wound with the treatment that preceded it, until it is healed.
Chapter on the restoration of anus (Anca).
Chapter 11.
Fractures of the bones of the ankles are rare. If they are fractured, then the fracture is not anything except comminution at their extremities; and they are divided lengthwise, and slant towards the inside; and there occurs pain in that place, and puncturing; and the leg that was fractured becomes numb.
And its restoration is, that you extend your hand over it, until you stand over the fracture as its figure is.
If the fracture is only at its extremities, then equalize that fracture, according to what you prepare yourself from the equation, until it resembles its natural figure.
If however the fracture is in its length, or it already turns towards the inside: then make the weak one lie on his belly, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When you have equalized it, place a plaster on it; then place an astel (a splint) made of wood or hide over it and tie a suture on it where you are not afraid of altering the fracture or removing the splint.
And equal the concavity of them with what fills it until the suture takes it in accordance with the equality; and command the weak one to sleep on his back or on a healthy side.
If a hot abscess occurs to him: then stop extending it and its restoration until the hot abscess settles; and place whatever is beneath it on it, according to what has passed, then return to its restoration; and tie it as needed.
If however it happens to the bone that it swells or breaks out: extract it.
Chapter on the Restoration of Fractures.
The helper (tool) is that which is between the elbow and head of the spatula.
If it breaks, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of these methods is: that you receive a flat wooden board of medium thickness, in the following shape.
And two ligaments are to be tied at both ends.
Then it is suspended from a raised place, and the weak one shall sit on the seat. Then he should throw his broken arm over a log until he reaches the notch of that log, where the break of the log is attached.
Then let something heavy be placed upon him from above, so that the servant may stretch him towards the lower parts. Then the physician shall set the fracture with his hands until it returns to its proper position.
And another method is that the weak one lies on his neck; and let his hand hang from his neck with a bandage. Then command two servants that one holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and let another hold below it, and each one of them stretches to his side.
And if you wish the extension to be stronger, then bind below the fracture with a bandage, and above it with another bandage; and let each of the two servants stretch to his own sides.
If therefore the fracture is close to the shoulder end, then it is necessary that one bandage be placed under the notch and another under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow, then it is necessary that a bandage be placed above that place and above the elbow itself.
Then set the fracture easily without difficulty, until it is level according to what is necessary, and applied correctly; then bind it if no warm abscess occurs.
But if a warm abscess occurs, then release the binding for seven days. Place linen that has been soaked in vinegar and rose oil on it until the abscess subsides; then bind it: and the method of binding is to place a plaster over the fracture.
Then place the inversion from new cloth over the plaster. Then gather the arm onto the support itself, and put his open hand on his own shoulder.
Place the cloth and bind it over the support so that the arm remains in place like a star: if something does not prevent you from doing this, nor will anything move due to a broken bone.
If you are afraid that something will move due to a broken bone, then use a star: and there is one, by which you place the larger and stronger star over the fracture itself. And place the width of each star equal to a digit: and let the length of the stars be according to the fracture, with an addition of three digits from every side.
Then bind over the stars with the bandage as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And your binding should be tighter than the fracture site. And as the fracture extends more, let the binding be less.
If you see the position of the stars and the binding as we have said, then do it at the hour when you restore the limb immediately: but if you fear a hot abscess, then let go of the binding and the stars until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the binding in all three days, so that it does not happen in the place of itching, or swelling, or food is prevented from reaching the limb because of the excess binding. Correct therefore everything as we have said.
If you are confident that nothing will happen from this: then do not loosen the binding, unless after three days or more.
Let the weak person sleep on his back and place his hand on his stomach: and put woolen socks full of wool equally under the support.
Consider at every hour of the night or day, so that the figure of the broken member is not loosened, nor is the ligament softened. Correct it entirely with your power.
Place food for the sick according to the order we have given you, so that it is a subtle food first, until the bone begins to bind; then it is necessary, that you increase his food.
For the custom of help and the member is to bind for forty days; then it is necessary, that it be loosened, and a bath be given, and it be treated with ointments which correct it.
If the fracture is foul, scrape it; then do not loosen from it the ligament and splints for fifty days, and until two months.
Chapter on the restoration of the broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two humeruses.
One of them is small; and it follows the thumb. And the other one is large, and it is placed below the small one from the lower part.
Perhaps only the large humerus breaks, or perhaps both break at once.
When therefore the small humerus above breaks, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the large humerus below breaks, the fracture is bad, and the healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones break at once.
If the bone that breaks is the small humerus above, then it is fitting for the physician at its restoration, to place a sling smaller with ease until it equals itself.
If however the large humerus is the one that is broken: then it is necessary to place a strong splint very tightly.
It is necessary that [the figure] of the hand be placed at its restoration, and its [full] extension extended over the pulley. The thumb shall be higher than all the fingers, and the lower joint (of the thumb) shall be higher than all the digits or the rest: and the weakened square one resting on itself, and there shall be a pulley before it or directly in front of it, at its level, so that the weakened does not fall into labor.
Then let the attendant stretch the arm from its lower part with his hand or with a ligature. And another attendant shall stretch likewise from above.
Then the physician sets the bone until he brings it back to its best shape possible.
If there are pus-filled cavities (sinuses) in the bone fracture, then strive to replace every splinter in its place with your strength.
But if it appears separated and pustular (abscessed) and penetrating the skin and there is no hope of restoration for it: then incise over it, and excise it according to the manner which was previously mentioned.
But if there is a fracture with a wound, I have already written a separate chapter on this matter, so take care of it from that point.
If at the beginning of your restoration an abscess arises that is hot, then apply a linen cloth prepared with wax made from rose oil, white wax, and medium thickness: and bind the cloth over it tightly with a narrow ligature until when the abscess subsides: then remove the wax, and place an ointment prepared from flour mill powder and egg whites. Then place pins, and the pin that is placed over the fracture should be slightly larger and stronger.
And know that the number of pins for the arm is six in most cases: whether the fracture occurs in one splint or two splints at once.
Then place your bandage stronger and more forceful over the stronger and more prominent part of the fracture, and a little further towards its upper or lower parts: or place a softer bandage around it according to what was previously remembered at the beginning of the chapter.
The wrappings to be used on the fracture should be soft, moist: and they should not be hard, rough. And let the thread for binding be of linen, middle between fine and coarse, as we have said.
Consider the limb and ligament after several days. If anything happens which requires correction, such as itching on the limb: then it is necessary that you apply embrocation to the limb with warm water until the itching stops, and leave the limb unbound until it calms down; then repeat the bandaging.
If the bandage has already been softened and the bone removed, and similar things have happened: then correct that completely with your skill, and consider again.
If nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, then it is necessary to soften it slightly, and leave it for some days until it reaches the nutrition; then bind it again.
But if nothing of what has been said happens to the sick person, then it is not necessary to loosen him, unless after twenty days or thereabouts.
Then the hand of the sick person is suspended at his neck. And let his neck be straight, and keep it protected from violent movements. Make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is healed within thirty or forty days; and perhaps it is healed within twenty-eight days. All of that depends on the temperaments and dispositions of humors and virtues.
Restoration of broken hands.
Know that the hand comb and finger knots rarely occur a fracture. It does not happen to him, unless it is rubbed many times.
When a foot fracture occurs or is rubbed, then it is necessary that the patient sits on a low stool, and before him there should be a seat equal in height. Then put his hand upon it extended.
Then the servant spreads out the broken bones, and the doctor aligns them until they are joined with a good union.
Then it is necessary to place plaster and wool, unless there occurs a hot abscess. Then put a splint on top according to the size of the place: and you have already wound it in linen cloth.
If the fracture is below about the belly of the foot, then make a similar sphere from cloth: and command the patient to bend over it with his broken foot: then tie it with long cloth.
And let the splint be of parchment, in which there is softness, so that it can be applied to the skin of the sole: and tie it as necessary.
If the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary to place a splint on top and another one below on the foot: and keep the hand open and straight. Then put a bandage, as the hand is rolled up: and extend between the fingers with a ligament.
If there occurs a fracture in any finger knot, then if it is the thumb, align it as necessary. Then tie with the foot: and if there are any more, place a straight splint, smaller, to lift the fracture and not move it.
If the fracture is in the remaining fingers, such as the middle, index, little finger or ring finger, then align it and tie it with the healthy finger that follows it: or tie all of them according to continuity: and it is better. Place a small awl upon it [the part], as we have said in the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the arrangement of the amputation of heat, and set against it what is required, when something happens from that [object], according to its repeated narrative.
Chapter on the repair of a broken Hip.
The thigh bone is often broken and revealed to the senses because it turns towards the inner and posterior part.
And its repair is done by tightening a ligament above the break, and another ligament below the break. The sick person stretches himself upon his face.
Then extend all the ligaments serving its part equally; and this when the break is in the middle of the bone.
If however the break is close to the root of the hip, then let there be a ligament for the neck part, so that the extension falls upward; and another ligament below the break.
And similarly if the break is close to the knee, then let there be a ligament near the knee, so that the extension falls towards the lower parts.
Then the physician adjusts the bone with both hands until he reduces it to its original shape; and the bone unites by a good union.
Then it is necessary that you apply plaster and a tight bandage if no abscess occurs in the limb. If an abscess should occur there: then let it be left for several days until the abscess becomes hot; then return to your treatment.
The bandage of this [limb] should therefore be as follows. It is necessary to wind a hard plaster around the break, that is, bandage; and double it twice or three times; and there remains an excess of it. Then wind the leg until the heel reaches the root of the natural joint.
Insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee towards the lower parts, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper parts of the two areas. Then roll up (the skin) over the leg and hip what remains from the incision.
Next, place stars (splints or bandages) on the hip in the location of the fracture, and place one star on the bone of the leg.
Then fill the voids between the leg and hip with soft cloths so that it matches the tightness (of the wound).
Then begin with a strong suture from the middle above the location of the fracture with three or four revolutions. And as you lengthen the suture from the location of the fracture, let your stitch be smaller, softer, and looser.
Next, aim for the ends of the thread which you inserted between the hip and leg. Then bind three stars (splints or bandages) on both sides (of the wound). Next, follow the ends of the thread to the lower parts until you reach the ankle. And with both sides bind also the ends of the stars so that the suture is not moved from its place.
Then release the stitch until it remains so that there is no rot on the limb, no abscess, no swelling, and similar things. If something happens from this (the treated area). Therefore, when the solution is applied to it, correct whatever has happened there completely, as we have said many times.
But if there is a splinter in the bone that it pierces: then it is necessary to equalize it, if it is possible for you. And if not, bind over it and remove it: and care about the one who preceded the reminder until it heals.
And at times this hip fracture is tightened, apart from the addition of pegs, as we said in aid and arm. (Translated from Latin)
However, in its restoration, such a fracture does not cause lameness to the weak. (Translated from Latin) And if it is restored alone, apart from applying another leg to it, then it is necessary that he who has it will always limp. (Translated from Latin)
Know that the hip becomes tightened in fifty days or less, or it is added too little, or it is reduced too little; all this is according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions. (Translated from Latin)
Restoration of a fracture of the knee-cap. (Translated from Latin)
Know that the knee-cap rarely occurs a fracture, but it frequently occurs attrition. (Translated from Latin)
If indeed it occurs a fracture, then it is not other than a fissure or an opening in its parts. (Translated from Latin) It is that with a wound and without a wound. (Translated from Latin) It stands upon it entirely with feeling. (Translated from Latin)
Its restoration is as follows: equalizing what has been split from its parts with fingers until it is gathered and joined according to what is possible by equalization and ease, and construction. (Translated from Latin)
Then place a plaster made of rice flour or milled flour with egg white; and place upon it a round peg if needed; and bind above with a bandage suitable for that. (Translated from Latin)
Then consider all the dispositions which we have mentioned in other fractures; such as a hot abscess and similar cases; so that you present every occurrence with what is suitable for it until it heals. (Translated from Latin)
Restoration of a Leg Fracture.
Know that there are two bones in the leg, one is large and called the shinbone (cruris); and the other is slender, and is called the calf bone (focile).
It happens with both kinds of fracture that it occurs with two bones of the arm; and because of this, its restoration is done equally, and the operation is one.
If two bones break simultaneously, the leg turns towards all directions.
If a bone breaks more finely, the leg turns towards the anterior part.
If a bone breaks coarsely, you will find it lower: and it is among those that are not hidden from you.
Then administer the extension, equalization, and ligature of stars equally according to that.
However, if the fracture of the leg is a dirty fracture with many setragies, it should have a smaller and softer extension, and a gentler alleviation by you.
And in the leg there is something about the operation that is similar to the arm: and it is, when you equalize the stars, and complete your entire operation, then take two bands from pine wood, which are used in the making of solariums placed under tables, and they are made of spatulas of the palm; and choose those with a small thickness, and not too thin; and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee downwards.
Then fold one band over another with two folds according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side: let them be from the knee down to the foot.
Then tie the two bands in three places at the two ends and in the middle. For it is forbidden to bind, the leg turns towards the right and left, and stands well with a good stance.
And now the cradle made of wood according to the length of the leg should be placed under it, to keep it from moving.
It is most important that you make this [the treatment] when there is a wound with the fracture itself.
Then consider the leg every day, and take care of it with utmost diligence to prevent aposteme, inflammation, or other things. If anything from those (afflicts), then oppose it with what is necessary until it heals, if God wills it.
On the Fracture of Bones of the Foot and Fingers.
The calcaneum indeed does not suffer complete fracture.
The bones of the foot indeed sometimes suffer fracture, and fractures of the fingers do not happen very often: and they do not occur to them except by severe injury at several points.
If a fracture of the bones of the foot occurs, and you see the bone protruding beyond itself, then place the sick man's foot on the ground prepared as when walking.
Then you stand there, and place your foot on that which is raised from those bones; then press or tread upon it; and hold it equally, until it returns to its places.
Then place a poultice and a plaster on top of it; and put a small table beneath the foot with two flat heads.
Then bind it with a decent bandage when you have wrapped it in linen and other things that are needed.
When three or four days have passed, then unbind the bandage. For you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or displaced. The operation is therefore as you see.
If some fingers are broken, then restore them, and align them as I have told you in the restoration of fingers of the hand. Then place a stylus along the length of your finger and let it be slightly wider than the finger; then put this table beneath the foot as I have told you, and bind it with a decent bandage.
If what is broken is two or three bones, or more, then place a stylus of the same size over each finger and wrap it in linen; and bind the table beneath the foot; and let there be a standing on one head of the table outside the foot to hold it with good retention.
It is fitting for you, lest you forget, to consider all that I told you about the other fractures regarding the accidents we mentioned; and apply the appropriate solution to every accident.
On the fracture of a woman's jaw, and the breastbone, and a man's long bone.
When a woman's jaw is fractured, then make her sit in a square position. Then lean her towards the back of the same slightly and hold her in that position.
Next, a midwife fills the woman's jaw with a linen cloth until it is full; and the jaw becomes as round as a sphere from this.
Then strike the woman gently, and gradually reduce her back. This linen cloth emerges until it becomes before the mouth of the jaw as round as a sphere, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a small cushion under her back. Whenever she wishes to spit, let her easily remove the linen cloth, then spit; and bring it back according to the amount you first inserted; then return to the cushion again.
Let this be done for seven days or approximately; for the bone itself recovers.
And if you wish, take the bladder of a hen, and tie it around its orifice with a reed tube, and insert the entire bladder into her jaw. Then blow through the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the jaw; for the fracture returns.
Then it should be filled with linen cloth and stay for some days as we have said, until it heals.
When the breastbone of a man or woman is fractured, then administer its treatment and apply what we have said regarding the anchorage for the bone.
And it is not hidden that the right [side] is not concealed in close fractures which happen little, particularly for one who has some interest or practice.
Understand my book very much, because the fracture itself indicates to you in many dispositions the way of the right [side] in its restoration and the narrowing of it: therefore understand.
When a man's member breaks, take the throat of a goose; and insert the staff [into it]. Then place upon it a covering from cloth, and wrap [it], and let it be for three days or about them, and it will heal if God wishes.
On the restoration of bone fracture when there is a wound.
It is appropriate for the one who has a fracture along with a wound, especially if it is large like the hip bone or humerus, to rush and summon a phlebotomist immediately; if you are informed of the conditions of phlebotomy as we have previously mentioned.
If the wound flows with blood, then it is necessary for you to rush for its amputation, so that you pour powdered lime over it if nothing else is present for you.
Then begin to restore the fracture on the same day; and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
If however, an abscess hot occurs, then delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. And do not approach him on the third and fourth days, for you will cause him to suffer additional harm.
If the broken bone is sticking out from the skin exposed: then it is necessary to try to bring it back and align it with your hands easily and slightly extended.
If however the extension is not prepared, and the arm itself is equal to your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And the tool is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight fingers: and its width is according to the size of the wound. And for that reason it is necessary for the physician to take from them three or four, according to the quantity required for the treatment of any kind of fracture.
And let it be round: and let its thickness be small, so as not to increase during the application of pressure on it during the hour of surgery: and let its sharp edges have a margin at their ends. And let the upper part of it be thick up to the middle, but below that let it be thin.
And this is its shape.
In this operation, the sharp end should be bent and placed over the protruding bone's extremity: and push it with it together until when the bone returns and is equalized in some way.
Therefore try to align the fracture ends against each other.
If the fracture ends are fine and do not accept the tool properly, then it is necessary to cut the bone end until the tool can hold it.
If however you cannot reduce the bones with what I have described, then cut it with the chisels we mentioned, or saw it with one of your saws in any way possible for you.
Then plane down what remains on the bone from roughness and fine layers.
When the bone is reduced and after its removal a very strong pain arises that hurts it, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
Make it so. For you bring great help to the sick, when you complete the restoration that you do for the bone.
Then immerse the linen in strong wine, black. And properly if it is in summer. And do not place on the wound cicatricles or anything containing oil; so that it does not cause decay and corruption at the same spot.
Then administer the splinters in the hour of the completion of your restoration of the bone. And leave the wound undressed; thus, so that you cut with forceps a hole in the swellings according to the size of the wound.
Be careful not to squeeze the wound with the fracture. For often have fools done this; and they have caused death, or corruption, or gangrene on their own patients, that is, pus. And your suture be soft, gentle, diverse from the other sutures for fractures.
If the wound is bad or large and you fear some bad incidents that we have mentioned, and you find pain at a suspended place; then it is not necessary to place splinters on it. And make swellings from hard cloths in the place of splinters and stitch it with them.
And when it has been a day or two, and you see the wound begin to produce pus; then remove from above it the linen that you had placed on it with wine. Then administer linen and ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds; such as ointment of four ingredients (tetrapharmacon) and similar ones.
And it is suitable for you to dissolve the suture. And consider the wound every day morning and evening until it heals and cures.
It is necessary to prepare the limb in such a way that the pus runs out from it with ease towards the lower parts.
If many days pass and the wound does not heal nor the pus is discharged from it: then you know that there are small fractures of bones in that place. It is necessary to examine the wound with pressure (or probing). As for how many of those small fractures have been separated, remove them and extract them. And those which have not been separated and are boring the limb and causing pain, try to cut them and remove them in every way possible for you.
If pimples (zuchen) or boils (ekileten), i.e., abscesses, or any other corruption and putrefaction should occur at the wound: then it is necessary to apply each of them with what corresponds to it from the remedies whose narration preceded in their respective chapters.
And from that where my discourse must remain silent, and to whom you should direct your mind when a bone breaks and protrudes upon the limb, such as the hip bone, or the shoulder, or similar large bones, it is not to presume its attraction; for often death occurs from it, indeed let it be, until it putrefies.
Perhaps it will fall by itself after twenty or thirty days.
Therefore treat the wound if it seems to you; and if not, let it be.
Chapter on the treatment of a nodule (Nodation) in the fracture of a limb.
This nodule occurs many times in the course of the healing of a fracture. Above all, that which is near joints; and it becomes foul from this figure of the limb. And perhaps it hinders the limb from its natural movement.
Therefore consider if the nodule is recent; administer to it remedies that have astringent properties, such as aloes, frankincense, myrrh, gum Arabic, acacia and similar ones.
Therefore, take some or all of them [the medicines]: and bind them with staunchion wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar; and place them on the swelling, and tightly bind them over the good constriction.
And release the binding, do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and apply another one until the swelling is removed.
Or bind over it a sheet of lead well. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from the limbs.
If the swelling has already turned into a stone and is tightly bound and there is an urgent need to remove it: then bind something above it from its upper part, and cut off the excessive protrusion; or shave it with certain scrapers until it is removed; and take care of it until it heals.
[Chapter title: Treatment when the member has been restored but remains tender after that]
When a bone fracture is restored and the member remains tender after that, weak: then it is not done except for many reasons. One of the reasons is a multiplicity of loosening and tying of the ligament not as required; or due to an excessive binding of the ligaments, preventing nutrition from reaching the member; or due to an excess of embrocation at an inappropriate time; or due to a lack of blood in the body of the sick person and its weakness.
And the treatment for this is to feed the sick person and make his body soft until blood increases in him. And apply a bath. And pour joy and happiness over him.
Then place pitch on the member: so that it attracts much nourishment to itself. Apply the ointment to it with warm water until the wound heals and returns to its natural shape.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are set twistedly.
When a restored member, after its healing, becomes twisted or protrudes due to fractured bone or nodulation, and is disfigured by this condition of the limb; however, the limb does not prohibit its natural operation; then it is not necessary that you accept the advice of him who thinks that the limb should be broken again.
And there have been many foolish physicians and restorers, who did this in our land.
This operation is extremely blameworthy, leading to death or great fear, lest it be fatal.
But if lameness and nodulation are recent: then it is necessary to apply warm water in which soothing herbs have been boiled, such as the leaves of althea, its root, melilotus, and similar ones. And make for him an ointment with a soothing plaster, such as well-made dyachilon.
Or take the mucilage from the root of althea, pound it with chicken fat or sesame oil; and apply it with that.
Or figs are taken, powdered with dove dung, and similar substances that are called from medicines reducing consolidation.
And sometimes nodulation is resolved through persistent gentle rubbing, which is done with moist hands. And the movement of the limb should be administered to all its parts every hour.
If the twisting has already occurred, and it has become strong, and has turned into a stone, and its treatment with iron is necessary: then it is necessary to make an incision above it, and to break the continuation of the bone, and to cut off what is superfluous from nodulation or bone with fine instruments; and apply ease to that with care and diligence.
"On Speech in Dislocation.
"Dislocation is the displacement of some joints from their place. "Why it is forbidden to move and it disfigures the shape of the limb. "And causes heavy pains to occur on the weak and violent injuries."\]
"When therefore a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to hurry for its restoration; not at all delaying it."\]
"For if it is delayed, the location will be lost and perhaps with it also the reduction of the dislocation."\]elfare, and to promote social harmony by providing honest, helpful, and friendly responses. I'm not a real person but am a
"Therefore it is necessary that it should not be moved or extended during the hour of its setting."\] "Because many times it causes a spasm to occur, and pains damaging."\]
"However when this happens, then it is necessary to hurry to the bloodletting of the weak."\] "Then it should be released until the abscess subsides.
"Then the limb is wrapped with warm water and oil."\] "Then it should be reduced gently.
"And all the limb is to be treated with the one whose memory returns to its place."\]
"I myself have already arranged the chapters on dislocations, even according to what preceded in the fracture, from the upper part of the body down to the lower part of it.
"Chapter on the care of lower jaw dislocation."\]
"Two lower jaws dislocate rarely."\]
"And the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways."\] welfare, and to promote social harmony by providing honest, helpful, and friendly responses. I'm not a real person but am "Either they are moved slightly from their places by a small displacement and softened slightly."\] welfare, and to promote social harmony by providing honest, helpful, and friendly responses. I'm not a real person but am The dislocation is to be reduced by means of a complete reduction until it becomes softened at the chest part, until the salve for the weak has run and it cannot hold it, nor can it close its own mouth, and its tongue is wrapped with speech.
When the dislocation is slight, then by itself and with few positions it returns.
If the dislocation is complete and entire: then it is necessary that its reduction be administered quickly, and it should not be delayed too much; and it is to be such that the attendant holds the head of the weak person; and the doctor is to insert his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocated mandible between the bones if the dislocation is from a single part. Or he is to insert two thumbs at once, if the dislocation is from two parts. And the other fingers of his hands are to be outside, which equal it.
And command the weak person to cleanse his jaws and to purify them for eating entirely. The doctor holds the jaw equal, and he pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are together: then administer steaming with hot water and oil until it becomes easy to reduce both; nor should you delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
When they return and equalize, and the mouth of the weak person is closed, and they do not soften: then place on them poultices of cloth, with a mixture made of wax, and rose oil.
Then it is tied with soft bands.
And let the sleep of the weak person be on his back; and let his head rest between two poultices, so that he does not move it to the right and left; nor should he try or be forced to chew something; instead let his food be made soft, until when the pains are removed, and the jaw is relaxed: then he may eat what he wants, and let that be given with ease.
Do not let him eat or drink at the operation on his mouth, and do not let him speak, until the mandible is sutured and healed.
If the reduction of the two jawbones becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and do not return to their places: then often fevers occur, and constant vomiting happens; and perhaps the weakened stomach dissolves, and possibly it vomits pure bile.
Therefore, when you see that: then you know that it is a loss, and he who experiences this usually dies within ten days.
Chapter on the reduction of dislocations of the neck (jaw) and the end of the arm.
The jaw is not dislocated from the inside out, because of its continuity with the chest. It is dislocated to the outside sometimes and this is made clear to the senses.
The restoration of it (the jaw) is that he lies weak on his back and extends his arms. Then make room with your compression, for it shall return itself.
Place upon it an ointment and a powder, then bind it.
However, the parts that follow the elbow should not be dislocated, unless rarely. If it is dislocated on any day: it must be reduced and set according to what was said, and that which has been prepared for you.
Then place upon it an ointment, a powder, and a bandage. And command the sick man to adhere to calmness and rest until he is healed.
And with this same treatment, the extremity of the humerus should be reduced when it is also separated from its place.
Chapter on the Reduction of Dislocations of the Humerus.
Know that the humerus is not dislocated except in three ways.
One way is when it dislocates towards the region of the pectoral girdle below. The second way is when it dislocates to the chest region. And perhaps it is dislocated to the upper part of the Humero (shoulder): and that occurs rarely.
And it is not dislocated to the back, due to the spoon-shaped process (of the humerus). And it is not dislocated to the front, due to the nerves.
And indeed it is mostly dislocated and exits towards the lower part turned like a spindle; particularly in those whose flesh is scanty. Since it exits rapidly in them, and enters rapidly.
But in those whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite, that is, since it exits with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some people by a blow or accident, and the humerus is dislocated with heat, and it is thought because of that, since it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, one must test that, until you are certain of it, and then proceed with its treatment.
The dislocation is known when it turns towards the lower part like a spindle; and you will distinguish between the dislocated humerus and the healthy one. For you will find among them a clear difference, and in the head of the humerus a hollow, and beneath the spindle-like part on touch of the head of the humerus as if it were an egg; and an incapacitated person cannot bring the hand to the ear nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards; then you will find clear evidence of touch and it will not be hidden.
And this dislocation is easy to reduce when it is recent or the child is weak.
The reduction of it (the dislocation) is that the attendant raises his hand towards the upper parts. Then place your thumbs beneath the spindle part of it and lift the joint with force to its place; and the attendant raises his hand and extends it upward. Then place her below, for he himself returns quickly.
If he does not return within what I have said, and there is from the beginning the dislocation of joints for several days: then it is necessary that the sick person be bathed in hot water, and given a poultice which softens and soothes, such as if they decoct the roots of althea, and fenugreek, and trefoil in water, and give it.
Then the sick person shall lie on his back upon his back; and let there be placed beneath him a cushion, and woolen cloth which is equal in tension between softening and binding.
Then the physician shall place his heel upon the sphere, and shall lift the head of the humerus with force, and draw the hand of the sick person to below.
And if you wish, return him in this manner: and it is for you to make a tall man present who is taller than the sick person, and let him stand by his side, and insert his arm beneath the sick person's cushion; and lift the cushion upwards until the sick person is suspended in the air. And another assistant shall draw the hand of the sick person to below his abdomen. If the sick person is light: then it is necessary that he be suspended with something else to weigh him down; for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also returned in another manner: and it is for you to fashion on the ground a long stick, whose head is round in shape, such as a mitten-handle; not too thick, nor too thin. Then let there be placed beneath the sick person after the sticks are placed on his head, soft cloths; and the sick person shall stand along the length of the stick.
Then extend his hand to the lower part on one side, and extend his body from the other side with strength: for the connection returns to its place quickly.
If his reduction is difficult by everything that has been said, then use this care: and it is, that you take a stick whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness the quantity of two fingers: to which head should be round, that it softens the entrance into the deep place by rubbing, according to this form.
Then wrap soft cloth around the round head, so as not to hurt the weak stick.
Then place it under the weak rubbing (place), so that his hand or arm is extended over the stick to the lower part: and bind the stick above the assistance, and the arm and the end of the hand.
Then place his arm on a step of the ladder by its width, and extend his hand to the lower part, and let the rest of the body hang suspended from the other side. For the connection enters immediately.
When his entrance is completed according to whatever way it is possible: then it is necessary, that you place under the weak rubbing (place) a sphere equal in quantity from wool. Then place the prepared plaster from milled flour with balm and egg white on his shoulder, just as it is turned over.
Then tie under the weak rubbing (place) a suitable stitch: and turn the bandage over the plaster above: and connect his hand to his neck, and let it not be moved, nor move his hand for seven days.
It is necessary, that food be given to the sick in small quantity, until he strengthens the limb: because it is quicker for its healing.
Then let it be placed wider after seven days or five, and rub gently with movement. If therefore it becomes firm and does not become soft, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated several times, due to the moisture that occurs to it, or due to another cause: then it is necessary, that a cautery be administered to it with three holes, according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
If this is done and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the joint does not become firm, and the plaster and constriction are applied on it several times, and it does not become firm and falls, and cannot be lifted up: then you know, that the nerves which are towards the head of the humerus have been cut or extended or softened: and you know, that the joint will never adhere in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the chest and breast, or to the back, is reduced by pressure and extension with hands: until it returns, and care is administered to it afterwards, until it is healed.
If after healing a pain occurs in the limb, and sluggishness in its movement: then the weak should use baths many times, until that pain is relieved, and it returns to its first nature.
Chapter on the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty, and similarly it returns with difficulty too; and indeed it is dislocated to all parts, and particularly to the front or back.
And its dislocation will not be hidden from you: because it falls under your sight, and under touch, according to whatever shape it is dislocated. And when you join the dislocated shoulder with a healthy one, it will be made manifest to you. The joint should be hollowed out, and the arm cannot be doubled nor touch with it its own humerus.
It is necessary that you hasten and reduce dislocation immediately, before a hot abscess occurs to it.
If a hot abscess occurs to it, its reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps it does not heal altogether, especially when it is in the back region. For all kinds of dislocations, it is worse; and it brings a more violent pain, and death often descends with it.
And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient should be extended with two hands; and the arm should be expanded, and the hands of the physician should be above and below the elbow, and he himself should push the disjoint joint with the tips of his fingers or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Or if the dislocation is towards the front part: then it returns in such a way that he separates his hand with his hand until he strikes with the root of his palm on the elbow that is dislocated.
If the dislocation does not obey in reduction, then administer a strong and vigorous traction; and it is that two assistants extend the arm; and two assistants hold him also, so that he is not moved during the traction.
Then turn the arm to every part after it has been wrapped around his hand with a double cloth or broad bandage.
And when the physician touches the disjoint joint with his hand, he binds it with oil; so that it is one of those things that help in lubricating the disjointure with ease. Then push the disjoint joint with a vigorous push until it returns.
After its reduction, it is necessary to place a plaster on it that has astringency and drying with ox-gall; and it should be sewn up with a suitable suture. And let the arm of the sick person be suspended from his neck; and let it remain for some days.
Then, it shall be loosened. If the joint has become fixed at its location, then undo the binding from it, and let it (the arm) be.
And if you see the joint not tightly bound, then repeat the plaster, and bind again, and let it (the arm) be for some days until it becomes tightly bound. Then, undo it (the arm).
If pain occurs after the reduction of the joint and it has movement: then administer humectation in bathing, and fine friction, and compression until it (the pain) settles, or place on the joint an ointment of the fat of the ram's wool. Then, let it be bound; and let it (the arm) remain on it by day and night. Then, remove it (the ointment), and immerse him into the bath. When he sweats, then frict the joint with a moderate friction. Then, apply to it (the joint) three times with ointment, first, second, and third, when entering the bath, until it becomes soothed.
And if you wish, place upon it (the joint) horse dung, moistened and heated with butter, and bind over it.
Do this (the treatment) at times. It becomes soothed, and returns to its proper position.
Chapter on the cure of dislocations by Albucasis.
Mahassem often dislocates his hand, that is, the joint between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy. On the contrary, other joints (are difficult to reduce). However, it is necessary that speed should be in the reduction of this dislocation within an hour from when it was dislocated, before the place is opened; or a warm abscess may occur at the site.
Reduction of dislocation is to place Mahassem's weak hand on a table, and let his attendant extend it; and the physician shall place his palm upon the prominence of the joint, and push until it returns.
However, it should be considered if the palm has already retreated towards the back of the hand; then let the weak person place the back of his hand on the table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then let the position of his hand be inwardly upon the table, that is, the inner part of his hand shall be placed upon the table, so that the physician falls upon the same joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then bind it with plaster sitting on an abscess; and let him be, do not redo it.
For if it cannot bear [the treatment], and you cannot do reduction of it after the days have passed, but still the joint remains according to its twist; and nothing harms the weak person except what softens the hand, and nothing can be bound; then know that the nerves are cut off or rubbed.
Therefore, there is no skill in it, except to bind with a cautery near its loss. And perhaps it does not bring anything about.
When Almahassem does not return, then place upon him the plaster that I have mentioned. Then bind it and let it be for five days; afterwards, it is to be loosened and let it be, and the hand should be exercised.
If it loses movement and something heavy happens to it; then soften it with warm water, and rub it softly several times, until it becomes soft.
[Paragraph on the treatment of finger dislocations.]
When a finger is dislocated from any part of it, or the finger to the back of its palm, or its back; then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then hold the finger's head and suspend it towards the side where it is dislocated, and let it be for two days.
Then extend it until it becomes straight on its own day.
When it is night, bind it according to the story told, and do not stop unbinding it during the day; exercise it with movement and bind it at night.
Do that for several days until it is tightened.
And do the same with it if it is dislocated towards the stomach of the hand; bind it to that side and perform your first operation on it until it heals.
And do the same with it when it is dislocated towards other parts.
Chapter on the treatment of spondylolisthesis of the back.
When spondylolisthesis of the back or neck occurs, or when many vertebrae are moved from their places; then there is no treatment for it because death approaches the weak.
And the sign of this is that hunger leaves the weak without will and cannot hold it; the limbs become soft several times from him, or two legs or two arms of himself, or one of them; or a vertebra is moved from its place.
For it is often moved because the removal occurs to four directions.
Therefore, that which is moved towards the back is called humpback.
But the treatment of it is that you should consider if humpback occurs from childhood; then there is no treatment for it and no cure at all.
But in that which occurs from an accident, blow, or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment have already been said in a lengthy speech. Of which much does not return with profit.
I have already shortened it from that one, whose little justifies its much due to my proximity to the intention; and in my exposition of it, I have shaped the instrument differently from how they presented and explained it.
Therefore, I say that when there is a hump occurring on the anterior part, it is not a natural state, nor can healing come from it.
And similarly, in that which occurs to both sides as well.
And it is not cured except for that which occurs in the back itself, as I have said; and it is so that the weak person is extended over his face on the bench, nearly up against the wall; and a damp cloth is spread beneath him to avoid hurting his chest.
Then place a straight piece of wood fixed in the fireplace on the ground at the foot of the bed, about his head; and another piece of wood about his feet at the end of the other bed; and let a servant hold the wood, and it should not be fastened to the fireplace. And the second servant holds the other.
Then cover the head of the weak person with a soft cloth, and tie a firm bandage around his neck under his chin; and extend the end of the bandage to the wood near his head, and tie it there.
Then tie another bandage above his ankles and above his knees, and near his fetters. Then gather all the bands together and tie them to the other wood near his feet.
Then all the servants extend the band to the part of the wood and they must not move the two woods from their places where they are fixed; however, they should not be fastened as we said.
And the physician shall place his hands on the thigh with strength until he returns; or he may place a table over it. Then he attaches his feet to the table until he returns.
If he does not return through this treatment, then take a table whose length is about three arms. And bore a hole in the wall near the sick man, where the end of the table may enter. Then place the middle of the table on the hip bone (Spondyle). And the physician places his feet at the other end (of the table). And bind it tightly until the hip bone is dislocated and he returns to his place.
Then, if you wish, operate with a drill that is turned by hand. It is so that you mark on the ground near the head of the sick man two pieces of wood, whose length is one arm each; and at his head near the last foot, two pieces of wood.
And let the length between each piece of wood be one palm; and now a hole has been made everywhere where the drill runs through, and each piece of wood is fixed firmly to the ground so that it does not move at all.
A round piece of wood is inserted; and there is a drill inside, where the ligament is turned through two holes in the two pieces of wood.
And at the end of it (the drill) there is a hole, where the piece of wood is fixed, whose length is one palm with what is turned; and similarly in the other two pieces of wood.
Then bind the ligaments that you tied around the chest of the sick man on the drill near his head; and the ligaments that you tied around his thighs on the drill near his feet.
Then the assistant stands near every drill, who turns his hand with a cloth (linen), with which the drill is turned; and the physician aligns the hip bone as we have said.
This is the form of a hernia, which follows.
Then when the fracture (Spondilis) returns and the place is leveled, then it is necessary that you apply a dry plaster with egg white. Then a wick of linen or wool should be inserted into the wound from the plaster and on top of it place a wooden splint whose width is that of three fingers or about that. And its length should be such that it encloses the swelling and over the healthy part of the fracture.
Then it should be bound with the cord as previously said. And the sick person should take a subtle food until he is healed.
If something remains projecting in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that medicines be given which soften and soothe, with the use of the tablet as previously said for a long time. And now lead is applied to it.
Occasionally a projecting swelling arises in the last fracture of the back; it is supposed to be dislocation and that bone which is now projecting. Therefore, it is not advisable to make a presumption about this medicine; perhaps it will cause death.
Chapter on the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You should know that the joints of the ankle and shoulder do not occur except by dislocation; nor does it happen to them as it happens to the other joints from a slight separation and hollowing out.
The joint of the ankle is dislocated in four parts. Because it is dislocated forward and backward.\]
The most frequently dislocated are those that are internal: few are dislocated towards the front and back.
The treatment for dislocation of this kind towards the internal is as follows: because when you join the weak leg with the healthy one, it is longer; and the knee of the weak one projects more than that of the healthy, and the weak cannot double its foot at the inguinal region; there is a place following the inguinal region that is indented by an indentation made with heat, because the head of the hip has already reached that location.
The sign of a dislocation occurring towards the external is as follows: because its signs are opposite to these signs.
The sign of a dislocation occurring towards the front is as follows: because it extends the healthy leg beyond its normal length; however, it does not double it without pain in the knee; and if it attempts to walk, it cannot move forward over that leg; and urine retention occurs in it, and the inguinal region of it should be massaged, and at walking there is a bruising of it on the heel.
The sign of a dislocation occurring towards the back is as follows: it does not extend the knee, nor can it double it before doubling the inguinal region; and the leg is even shorter than the other; and the inguinal region is softened, and the head of the hip is at that location.
The reduction of this dislocation, however, is as follows: that you consider then whether the dislocation is old and has occurred with someone who already has it. Then if you apply the reduction to it, and it remains in its original position, then there is no treatment at all in that case. Therefore, it is not appropriate for a presumption to be made regarding this.
In the case of someone whose dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocations: then go to this, that you wish to join the bones together, and extend them towards the internal and external, and move it left and right; perhaps it will return, and no other care will be needed.
If it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary to prepare a strong assistant and extend his leg from the lower part; either with his hands, or with a ligature that can be tied above his knee: and another assistant should extend his arm above, so that he may insert his hand beneath his armpits. Then tie a soft ligature over the root of the hip and hold the end of another ligament.
And let its extension be either from the front of the groin to the chest area, or from the back to the back area.
And let all the extensions be the same until the sick man, along with his body, is raised from the ground and remains hanging.
For this is indeed a common type of extension among the four types.
If the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to do what I will say about its own treatment.
In reducing it for itself when the dislocation is to the inside, it is necessary for the sick man to lie on his healthy side. Then place a ligature over the root of the hip, in the area that is between the head of the hip and the area under the groin. Then extend the ligature upward from the groin to the upper part of the body, to the chest area.
Then another strong assistant takes his arms, and he reduces the large area of the weak hip and extends it with a powerful extension to the outside. Now it returns to its place.
And this is an easier treatment than the other treatments for reducing this limb.
If it is dislocated above you and does not obey you with this type of treatment, then it is necessary to tie the feet of the sick man together with a strong ligature, a soft one, over both heels and both knees: and let each length be four finger widths in comparison to its own; and let the sick leg be extended more than the other two fingers.
Then the sick person is suspended over the head of a beam, which is in the house; and its length from the ground should be the measure of two arms.
Then command a strong youth to brace the head and loins; another youth shall suspend them with the sick person; and another shall push, bracing the loins with strength, for the joining returns to its place swiftly.
In his own reduction, when it is a dislocation towards the outer parts, it is necessary that the sick person lie on a platform, as we have said in one who has a hump. And tie a bandage over his foot and over his chest, for the sick person himself.
Then two beams are placed, one at his feet and another at his head. Then place a beam in the middle of the platform, fixed firmly; over which they should be wrapped with wet cloths so as not to hurt the sick person; and let there be a beam between his loins so that he is not drawn downwards during stretching.
Then let every attendant go to his place, and the physician shall supervise the reduction with his hand.
If therefore he obeys in returning, it will be good.
And if not, place him on the platform and press it equally, as we have said for one who has a hump. Nevertheless, it is necessary that the sick person lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is towards the anterior parts, then it is necessary to extend the sick person's leg quickly; and this same story applies on the platform; and let the physician place the palm of his right hand on the loins of the sick person. Then bend him with one hand, and with this bending place him extended to the lower parts towards the knee.
If the dislocation is towards the posterior parts, then it is not necessary to extend the sick person downwards and lift him off the ground; instead, he should be placed on a hard surface, as it is also necessary when his ankle is dislocated towards the outer parts, according to what we said about his lying on two surfaces: one on his face and his legs extended: according to what we said recently.
It is necessary that a compression be applied with a flat object on the joint where it exits, when reduction is completed as required.
And the sign of reduction is not hidden from you: and it is, that you extend two legs of the weak: and when you see them equal, and the weak person pulls his own leg, and expands it without displacement: then you will know that the limb has returned as required: then join the hips, and place the plaster, and bind with bandages, that is, a roller: thus, so that it does not move out of place to any part: and let the weak person remain quiet for three or four days.
Then undo the bandage, and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in position, then you will know that the dislocation is already fixed: therefore release the weak person to walk.
And if you see something softening: then return and apply a plaster, and bind it as per your first binding: and leave it for three days as well.
Then undo that and make it slow in walking over some days, until it recovers well.
Chapter on Dislocations of the Knee.
The knee can be dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated towards the outside, towards the inside, and towards the bottom (i.e., the back).
And it is not dislocated towards the front.
And the sign of dislocation is, that you order the weak person to apply his leg to his hip. But if it does not stick with the hip: then know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of dislocation is, that you make the weak person sit straight, so that he can now extend his leg if possible over it, and let his back touch your face: and place his foot between your feet.
Then make his leg adhere with your palms, and place them straight upon his leg between your fingers. Then apply both sides of the leg with the palm of your hand with strength. And let another servant extend his foot until the leg returns to its place.
The sign of its return is that the foot will adhere with the thigh in a gentle manner, not forcefully.
Then apply ointment to it, and make his foot adhere with the thigh. Then bind them together with linen cloth for three or four days. Then unbind them.
And the sick man shall not walk for some days until he is healed.
If the reduction is refused to you, then administer a strong traction with ropes, whose method of application for the ankle has been previously described in the treatment section, until it returns.
Chapter on the treatment of dislocation of the heel.
The heel is sometimes displaced slightly and sometimes fully dislocated according to its extent. Its dislocation may be towards the inside or the outside.
The sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen and projecting towards the direction to which it has been dislocated.
The cure for its removal is easy reduction: and it is to extend it gently with the hands and align it until it returns.
In the cure of its full dislocation, it is necessary that you make the sick man sit upright and hold him firmly from behind his back, in the middle of himself.
Then hold his foot with your right hand from above and with your left hand below the foot at the place of the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand. Then with two-thirds [of the limb].
Then extend with left hand and push the sole of the foot with right hand turned toward the leg without strain.
Do that twice, as we have said.
Then push the sole of the foot to the leg one-third of its length and you pull the ligament.
If it returns to its original position in one or two ways according to this method and you see the foot even, it is good; and if not, then perform the operation again on it; because it will return.
If the reduction is prohibited to you with it as we have said; then make the weak person lie on his back on the ground, and fix a small peg firmly in the ground so that he falls between his hips; and now roll a cloth over him, so that he does not injure the weak one.
Then take hold of his hip with a servant; afterwards stretch out the servant the leg, or with his hands or with the strap that binds over the ankle. Then all servants should stretch opposite to their companion's extension; and the peg should stand between the weak one's hips holding him so that his body is not drawn downwards during the extension.
Then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, and another servant holds the healthy leg downwards. Because dislocation returns quickly.
When the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction is declared to you; then apply ointment and plaster and bind it tightly with bandages, and bind the foot with a strap to the leg.
And it is necessary that you be careful or afraid of the nerves that are above the heel at the back, so that the bandage is not too tight and injures them.
Then let him go for two or three days. If the ligament is softened, tighten it; then dissolve it on the third or fourth day, and prevent the weak from walking for forty days. If it attempts to walk before that period, there is no certainty but that it will be loosened again due to the dislocation, corrupted, and not receive subsequent treatment after that.
If it happens to him an abscess that is warm: then it is necessary for you to administer for its sedation what was mentioned earlier in our narrative at another place concerning the treatment, and embrocation until it is removed.
Chapter on Dislocation of Fingers of the Foot, and Cure.
It is necessary that it be reduced as soon as possible without exertion from those who have been dislocated with slight extension, and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
If the dislocation is in some of the knots of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that the weak person sit with his foot on a level surface with the ground or on a table, and he stands as if walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot upon that which projects from those joints. Then press it with your foot with force until it returns and you see it leveled again, and no projection appears in its place.
Then put a table under the belly of his foot which can hold his whole foot, having two heads. Then bind it with a bandage for three days. Then dissolve it, and let him rest from walking for many days until it is bound up and secured after the reduction.
Chapter on Types of Dislocations with Wound or Fracture.
When something happens to him and you attempt the treatment and restoration of that, death often occurs repeatedly; and therefore it is not advisable to presume on his cure, which is such, unless he who does this is experienced in long practice, merciful, devout, patient, cautious, not daring, nor presumptuous: and that he should use at the beginning of the treatment medications that soothe abscesses hot only: and let him be entrusted to divine judgment. If thou seest, or hopest for salvation from destruction with mildness of sickness, and where something of hope appears. Endeavor therefore the reduction of it immediately at the beginning, before a hot abscess occurs.
If therefore the member returns, as we wish, then administer a regime that suppresses abscess: and care for the wound with it what suits it from drying ointments.
If there is dislocation with fracture, and separated sores occur in the bone, then endeavor to remove them, and make as I have said in simple diseases at the sites of those.
And be careful according to your worth, and guard yourself from entering into the path of fear: according to what has gone before my speech to you.
For that is better for thee with thy Creator, and more lasting for thy glory, and more safe for thy body with them at thy time.
