After I have completed this book for you, O Sons, which is the last one in the science of medicine along with its complement, and after I have reached the end in it through its expositions and declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of operation, that is, surgery with the hand.
Since operation with the hand is prostrate in our region and at our time completely, until perhaps it has perished, and its trace has vanished; and only small descriptions of it remain in the books of the ancients, which have been corrupted by hands; and error and hesitation occurred to them until their intentions were closed, and the force was elongated; It seemed to me that I should bring it to life with the arrangement of this Treatise according to its position, declaration, and abbreviation; and to come with the shapes of the tools of the Cautery, and the remaining instruments of work; which is made by addition from the declarations, and by the properation of what is necessary.
The reason why a good craftsman of this art with his hand is not found in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and its author must be trained before that in the science of anatomy, which Galen narrated, until he knows the help for the members, and their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, and their number, and their exit, and the pulses of veins and arteries, and their quiets, and their locations.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that much is the name with the name, and little is the work, especially in the art of the hand.
We have already spoken about it at the beginning of this book.
Since one who does not know what we have said about anatomy will fall into error and kill men, as I have seen many of those who are formed in this science and boast of it without knowledge and without experience.
Because I saw a foolish doctor cut off a scrofulous apostema on a woman's neck and cut some arteries in the neck; therefore, the woman bled to death until she fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who presumed to remove a stone from an old man who had passed his prime, and the stone was large. Therefore he came to him and removed it with a piece of bladder. Wherefore the man died on the third day.
And indeed I had already been summoned to remove it; and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving a stipend from one of our land's dukes because of medicine; and a black eunuch was with him, who sustained a fracture near his heel; and the doctor, with his ignorance, bound up the fracture over an ulcer with pulley irons and tightened it strongly, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he cured him according to his devices. Afterwards he dismissed him for some days and ordered him not to loosen the bandage; and he stood thus until the apostema grew on his leg, and his foot, and came to destruction.
Therefore I was summoned to him; and I hastened to loosen the bandage; and peace came upon him, and he was released from his pains.
The corruption had already been confirmed in the member; and I could not prevent it.
Then, the corruption ceased to walk around in the member, until it perished.
And I saw another physician who pierced a cancerous boil; and it ulcerated for days, until the wickedness of it with its lord was manifested.
This is because when it is a pure cancer from black bile, then it is not fitting to reach it with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can bear it, so that the whole of it may be cut off.
And for that reason, according to O Filii, it is necessary for you to know that an operation is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation which is associated with safety; and the operation with which there is danger in many arrangements.
And I have already awakened in every place of this book where the operation comes that has fear and terror.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be careful of that and divide it yourself so that fools do not find a way to talk and disgrace.
Therefore, take the measure with care and protection, and take care of your weak ones with ease and firmness, and use a better way leading by God's grace to health and praiseworthy success; and let go of fearsome illnesses difficult to cure; and remove yourselves from that which makes you afraid, so that hesitation in faith and your comfort may not enter upon you.
For it remains more for your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your quantities.
Galenus has already said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat evil sickness; do not be called a bad physician.
Now, however, I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters. ¶
Chapter One.
On cautery with fire and cautery with sharp medicine, this chapter is arranged, from the head to the feet, and on the shapes of instruments and tools for cauterization, as well as everything that is necessary during the procedure. [Paragraph break]
De incisionibus generaliter: et de incisione capitae, et
Chapter Two. [Paragraph break] On general incisions and the incision of the head, [paragraph break] On section and perforation, phlebotomy and ventosities, and wounds; as well as extraction of arrows and similar objects: and all arranged in the shapes of instruments. [Paragraph break]
De cauterio cum igne et Cauterio cum medicina acuta,
Chapter Three. [Paragraph break] On cautery with fire and cautery with sharp medicine, [paragraph break] On restoration, dislocation, treatment of twisting, and similar cases: arranged from the head to the feet, and on the shapes of instruments.
Before I remember the procedure with it, however, it is necessary to say the quality of its benefits and harms, and in what constitution it should be used. [Paragraph break] Chapter One. [Paragraph break] On the benefit.
I therefore say that the discourse on the quality of the benefit and harm of cautery is a long, subtle, scientific, and hidden knowledge. [Paragraph break] Chapter One. [Paragraph break] On the benefit.
And there was much wisdom spoken about it and they disagreed on it; and for me, enough from their words is sufficient, fearing prolongation. [Paragraph break] Chapter One. [Paragraph break] On the benefit.
I therefore say that cautery applies universally to all constitutions, whether with matter or without; except for two constitutions, which are a hot constitution without matter, and a dry constitution without matter. [Paragraph break] Chapter One. [Paragraph break] On the benefit.
In a hot and dry composition, they separated from the matter. Some say that Cautery is beneficial in it. And others say the opposite, that Cautery is not appropriate in a disease which is due to heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat; it is inappropriate to cure a hot and dry disease with heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite said that Cautery is beneficial for every hot and dry disease which occurs in human bodies, because when you compare a human body and its humors, according to the constitution of fire, you find a cold body in humans.
And I myself say through his speech, because I have already seen that many times confirmed to me.
Nevertheless, it is not necessary for him to come upon it unless he who has already been tested and trained in the last chapter on Cautery, and knows the diversity of human constitutions, the disposition of diseases in themselves, their causes, their qualities, their accidents, and the duration of the diseases.
Concerning the other constitutions, there is no fear for you: and especially for cold and moist diseases. Indeed, all physicians agree on these: and they have not separated from the benefit when using Cautery for them.
And know, my children, that from the secret of curing by Cautery with fire, and the goodness of it over Cautery with medicine burning, is that fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member being cauterized; and it does not harm another part joined with it unless it causes a slight damage.
But the action of medicine burning reaches to that which is extended from the limbs; and perhaps it causes a difficult-to-heal disease in the member, and perhaps it kills it.
Fire, on account of its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not do that except when it is excessive.
We have now come to know that (something), through experience, because of the length of service and study with art, and due to its conformity to truth: and because of this I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not forbidden to this book of mine, I would bring you the secret hidden in fire and the quality of its operation in expelling bodies, which expels diseases with a philosophical explanation demonstrated, which could be understood by your minds.
And know, sons, that they themselves differ in the time when cautery is to be done, and they put a better time for it according to truth.
And I say that cautery is suitable at any time: therefore, because the damage caused by time is submerged in the benefit which is attracted by the cautery. And especially if cautery is for pain due to necessary pains, strong, sharp ones that do not tolerate delay: therefore because it is feared that from them there might occur a greater mischief than the small damage caused by time.
And let not that enter your minds, sons, that it is not thought except by the common people and foolish doctors, namely that to the ailment which is cured by cautery there is no return: and they put this as a consequence, and things are not so as they think: therefore because cautery is not unless in place of medicine, which alters the complexion, and extracts humidities which are the cause, that why pains occur.
However, cautery is superfluous over medicine because of the rapidity of its health and virtue of operation and the force of its dominion: and it is possible that the ailment returns an hour of time according to the complexion of the sick person, the location of the ailment, and the power of the ailment: and what is prepared in his body from accumulation of superfluities in it: and what comes upon him in acquisition of his body from foods and similar things from causes, unless an ailment occurs, for which cautery is administered.
Subtle ailment in a member of few superfluities and moistures, like the cautery of a tooth, due to pain, and similar to it, is possibly such that the pain does not return in it. But this happens in few cases.
However, the common saying that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is correct only to what they intend by it, because they believe that there is no healing brought about with medication nor with anything else after the fall of the cautery.
But this is contrary to their intention, and the saying that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not true, unless when we administer ways of healing for some ailments, these medications do not help; then we administer cautery at the end, and it helps; thus it comes about that cautery is the last of medicines, not in accordance with the understanding of the common people and most foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron; and they did not say this unless for the equality of gold, and the subtlety of its substance; and they said that it does not make a wound in the place of cauterizing. This is not absolutely true; for I have proven this and found that it does not do this in certain bodies without others.
And cautery with itself is good, and better than with iron, as they said. But when you heat the cautery with fire from gold, it is not shown to you when heated according to the amount that you wish, due to the redness of gold; and when it goes towards it, coldness comes about, and if you add more heating on top of this, it liquefies in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls into this mistake; and for this reason we use cautery with iron more quickly and closely among us in accordance with correctness for the operation.
And I myself have already arranged this Chapter on cautery, according to the Chapters: and I have arranged it from head to feet: so that one may alleviate what the inquirer wants from it.
Chapter II.
The cauterization here is applied to the dominion of moisture and coldness on the brain: which are two causes of scurvy, and of the flux of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and of sleepiness, and toothache, and throat pain: and universally of all illness that comes from coldness, such as paralysis, scurvy, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ones caused by these illnesses.
The method of cauterization is that you order the sick person to: evacuate his head first with a solution of medicine cleansing it for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient and his age and habit.
Then order him to make his head with a linen cloth. Then make him sit between your hands square, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Whenever therefore your middle finger comes to a place, mark that place with unburnt (material).
Then oil the Cautery Iron; of which this is its form.
Then place it on the marked unburnt place with a downward pressure, by which your hand is gradually tightened and you turn it. Then quickly lift your hand and look at the place.
If you see that a piece of bone or quantity of flesh has been burnt off the skull or forehead, then lift your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with the iron itself, or with another one if it becomes cold: until the bones that I told you appear.
Then take something from salt, and dissolve it in water, and immerse the dressing in it, and place it over the location: and leave it for three days.
Then place the dressing soaked in butter over it, and leave it until the burn is destroyed by fire. Then treat it with a four-ingredient ointment until it heals.
They have said that the more an ulcer remains open, the more pus it discharges; wherefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone; and the cautery should be held until something is burned through the thickness of the bone.
Then file off what has been burned from the bone, then treat it.
And others say that when the cautery reaches the bone, it should leave an impression on it for as long as the bone falls out like the shape of a scab: or an instrument that women use to apply to the small alphabet letter: and they believe that steam from the head will escape from this place, and the wound should be left open for a long time.
Then treat it until it becomes firm.
But these two types of cautery do not seem to me at all useful except in some people, according to the way of fear.
And leave it alone, in my opinion, it is better for his health.
The head is weakened by the solution of its own natural continuity; as we have testified in other members; and especially when the head is naturally weak and frail; and the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, and I use it: so operate with it for the benefit.
Caput III. Inhibetur ut perforatio
Chapter III. It is forbidden to perform perforation when there is chronic pain in the whole head and it persists in sickness, and uses herbs, oils, and plasters. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery as we have said, and none of those [remedies] help him, then consider. If the head of the sick person is strong by nature and not weak, and it finds very cold: then cauterize with another cautery under it scarcely. Then cauterize it on all its horns of the head with a cautery, so that the skin is not penetrated, and a quantity of bone is excavated as we have said. And cauterize it with one cautery on the back of the head at the place called vase; it is a place where a vent is placed; pour your oil into this and do not excavate the bone. The sick person finds it because of that very violent pain, and it is different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
I will say that this cautery is in its place; it must be a cautery used for the horns of the head and the back of the head more finely with a cautery used for the middle of the head.
Chapter IV.
When there is pain and swelling in the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and the head is evacuated with cleansing medicines, and further treatment is administered as I have said in the divisions of diseases, but it does not improve fully: then cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterization with a burning acute medicine, or with iron.
The cauterization with a burning acute medicine is: take one alum, peel it and cut off the ends from both sides. Then, make an incision in the time of pain with a broad lancet at the place of pain until there is a cavity under the skin where the tooth can be captured.
Insert it then into the cavity under the skin and let it be covered; then apply a suitable amount of pressure on top of it with a plaster and leave it for fifteen hours, then dissolve it and extract the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days: afterwards, place over it a hot compress submerged in butter until the place becomes pus-filled; then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do this with some burning medicines, which I have written about in the twelfth treatise, on remedies for wounds.
Cauterization with iron is as follows: Hot Iron Cautery, whose shape is as follows.
And it is called Clauilis: because its head's shape is like a nail, in which there is something hollow, and in the middle of it there is a small projection.
Then place it on the location, and hold your hand; and you turn the iron slowly with swiftness; and let the quantity that is to be burnt be equal to its thickness. And lift your hand so that the artery, which is below, is not burnt, and let there be a flow of blood.
Then immerse the cotton in salt water, and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; then immerse the cotton with butter; afterwards take care with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemicania with the tip of the second type of Cautery. Be careful not to cut the artery in this hemicania, except for an old one specifically.
[Title] On the method of cauterization in old hemicania.
When curing a hemicania, if the treatment mentioned from the previous cure and what was said in the division of diseases does not help: and you see from the illness that what we said with the first cautery or with cautery and fire is insufficient, then it is necessary to use cauterium ignis cultellare until it becomes white after marking the location of pain with a line, whose length is half a digit, or approximately so: and place your hand instead of one, and tighten it until you cut the artery, and reach the bone.
It is necessary that you beware of the hinge part of the jaw, which moves during chewing, so as not to burn the side or the nerve that moves it, thus causing a spasm.
And beware of the flow of blood from the artery which was cut. Indeed, the fear is in its cutting and especially to him who does not know what he does, and is not diligent, nor experienced; and he dismisses the operation first with it.
I will come again with a reminder of the management of bleeding from the cut artery according to its manner, and in the place of this book.
If you see from the illness that this cautery is insufficient and you see the weak body enduring cautery in the middle of the head as we said, then cure the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with a cautery having two knives. For indeed cauterization is better and more effective by this method.
Chapter on the manner of cauterizing ear pain.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with solvents, and with the remaining cure as we said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then cauterize with fire: this is called a puncture, whose form is as follows.
Then make small incisions around the entire ear, after its ignition (burning), as it is being rotated; or around both ears, if the pain is on both sides. Then burn the base of the ear slightly with the cautery after marking the spots with pitch; and let the size of the cautery be ten small points on each ear, and so forth.
Then take care that they heal.
Chapter on the mode of cauterization for tortures.
Chapter VII.
The torture that is cured with cauterization, is not other than those accidents due to phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of diseases.
And let us avoid cauterizing the species that occur from exhaustion, and from spasm of a nerve.
When you cure this species of torture with hiruses (leeches) and purges (medications to expel waste matter) and gargarisms (mouthwash), and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the weak one with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little below its time (a unit of measure), and third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the weaker side of the affected area. Since softening does not occur, unless in the healthy part that appears.
And the shape of cauterization is to cauterize the same with a straight cautery at the base of the upper edge of the ear below the corner of the head, and another at its time (the point), whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until a quantity equal to half the thickness of the skin has been burned.
And this is the shape of a cautery and it belongs to the type with a blade (small knife), whose form is as follows: but it should not be too thin, as you see; and it is necessary that the blade is in it without being excessively thick.
Then cure the location (area) with what has been previously mentioned until it heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for ancient apoplexy (sudden loss of consciousness caused by a lack of blood supply to the brain).
When ancient apoplexy occurs and your treatment does not help with what has been previously mentioned, and the patient does not have a fever, then you should cauterize him with four cauteries over all of his cornus (horns) of the skull, and a cautery in the middle of his head, as we have said, and a cautery on the back of his head, according to what has been previously mentioned; and the method of cauterization should be as previously described.
Also, it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach with a cautery; and this is more ultimate.
Then it will be cured, with what has gone before.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in a drink there are first, large amounts of hyssop, and purifying pills for the brain.
Then, shave the entire head of the sick person, and place on his head a plaster made from henna described in the plasters' treatise; apply it several times.
For that is the method of cautery: do it according to the same order as I said there.
If he is cured by this (method), it is good. If not (cured): then make three cauteries on the back of his head, which are descending from the top of his head to the lower part of his eye; place a thickness of finger between each cautery.
Then, after care for the cautery, do as before (with the purifying pills).
If you wish an additional treatment and the sick person can tolerate it: then make a cautery in the middle (of the wound or affected area). And if you want an additional treatment: then cauterize it above both horns (of the skull).
Then, care for it until he is cured: and let the cautery be anointed according to the shape mentioned before (with oil).
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter X.
It is necessary that you proceed in the mundification of the head with hyson, and with what has been said.
Then scrape the head of the sick person: afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the back part of it, and three over the spondyles of the neck.
If, however, you need the softening of the body by many of these things, and the sick person is weak and the illness is strong: then cauterize it with four cauteries over the spondyles of the back, and the last one with a cautery, until most of its skin is burned off, and let go of your hand. Then take care of him until he is well: thus cauterize Olive oil.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
A person with epilepsy should not be cauterized, unless his epilepsy is due to phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary that you clean the brain of the patient first with hirses (a type of plant used for cleansing) and with the rest of the treatment as we have said earlier: when the patient is seriously ill or is resistant to medications.
If the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medications, then gargarisma (a type of mixture) is administered and cleansing mastications are given to clean the brain before that for many days with good food provision.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize him with a single cautery on the mid-point of his head according to what has been previously described; and cauterize another place on his occiput (the back part of the skull), and over all the horns of his head with cautery. If the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with cauteries as previously described in the presence of paralysis, and apply mollification to his body over the spondylus (a type of vertebra) of the neck and dorsum (back part): and oil the cautery according to the method that has been previously described.
If the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and gross phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries that have been mentioned in the presence of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of slopes leading to melancholy and the body of the patient is damp, then give him a drink that cleans his brain, according to what has been previously mentioned earlier: then shave the head of the patient, and afterward make a well-centered turban from linen, similar to a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and a weak person sitting square should hold it from every side.
Then apply the liniment. And it is more suitable from ancient butter of sheep. And heat it above a fire with moderated temperature, as much as a finger can bear when it is inserted into it. Then evacuate it from the middle of his head in a circle, and let it out until it cools down.
Do this to the weak one once a week with the rest of his good regime, until he is cured.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small holes in it, except that you should keep your hand with the cautery; preferably use something that smells good.
For this kind of cauterization moistens the brain with its nature.
Then place on top of it a plate soaked in butter or goose fat.
Chapter on how to cauterize when descending into the eye with water.
Chapter 13.
When you are informed about the beginning of water in the eye by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and clean the weak person's head with him.
And keep him away from all moistness, and make him sit in a bath, for some days in fasting.
Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his own head. Then cauterize him on both temples with two cauteries, if there is no opening for the descent of water in both eyes at once: or from one side, if there is an opening of water in one eye: and cut with cautery all veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in width like the temples: and avoid bleeding.
If you see something from it, then immediately cut it with any medicine that is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the removal of arteries, and cutting of them, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two lastly produced cauteries.
Chapter on the ancient method of cauterizing in tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and continuous: and they are above veins and arteries that are manifestly on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is from superfluitates frigidarum phlegmaticarum: then cauterize with the same cautery as I have mentioned in the opening of water, cauterizing in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries on the neck under two bones. And if it is necessary to add, then cauterize him carefully on all sides of the eye, above the edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in nasal stench.
When you treat it (the patient), as we said in the division, and the medication does not improve: then rush and give infirmocochia for three nights; afterward shave its head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with oil-based cautery. Then cauterize it (the head) with two cauteries and a medium cautery, on top of the eyebrows slightly beneath the hairs.
And take care not to cut the artery.
And this is the form of the claw-shaped cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for softening the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye becomes softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, using this moon-shaped cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it (the head) above the eyebrows slightly in all parts with two cauteries; and they should extend from the temples; and let the length of the entire cautery be equal to the length of the eyebrows; and do not move your hand with the cautery, but rather according to the amount that is being heated, the third part of the eyelid.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn inwards and poke the eye.
The instrument (cautery) is of two kinds: either a hot cautery, or a cautery with a burning medicine.
For the hot cautery, instruct the patient to shave beforehand if he is one who cleans himself, until they (hairs) extend and become even. If (they perform the cautery) at its origin: then bind his eyes with an ointment, so that they do not move, until they (wounds) grow.
When they grow and become even, then place the head of the patient in your lap: then mark over the eyelids of his eyes with encaustic, marking that it is in the shape of a myrtle leaf; and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a warm vessel filled with egg white or slippery elm gum on the eye.
Then heat the cautery, which has this shape.
Then cauterize gradually on the marked places in many spots, until the surface of the skin becomes burned to a depth equal to the shape of a myrtle leaf in its entirety.
And the sign of your health is: if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting and hairs growing at the site of cautery.
Then withdraw your hand: and release him for three days.
Then place a warm vessel with butter on it until the eschar is removed. Then care for him with ointment until he is healed.
If some hair returns after an hour and the eyelid becomes softened: then repeat the cautery on that spot as you did before.
If the hairs are in the lower part (of the eyelid): then cauterize it, until they grow back to their natural position; and it becomes even so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
It is to be commanded to the sick person that he lets his hair grow until they become long and equal. Make a leaf shape out of paper from cloth in the form of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and unmixed lime each a weight of an ounce or about that: then grind them together with good grinding, and make it quickly so that it does not become cold. Then, from that (substance) spread it out on the cloth you have made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over one or both eyelids. Then pour the substance soaked in egg white onto a plate, and keep the head of the sick person in your arms.
Place your index finger on the medicine, and press it slightly. You move (the medicine) whenever the sick person feels the bite of the medicine, because its bite is like fire.
While it continues to feel that bite, then release the medicine and move it with your finger. When the bite subsides, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
Then consider if the eyelid rises like it is raised by heat or incision, that is good: and if not, then apply the medicine again to the same place where the medicine does not press and does not discolor, until your treatment is even and the eye contracts.
Then place the substance soaked in butter on it until the skin of the burn is removed. Then treat him with a diaphine ointment or another ointment until he is healed.
It is necessary for you to maintain the final protection during the operation so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes softened after a few days and something from the hairs falls into the eye, then apply the medicine again to that place where the eyelid is becoming soft itself, as you did at first. Then treat him until he is healed.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And know that human eyes differ in size and smallness. Therefore, let your attention be on this: and the way of rightness for that which is devoted to this art should not be hidden.
Method for cauterizing in lacrimal fistula.
When treating fistula, if the treatment as said in the classifications of diseases does not help: then it is necessary to cauterize it using this method.
Command the sick person to place his head in your armpit, and hold his head with a servant between his hands so that it is not moved or shaken along with his head.
Then place a cotton swab soaked in eye ointment or psyllium mucilage on his eye, and then apply the cautery iron of this shape (as shown below).
It is concave, like the form of a bird's feather quill at one end, with which you make a cautery iron: and if you want it to penetrate to the other end, or if you want it to point upwards in this way.
However, it is better for your use that the concave part be towards the work.
Then squeeze the fistula if it is open and drain pus from it, and excise it; and if it is not open, then open it and drain its pus.
Then place the cautery iron on it, which has been heated very strongly.
And hold your hand near the cautery iron from the eye to the nose so that your hand does not wander or the sick person moves; and you will place the cautery iron on the eyelid fat and destroy it.
If, therefore, you reach the beginning of your cautery to the bone, it will be good. And if not: then apply the cautery iron once or twice as needed; and let it go for three days.
Then place cotton with butter on it, and treat it with an ointment of antiseptic, until it heals.
If they exceed forty days and are not cured: then place sharp corrosive medicine upon it until the bone is exposed; and shave it according to what comes in its chapter.
And another method of cautery for the fistula, which some of the first called. Stretch to the place of the fistula and close it; then put in its fissure a thin cannula, that is, a thin tube, whose form is as follows. Pour over it an amount of drachmas of melted lead, and hold your hand with good retention on the cannula, so that the weak one does not move at all, lest the melted lead reaches or comes to his eye.
And it is necessary for you to place over the weak one's eye a warm infusion of eggs in milk, or in water.
For lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it with wonderful healing.
If the fistula is cured along with what we said from cautery, and with healing, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to make a nasal opening and bring the fistula back to the course of the nose, according to what comes in its own place.
[Chapter heading] On the method of cauterizing in fissures of the lips.
Often occur on the lip fissures, which are called hairs, and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures, with what I said in the division of diseases, and healing does not help, then make a small cautery iron in this shape.
And let its hollow be according to the fineness of a knife's edge.
Then place it quickly into those cracks, until the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
Then care for it with pitch until it heals.
Method of Cauterization for a Mouth Fistula.
When an abscess occurs at the root of a tooth, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and bursts; afterwards it becomes old, and the pus runs and forms a fistula: then care for it, and do not apply treatment to it, then if necessary heat cautery according to its quantity, which can be inserted into the fistula. Then insert the heated iron into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand, until the hot iron reaches its depth and its end: do this once or twice.
Then care for it afterwards, with what we said about treatment, until it is healed.
If therefore the pus separates and heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place, and remove the rotten bone according to what comes out at its head.
Chapter on Cauterizing in Softened Gums and Teeth.
When the gums become soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medicine does not help: then place the head of the sick person in your lap.
Then heat the cautery, whose shape will come later, so that you place the cannula on a tooth: and insert into it the heated cautery hastily: and hold your hand for a while until the sick person feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And remove your hand: then repeat the cautery as often as you wish.
Then let the sick person fill his mouth with water and salt, and hold it for an hour: and rinse himself.
For a moving tooth is strengthened, and softened gums are tightened, and the corruption of moisture dries up.
Method of Cauterizing Tooth Pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness or there is coldness within the tooth, or worms, and treatment with medicines does not help: then the Cautery is applied in two ways: either Cautery with butter; or Cautery with fire.
The Cautery with butter is as follows: take butter and boil it in an iron cauldron or copper. Then receive the bandage and roll it over the end of the wound. Then immerse it in melted butter and place it quickly on the painful tooth, hold it until it cools; then repeat this process several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or a bandage in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth; then place heated iron over it until the heat reaches the depth of the tooth's hollow.
The cauterization with fire is as follows: stretch out the probe made of brass or iron. Let there be something thick in his body so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the weak bone.
Then apply the cauterization tool with fire, whose shape will come; place it on that tooth and hold your hand until the tool cools.
Repeat this process several times, as pain will disappear, either on the same day or on another day.
It is necessary to fill the weak bone with good butter during the application of the cauterization and hold it for an hour; then spit it out.
And this is the form of the cauterization.
Cauterize with whichever end you wish, according to what is possible; and this is the shape of the probe.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in abscesses.
When the boil is from phlegm and cold moistures and not obedient to digestion by medicines and desires digestion quickly: then to the hollow concave Cautery, whose form is this.
Having two open extremities, so that the smoke may exit from the Cautery at one of the extremes: and place it (the cautery) heated upon the boil once, and again if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the boil.
If the boil is small: then place the Cautery according to the size of the boil.
Then leave it for three days, and place upon it a heated plaster soaked in butter, until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment until the form of the canal heals.
§ Method of cauterizing in throat hoarseness and constriction of breathing.
When moistures prevail over the canal of the lung, and especially when it is accompanied by coldness of the temperament, then the ill person should first be evacuated with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it (the affected area) in the neck at the root of the throat in a depressed location: and beware not to reach the throat with the Cautery nor the skin, unless something of its (the Cautery's) effect is needed.
Then cauterize it (the affected area) with another Cautery at the junction of the neck and shoulder blade in the last part of its end: and let the Cautery be like a nail according to the method described earlier.
Then care for it with what was mentioned before until it heals.
§ Method of cauterizing in diseases of the lung and cough.
When there is coughing and sickness of the lungs due to cold humors, and the person is not feverish, nor does he have consumption, and the sickness is old: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the clavicle in depressed, smooth, empty places. With another cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples: and let the cautery be cylindrical in shape, as was previously described.
And if your treatment is to puncture with a cautery named the Punctum, whose shape was previously described in the treatment of ear pain: and let there be punctures from thirty punctures up to another.
Then care for it with what was described before until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches in this shape. Because cauterization is applied with it, when you do it with one of three cauteries.
Chapter 27.
When the head is dislocated due to help [positioning], and it does not heal within an hour of returning from its dislocation, until that has become accustomed to return, then it should be dislocated slightly, which happens as we have already testified, at this point it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first. Then the patient lies on his back or on a healthy side. Then the skin is peeled, which is on the inside of the Titillico towards the top with your left hand fingers: and if the joint is dislocated towards the inside.
Then fire is placed in a cautery having two hollows. Its shape is as follows:
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cauterization will come with four cauteries.
And sometimes the cauterization is with a cautery having three prongs, therefore the figure of the cauterization will be that of six cauteries: and these prongs are according to the subtlety of the tendon tested.
And this is the form of the cautery having three prongs.
And sometimes an additional one is added to this method, therefore there are eight cauteries.
Then place on the cautery compressed leeks with salt. Then make the sick person be still for peace so that a limb is not moved at any time until it recovers.
And if the dislocation is upward (and this seldom happens), then cauterize it with a curved cautery on the shoulder, or with many pointed cauteries.
For joining it becomes strong and moisture is removed; the sick person recovers.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and many humidities occur in the stomach, until it separates itself from its composition and produces many catarrhs for it, and continuous methods of treatment do not help; then the sick person should lie on his back, extend his legs, and stretch out his hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery of the size of one finger under the concavity of the chest and a curved cautery on the shoulder, and two cauteries below the sides of one cautery, until a triangular figure of the cauteries appears. And extend them apart so that they do not join together, when they produce pus.
And the depth of the cautery is the size of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of cauteries be in this shape without addition. And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape: and let the cautery that is made for this purpose be one in the shape of a circle according to this shape.
The stomach is to be cauterized by touching it with this cautery that frightens it. Let there be marks on the stomach at the point where you wish to apply encaustum. Then cauterize that point with the pointed cautery. Then care for it with the remedy that preceded until it heals.
On the mode of cauterizing the epigastric region (frigidum).
When there occurs in the epigastric region (Epate) pain due to coldness and moistness, or due to excessive gas, until it exits from its natural expulsion of superfluous matter and the patient is cured with what has been said, and it does not improve in this: then it is necessary that the patient lies down on his neck, and marks with encaustum three cauteries in this shape, and the same amount below the hypocondria, where a man's elbow reaches; and let the space between each cautery be of the size of a finger; and let the cautery be of the length of the body straight; and do not press your hand tightly with the cautery.
And let the thickness of that which is burned be according to the thickness of the skin, without any addition; and let the patient stand on his feet.
If he is not standing, then let him lie down who has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the shape of the cautery.
It is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a pointed cautery when subtlety and wisdom are present in your art.
"Take care not to proceed too far in cauterization, lest the entire thickness of the skin be burnt, for the body as a whole is burnt, and it reaches the intestines; since there the skin is delicate, therefore you know this.
"On the method of cauterizing abscesses of the liver.
"When it happens that an abscess is about to burst and one wishes to know whether it is within the flesh of the liver or its membrane; if it is within the flesh of the liver, there is a dull pain without sharpness, and if it is in the membrane of the liver, with a very acute pain: and you see that the treatment has become tiring.
"Therefore the patient should lean forward on his neck. "Then mark the position of the abscess with a hot iron, and then heat an iron similar to a probe. "This is its shape (the probe). "And cauterize with the probe until the entire skin is burnt and it reaches the pus, until all the pus comes out; then treat him with care for bursting abscesses, until he is cured.
"And one should not use this method of cauterization, unless one's study extends to the art of medicine; and through whose hands these diseases often recur with experience: then he may dare to perform such an operation.
"But it is better to let it be (the abscess), in my opinion.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing pleurisy.
"The ancients said that a probe with the roots of Aristolochia should be used for cold pleurisy in this manner. "And it is to take a dry and long root of Aristolochia, one longer root which can be found among them, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then immerse her in oil and burn it in fire. Then cauterize it with a single cautery where the neck meets the shoulder, and with two small cauteries on the areas slightly below the chin, in that region under the beard.
And with two more cauteries on the area between the fifth and sixth ribs towards the back, and another cautery in the center of the chest, and another one above the stomach. And with three more cauteries from the back: one where it is between the two scapulas, and two more on both sides of the chest, with the lower cautery where it is between the two scapulas.
And you should not press your hand with the cautery, rather let it smell of skin.
And some ancient men have said that there are those who use a cautery made of iron resembling a rod and burn it inside the chest until it reaches the same place as the boil, and the pus comes out, just as we said in the case of an abscess in Epates.
But in this perforation with the cautery, there is a fear that either the sick person will die immediately or a fistula will occur in a place where healing cannot be achieved.
Chapter 32: The method of cauterizing the spleen.
When you treat the illness of the spleen, as we said in the treatment of diseases and your treatment does not work, then cauterization is to be done in this case in three ways, all of which are correct.
One is to make three or four cauteries in a row along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the cauterizations described earlier [in the book].
And let every cautery's size be that of a finger's thickness, more or less.
The method of cauterizing the liver, as we mentioned earlier, should be equal on both sides.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: let it be weak and prone onto its backside.
Another method of cauterizing is: having heated the cautery with two openings, as we mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; and peel the skin, which is directly above the spleen, where the weak arm arrives; let your peeling be along the body's width, so that the cauteries fall along the body's length.
Then introduce two openings heated very strongly, until they penetrate the skin from one side; then remove the cautery; thus there will be four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a cautery having three openings.
Then care for the cautery after you have released it, let it emit pus for many days; for this is more conducive than the other treatments that preceded it in healing.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Hydropsy.
A cautery does not fall in Hydropsy, unless it is properly applied.
When you treat a Hydropsy with the methods of treatment we mentioned earlier, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two behind the loins, and one on the chest and another on the stomach; let the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open cautery, so that it emits pus for a long time.
And it is not right to evacuate the sick from treatment after cautery, for it is necessary that two intentions are gathered towards him: and healing will hasten towards him with divine aid.
The form of the cautery for the abdomen should be clavilis; according to its preceding form. And the form of the cautery for the back should be oliuaris; according to its preceding form.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing Feet and Legs.
When they are amputated in Hydropico and filled with citrine water: it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot at the navicular bone, which is between auricular and annular; then remove your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it. Then remove your hand. Do not go back to it at all.
For citrine water will flow out, and let the cautery be in this form.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be at the end of a cultellar cautery throughout the entire leg; and let the cautery be along the length of the leg, one below the knee, and the other lower than that, about half the length of the leg. And over the whole hip two cauteries; and leave the open cautery without treatment for a long time: until some water flows out of it; then cure it with what we have said.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing for the solution of the abdomen.
Chapter XXXV.
When the solution of the belly becomes loose due to cold and moistness, until it weakens the powers retained and digestive, which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with methods of treatment, but it does not heal: and you see a person enduring an excessive force of heat, then cauterize him with a large cautery on his own stomach, according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle claw-shaped cautery: and a cautery over alum on top of blisters large or with two cauteries.
If you see excessive moisture and a person enduring it, then cauterize him with a cautery on his chest (pecten) and on the whole hip: and perhaps you may add two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach.
For indeed, this treatment is progressing, of which the benefit does not wander off.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When in the anus there are many old hemorrhoids or one, and they are made of thick fluids, cold or corrupt moistures, and they are treated with what we have said before, but treatment does not improve: then cauterize them with three cauteries on the lower part of the loin under the flank slightly triangularly, and with a cautery under the navel as if two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold and food is not digested, and you see his face becoming pale: then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, according to what has preceded: and with a cautery on his liver (Epar), and another one on his spleen (Splenem), with a cautery claw-shaped (clauili): and leave the open cautery for some time: then treat him until he is healed.
Head XXXVII.
When you excise althelul (a type of tumor or growth), then apply a burning cautery similar to a rod. Then introduce the burning (cautery) into the excised althelul; and withdraw your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows; do this once or twice.
If there are many althelul (tumors or growths), then cauterize each one with a separate cautery as we have described. Then take care of them, applying to them the remedy that is used for them until they heal.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery on alcatin (a type of stone), this is more beneficial for the treatment.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Head XXXVIII.
When the sick person does not obey the incision and operation as we have described in its place, and is afraid of it, perhaps he will heal with a cautery.
If a fistula occurs and discharges pus and becomes corrupt, cure it. It is necessary to test it as it should be, with a probe of subtle material. Then find out the depth of it by means of a probe.
Then heat the cautery which is like a rod. Then insert yourself heated (into) that fistula and find out the depth to which the probe has penetrated.
Then repeatedly apply the cautery to it until all the corrupt bodies are burnt up, once, twice, or thrice, according to the necessity of your case.
And be careful not to burn the nerve or the large vein (if it is there); or if the fistula opens up to the bladder or the intestine, then be careful of these places altogether.
And do not make that (action), unless when the fistula is in a fleshy place; and consider that it does not penetrate.
Then care for the place until it has healed.
If, however, the place is sealed and the materials are cut off from it and remain for a long time; then you will know that it has healed completely.
If the materials do not fall off from it, then you will know that it is penetrating, or that a rotten bone is at a deeper part of it, or something like that; whose memory will come back to its place.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing kidneys.
When pain in the kidneys occurs from cold or from thick wind, and it is weakened by this disease of the body, then it is necessary to cauterize it above the flank on both kidneys, with a cautery over the entire kidney with a cautery claw, whose precedent has been remembered.
And perhaps we cauterize it again in the same flank. Therefore, three white lines will come. Thus, there will be more relief in the latter (stage).
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture, so that it does not hold urine properly, then cauterize it in the lower part of the abdomen below the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, with a cautery on one side from the right side of the abdomen and another on the left side: let the length of this cauterization be according to the size of the knuckle of the thumb: and cauterize it with a lower back cautery, or two cauteries if necessary: and let the preceding cautery be as that of the claw.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the uterus.
When coldness and moistness occur in the Matrix (womb), and it is forbidden for conception because of this, and its menstrua are corrupted, and the summoning of them is delayed, and there is pain at their approach, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cautery below on the back, or with two cauteries: and let the cautery be a claw.
The Method of Cauterizing the Womb in Dislocation.
When the mucous humors flow out to the perineum of the womb and become the cause of its displacement from its place; and the sign of this is that one leg is extended over the other when they are brought together: and a gap or void is found in the place of dislocation.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the weak spot above the perineum of the womb with a similar cautery in a circle; after you have marked the circumference of the perineum with hot iron, as is customary: and that the perineum falls into the middle of the circle.
If this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize it with three cauteries, using a large lard-caustery; and the depth of the cautery should be in proportion to the thickness of the skin.
Then take care of it until it heals.
The Method of Cauterizing for Sciatica.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and its cause is coldness and moistness: and the sick one is treated as mentioned before, but it does not improve, then that should be allowed to heal by itself: then it is necessary that you dissolve the sick person from thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills, and similar ones. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization is according to two modes: either cauterization with medicines applied, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with fire, is according to many modes.
One of these modes is that you cauterize over the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries in this manner. And make their depth good or bad. And let the space between each cautery be of the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be covered with oil.
Sometimes however, a cauterization takes place in the middle of the ankle joint itself. Therefore there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a ring, whose shape preceded in the ankle joint dislocation, one: so that the ring encompasses the entire ankle.
And burn off the thickness of the skin entirely.
This is the method of cauterization in sciatica, when the pain is attached to the ankle itself and does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, at the place where the sick one indicates, in which there is pain, and your cautery four fingers on the outer part of the shin: and let the cautery be a knife-shaped one.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the sick person indicates that the pain extends almost to the toes of the foot, then cauterize it there where he indicates with a cautery, with one, two, or four, or more, if necessary.
If he indicates that the pain is turned towards the leg below the knee, then cauterize it there with a one-edged cautery.
And be careful in every cauterization of yours, that you do not burn the nerve or the great artery, and attract harm to it through this, or contracture.
And I myself have seen one and another, from those who cauterized above the ankle, and burned too much in the cauterization, and the leg became swollen until the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated completely, and the whole foot was corrupted: then the abdomen burst open, and death followed this.
If the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And some wise men said in cauterizing the ankle, that this is the method of the cautery. Make a small crucible of iron, whose diameter is half the size of the palm: and it should be at its mouth according to the thickness of the nut of a thumb or less: and inside this small crucible there should be a third small crucible.
And let the space that is between every crucible be as much as the size of a knuckle: and let the crucibles be open from two sides: and let their height be like a knuckle, or two knuckles: and make handles for them from iron appropriately placed in the crucibles.
Then it is heated in the fire until it turns red and throws sparks: then it should be placed on a potsherd of the ankle, with the sick person lying down on his healthy side. Cauterize it therefore with three round cauteries at one time.
Then let him go for three days. Afterwards pack it with butter and let the open wound heal for many days. Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis says, we have not used this kind of cautery enough, because of the horror of its appearance; and therefore, because few are found who can bear to look upon it.
Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauterizations for him who can endure it and finds a place for it.
The cautery with medicines driving it is, you shall make two small bags containing a perforated armillary, from which descends the key of its door made of bronze or iron, as long as the height of the wall; and on the height of these there should be two knots, or as if they themselves.
And the space that is between the two should be of the thickness of a finger and they should be open from below and above; and it should hold each other according to this form.
Then place it on a box with an anchor lying upon the sick side. And press your hand much upon the box with the anchor. Then pour water between the two circles which has been heated a little by fire and hold it as much as an hour's time; and let the sick bear the biting of it and its burning, for he himself finds the biting like that of fire, until the biting ceases.
Then wash your hand with the tool and clean the anchor completely with warm water and sweet water; then let it go for three days.
And place butter upon it until the blackness of burning is removed; and let it go for some days, and pus will run out from it. The remedy is at last in aid.
Then apply a cure with ointments until it heals.
If the pain spreads to the hip or leg: make a splint for him in such a way that it contains water, as you did in the case of the broken bone equally.
And this is the method of hot water: I have already written about it in the treatise on rectifying remedies. Take two parts of lime and unburnt plaster, grind each separately; put them in a new pot whose lower part is pierced with a small hole, according to the amount that will be added to the radius; place another earthenware pot underneath; pour over it lime and plaster from sweet water, so that both are submerged by about a finger; press them down with your hand; let go of the pot, until the sharp water goes down to the bottom of the earthenware pot.
Then gather that water entirely, and pour it over another mortar; and grind, until it returns.
For that very reason it will then be strong and highly sharp, which is administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of other members. Because it makes the action of fire itself.
And among the medicines, with which they are cauterized (or burnt), such as tartar emetic, also strychnine, and almond oil with soap, in such a way that both are mixed together.
And indeed, Galen relates the story of a certain man from the ancient times, who was cured of the pain in the anus and the sciatic vein; and he greatly praised his cure. And he said that it did not require any other treatment, and that he was cured from the pain in one application, until he reported that perhaps he himself entered the bath, and came out already healthy.
And it is to be taken from green seitarag; and if green seitarag is not found, dry one should be taken, recently; and it should be ground very much with a little fat, and placed over the anus, where there is pain, or thigh, or hip; and it should be tied, and allowed to stay for three hours, or until the sick person feels the relaxation of the burning sensation. Then introduce it into the bath.
When his body becomes hot, introduce it onto a bed. For the pain subsides, and he is cured.
And know that no one should use a cautery with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides himself said that the feces of goats, when with it the sciatic vein is cauterized, should be added to it; and a cautery is made according to this method. Take flax (or linen), immerse it in old oil, and place it over the deep place which is between the big toe of the foot and the sole, and is closer to the sole.
Then take dried goat droppings, heat it over fire until it becomes charcoal.
Place it on the flax and let it burn out (completely). Then do this again. Do not cease to do that until sensation arrives through the mediation up to the ankle, and the pain stops.
And this method of cauterization is called Vaccinum cauterization (or branding).
Chapter on cauterization for back pain.
Whenever there is back pain due to various causes such as fall, blow, excessive evacuation, and similar conditions, due to the infiltration of cold and moist matter; cauterization only applies in this specific case, which is done by the infiltration of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation (bowel movement) of the sick person with foul-smelling pills and similar things, three lines should be drawn on the back where there is pain, following the width of the palm; after marking each line with encaustic in five cauterizations or more depending on the quantity that comes from the strength of the patient; and make cauterization by cauterization puncture.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations along with the medial claw shape.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for humpback (kyphosis).
This illness often occurs in small children.
The sign of its beginning in children is that it happens above them with a constriction during inspiration at elevation, and you find it at the bottom of the spine of the back and the nodes of this part, which has already begun to appear over the other spines.
When you see it and wish to treat it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is in the shape of a circle.
The cautery should catch the entire spine part equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery, do two or three lines, and let the points be close together.
Then care for the place until it heals as we have said.
And beware not to administer the cautery on a hump that is formed from a spasm of the nerve.
Chapter on Cauterization in Gout and Joint Pain.
When the pains of joints are caused by cold wetness that is poured out to any part of the body, then when pain occurs in the feet, according to medical custom, it should be called gout properly.
When gout caused by cold is being treated with methods of treatment and the pains do not subside, then cauterization removes them.
And it is that you should cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the foot, with many cauteries: and let the cautery be Olive Oil.
And if you need to puncture the sole of the foot, then do it with a pointed cautery. If the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and it often happens this way, then cauterize it over all the knee with three or four cauteries from every side, with the same cautery of Claw.
If more than one are necessary for you with this cautery, then cauterize it. Do not immerse your hand in the cautery, rather let it be about the thickness of the skin.
If the pains rise to the knees and back, then administer what was said about cautery in its own chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then pierce around the circumference of the nails, as two lines are rolled up.
If pain remains in the fingers, then pierce them all, over every knuckle and over the back of the hand.
If pains rise after days to elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both from all sides.
And do not evacuate the weak from good management, from receiving medicine. For if there is good management and phlegm is evacuated, it will be cured with the help of God with this cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groins and the intestine or yarn goes down to the testicle, and it is close by: then one must order that the weak person should abstain from food on his day. And let him use laxatives so that stool comes out of his stomach.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and order him to hold his breath until the yarn comes out or the intestine appears.
Then bring him back with your fingers, and mark with a hot iron under the rupture on the back of the hand with a sign whose end is similar to half a circle above the body.
Then heat the iron cautery in this form until it becomes white and throw small pieces of charcoal onto it. Then reduce the intestine, or the hernia to its hollow. Then place the attendant's hand over the location so that the intestine does not come out: and you have already opened between the limbs of the sick person, and placed a retractor under it, and another serving on his limbs, and another on his chest who holds the hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark, with your hand holding the cautery upright. And hold it until you follow the bone with it; or repeat with another tool if you are not able to follow it to the bone in the first instance.
And be careful to observe the exit of the intestine during your cauterization, lest you burn it and bring harm upon the sick person or great misfortune occur.
And know that when you do not follow the bone with the cautery, the operation is of no benefit.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate, according to their measure.
Then take care with the remaining ointments until he is healed.
And let the sick person lie on his back for forty days until the wound is healed.
And it is necessary to give him nourishment for the duration of his treatment, which will soften his stomach, lest the intestine come out during attempts and evacuations.
Then when he wishes to rise after forty days, then administer a well-made ligament and let him hold it for another forty days.
And he should be diminished in labor, and in food and drink intake, and in violent speech.
For when he is subjected to this regime, he will heal completely.
And I shall speak of the treatment for hernias with incision in its own chapter.
When hernias occur in the remaining abdomen, and they are beginning and wish to be stopped, then cauterize the hernia with a round cautery according to its size; and let that which is burned be as the third part of it from then on. Then take care of yourself, as I have said, and do not add to it.
And some first ones said: that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautionery, in this shape.
After it is signed with hot iron, and a line is placed that runs through the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line towards below. And place your hand in the middle with a nail-like cautionery.
But the first cautionery is easier and better.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing for pain due to rupture or trauma.
Chapter 48.
When pain occurs in some limbs due to rupture or trauma and the pain persists for a long time and there is no cure with medicine, then it is necessary to be cauterized with a cautionery of puncture point.
And the cautionery of all members should be according to its size and its smallness, and its weakness, and its power, and the location of torsion, and pain from it.
If he is cured by the first cautionery, it is good. If not: then apply another cautionery on top of it.
Because by the custom of these pains they are changed from one member to another that is closer to it. Therefore you should follow them with cautionery until the weak one is cured.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing for leprosy.
The leprous, however, are sometimes helped by great cautionery. And especially the species of leprosy that comes from rottenness of phlegm and melancholy: when it is considered to cauterize it itself.
If leprosy is beginning and it has been treated with what was said in the division, and it does not decrease nor stop: and fear that corruption will spread over the entire complexion of it: then cauterize him on top of his head with five cautioneries: one in the middle of the head known, and the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hairline, and two above the two horns, and one behind the nuchal bone.
Place your thumb lightly on the cautery until it makes a small impression on the bone, and the cortex should dislocate: to relieve the expiration of large vapors from it, and cauterize also over the spleen as previously described.
If however, the leprosy has already spread over the sick person and is clearly visible: then it is necessary to cauterize with those cauteries that were mentioned earlier in the head, and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheekbones, and with two cauteries on both shoulder blades, and six on the hip bones, and one large one over alhahosos near the tail and one on it, in the same almeidati: and with two on the ankles: namely, on each ankle with one, and with two on the thighs, and two on the upper arms, and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of the chest, and cauterize it over all the joints of his fingers of both hands and feet, and cauterize over every calcaneum of his feet, and burn the palms of his hands.
Be careful with the nerves that are above the last calcaneus to avoid burning them.
And sometimes the cautery is applied on the forehead, and another on the stomach, and another on the ebar.
And know that, the more you apply the cautery, the greater the benefit and the stronger it becomes.
And know that, the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery as healthy people do; this is because his body has already become numb.
It is necessary that the cauteries be of different sizes and shapes according to the members and joints; this is based on the types of iron instruments as previously described.
Then, prepare a cautery from wheat flour and honey, and for the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
Method of Cauterization in Sleep.
When a part of the body is numbed (stupet) and treated with medicines, oils, plasters, but does not heal, then cauterize the affected part using cauteries, according to the size of the member or its diminished state.
And let your cautery penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin. Then take care of it with an ointment until it heals.
And when cauterization is performed for certain numbness that occurs in the hand and foot, in the spine at the nerve exit point moving that limb; and the numbness is removed.
But do not presume to perform it (cauterization) on that unless the one who knows about the structure of the body and the course of nerves moving the body is wise.
Chapter LXI.
When Albaraz (a type of wound?) becomes old and does not receive anything from the arts of medicine; then cauterize it with a deep cautery slightly, according to the thickness of the skin, until the white disappears and its color changes.
Then take care of it with wheat flour and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa (a type of fern), and blood of a dove and of a heron; each part should be equal; mix all these together, spread them on a cloth, and let them adhere to the location until it heals.
Chapter on Cauterization for Cancer.
When cancer is beginning, and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautionery around its circumference, as it revolves.
The wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
I, however, do not find that to be so: because I fear that it will burn, and I have already seen that happen several times.
It is truer, however, to cauterize it around its circumference with a circle, as we have said; or with many cauteries.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Adubelati.
Chapter LIII: When someone has Adubelati that is slow to mature, either because of excessive production or due to weakness from old age and scant blood supply, or because one wishes to hasten the maturation of Adubelati, then cauterize it around its circumference with many small cauteries by puncturing. Then let it be. For it will hasten when matured.
If you wish to perforate it with cautionery, then ignite the cautionery, whose form is as follows:
Place it [the instrument] in the middle of Adubelati, until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery that follows be weakened, so that its course may be purified.
Then take care of it until it heals.
Chapter on the mode of cauterizing in a corrosive disease.
Chapter LIV [The forty-fourth chapter].
A corrosion is not anything except corruption walking in a limb and consuming it, just as fire eats dry wood.
If therefore you see a corrosion in a place that can bear a cautery with fire, then apply much cautery, small and large nails, according to what suits the place where the corrosion is located.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate the entire corruption and nothing remains of it deep within.
Then let it be for three days and place finely ground sulfur with oil on the cauterized places until all scabs and all corruption are eradicated.
Then care for it with ointments that promote flesh growth.
If therefore you see that after three days flesh is born in a healthy way, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery on what remains from the corrupted places.
A corrosion is sometimes treated with an acidic medication. The corrosion itself arises where the cautery was.
However, a cautery with fire is more effective; and I myself have said that the cauterization of it with an acidic medication is used in division; so take it whenever you need it there.
Chapter on the mode of cauterizing in nails and warts.
Chapter LV [The forty-fifth chapter].
This illness often occurs in the lower parts of the feet and it is a thick, filtered matter that injures the foot.
The cautery is indeed of two kinds: the cautery with fire, and the cautery with hot water.
As for the type with fire, it should be made similar to a bird's talon in shape: which is to be made of iron, according to its size that contains a nail from all sides; and it should be fine at the edges.
Then place the heated [tool] on the nail. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the nail, until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail; and leave it for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply ointment with forest herbs, crushed with salt; and leave the ointment on it at night. It will be rooted out by its roots.
Then care for the place with a gentle ointment until it heals.
If they are not converted and occur frequently on the surface of the body, particularly in hands and feet: then administer cauterization with hot water; and it is to be had that you take a cannula made of copper, iron or bird's feather; and place it on the nail, or althea. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the cannula; hold your hand and turn it with pressure for a short time, so that the tip of the cannula is pressed onto the root of the nail, and let the hot water find its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and wait briefly for the weak one over the bite of the hot water for an hour.
Then leave it, for the nail will be rooted out with its roots.
Thus do this one after another, until you come to all who are on the body.
Then care for them when they have been rooted out, with that which generates flesh from ointments.
Method of Cauterization During a Shake/Tremor.
If a tremor occurs from cold in the nerve or from quartan fever or another cause, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the dorsal vertebrae, and between each vertebra with a cautery, and in its chest with a cautery, and over its stomach with a cautery.
The tremor is quieted when the cautery is applied to oil, and health from cold illness hastens.
Method of Cauterization of Albathir.
Si accidit alicui Tremor ex frigore in ner
Sometimes the foul Albathir are expelled from the body, that is, pustules which are made from corrupted gross matter.
Therefore, when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize over every head of the pustule with a subtle cautery and myrtle wood whose tip is burned with fire. Or with the root of the long aristolochia. Or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized with a small piece of raw meat, at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not increased; and superfluity is broken causing them to be expelled, and they heal from them.
However, it must be done after the evacuation with phlebotomy.
Method of Cauterization for Bleeding from an Artery in a Wound.
Often bleeding from an artery occurs which is cut near the wound, which happens externally, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar to them; and it is difficult to separate it.
When therefore it happens to someone, then hurry with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place your index finger upon it; and bind it tightly, until the blood is held under your finger, and nothing escapes from there.
Then place a small oil lamp cautery on fire, and many in number; and blow upon them until they are very hot.
Then take one, either small or large, according to the wound and place where the artery is broken, and place the cautery upon the vein after you remove your finger; and hold the cautery until the blood is cut off.
If it is expelled when you remove your finger from the opening of the artery, and extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery quickly, from those which are prepared in the fire.
Therefore do not cease to do that with one after another until the blood is cut off.
And be careful, lest you burn the nerve which is there, and other harm befall the weak patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to cut it; especially since the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we said. Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is drawn out, its extremities contract and the blood is cut off. Or it is tied with a strong thread ligature. Or medicines are placed upon it of the kind that are for cutting off blood, and it is bound with a tight tourniquet.
He who administers the amputation with a ligament and tourniquet, or with things burning, and similar ones, does not help him completely, unless rarely.
If it happens to someone and the physician is not present nor medicine: then let him begin with the positioning of the index finger over the opening of the vein as we have mentioned, and tightly constricting it until the blood is besieged from above the wound, and upon the artery. And the finger should not be removed, above it with cold water of intense coldness always, until the blood freezes, swells, and is severed.
And meanwhile he should consider in him what is needed from a cautery, or medicine.
Chapter on Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in wounds, and similar things.
We have already said in Chapter One that every ailment in which fire cautery and burning medicine are appropriate, and its occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cautery.
And there I placed chapters from the head to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter on the same path: so that what is sought may be relieved for the one seeking it.
And before I begin that, sons, you should learn what is there in this chapter due to the fear of what was in Chapter One on cautery.
And because of that, there should be greater caution in it, since in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation often falls with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision on an abscess, or the exit of pus, or treatment of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision on a stone, and similar things: from all of these things is associated tremor, fear, and death occurs in many of them.
And I warn you, let it not fall upon you that which has hesitation, for sometimes such things in this art fall upon men as the ways of their weaknesses. For there is one who gets angry with his sickness, and death is easy for him; because of the vehemence he finds from his weakness and the length of his wickedness. And when sickness comes from fear, it indicates death.
And there is one who gives you potions, and promises health, but his sickness is deadly.
Therefore it is not appropriate for you to agree to him who comes to you from those whose ways are such. Let your caution be greater than greed and greediness. And do not presume about anything from it unless after certain knowledge, which confirms among you a praiseworthy outcome for what it has reached.
And use in the cure of all your sick ones, prediction and indication about it regarding which suit health.
For in that is assistance to you for the acquisition of fame, glory, memory, and praise.
God will inspire you, His children, with knowledge; do not let Him take away from you direction and inspiration; for that is in His hand.
And I myself have arranged this chapter by dividing it into sections according to what preceded in the chapter on Cautery, from the neck to the feet; so that you may be relieved of what is sought from it, and what is needed.
Chapter: On the treatment of water accumulating in children's heads.
Chapter I.
Know that this illness frequently occurs in children during childbirth, or when the midwife squeezes the child's head without due care.
And sometimes it also happens for reasons hidden and unknown to us.
And indeed I have never seen this illness in anyone other than children, and death has come swiftly to every one of them whom I saw; for that reason it seemed to me advisable to abandon the operation.
And I myself have seen a child whose head was full of water and whose head swelled every day until it could no longer sit up on its own due to the size of its head; furthermore, the moisture increased until he died.
This swelling, indeed, either occurs between skin and bone, or it occurs beneath the bone at the forehead.
And the operation in this case, if there is swelling between skin and bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a single incision in the middle of the head, extending as far as two finger-widths; the length of the incision should be such that the moisture can drain away.
And this is the form of the spatula.
If, however, the swelling has increased more, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions according to this shape.
If the swelling is beneath the bone and there are signs that the skull is separated from all sides and water collects when you press it with your hand, and this cannot be hidden from you; then make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method.
And after making the incision, remove all the moisture. Then tie up the incisions with strips of cloth and wool. Then apply it with wine and oil for five days.
Then untie the bandage, and care for the wound with plasters and ointments.
And thou shalt not omit to tie head with equality. Feed the sick man with all dry food of scant moisture until his limb is strengthened and healed.
Another method of incision is to consider where it appears the abscess's size is, and the collection of water.
Since sometimes it is more so in the back part or forehead, right or left.
Therefore climb with the incision where it appears to you that there is an abscess and filling of water, and cut through it as much as possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut an artery, and there be a flow of blood, and the sick person dies from the flow with evacuation of moisture.
[Section Title: Incision of Arteries After Ears]
[Chapter 2.]
When catarrhs happen to someone for the eyes or chest and it has not been treated with remedies, then more so is the last treatment in that, incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you wish to cut them, let the sick person shave his head first. Then scrape the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear. Then let the sick person tie his neck with any cloth he has. Then consider where the vein beats. And the places of each are located behind the ears and depressed, and they rarely hide themselves unless in some men.
Then mark with pitch both, and cut one on each side with a scalpel, the incision reaching to the bone, and make it broad enough to match the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert a scalpel under the artery and cut it upwards with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be like two fingers joined together.
When a vein is cut, blood gushes out with pulsating flow, which jumps into the interior with frequent leap.
But if the artery is not apparent to the senses, then it is necessary that measurements be made from the ear three fingerbreadths in space. Then mark with wax and bind up to the bone.
And that which is necessary to draw from blood is VI ounces, and perhaps you will draw more or less from it. Cut the whole thing according to its size that appears to you from the strength of the weak and the filling of the artery.
Then look at the wound. If anything remains at the bone from the flesh, then cut it off, so that a hot abscess does not occur; then bind up the wound with linen strips.
Then take care of him with ointment until he is healed.
Chapter on the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When an old hemicrania or acute catarrh occurs due to acid moistures and heat in the temples, or an old scald, violent and similar to these; and it is treated with methods of treatment for illness, but it does not help: then we have experience in dealing with such illnesses by extracting arteries from the temples, or cauterizing them, as we have said.
And the method of operation for extracting them is to shave the sick person's hair in the temples and stretch out the skin over the appearing artery in the temple. Itself is shown to you by its pulse and is rarely hidden except in a few men or due to violent cold.
If it is hidden from you, then the sick person should bind his head with any cloth of his own; then rub the place with a rough cloth. If an abscess is present, let it be opened with hot water until a clear appearance appears to you. Then take the lancet which I previously prepared. Then scrape the skin with it easily until you reach the artery. Then thrust a hook into it and extract it upward until you extract it from the skin, and let it come out from all sides through the layers beneath it.
If, however, the artery is delicate: then roll it up with the tip of the hook. Then make an incision in that place according to its size, where the ends extend and contract, and avoid bleeding. For if it is not incised, and if it is not separated, blood will not rise up deeply.
Then let six ounces of blood out, until the third [point].
If the artery is large: then it should be tied in two places with strong double thread or silk, or with cords of alum, so that putrefaction does not approach it before the wound is consolidated, and bleeding does not occur.
Then make an incision in the excess that is between two bindings. Do this at that hour, or another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery until the bone, with a knife-shaped cautery, until the ends of it are cut, and it remains in place for this same operation.
And this is better work, unless if one has a fever, or weakened by heat treatment. Because the cautery is from those things that help to end moistures. Therefore it is better as a remedy.
And after the extraction of arteries, it should be filled with cooked old linen, and powdered fly-ash should be placed on top of it.
And after solution (of a wound), it is to be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with linen until it heals.
If during the operation, bleeding occurs from an artery, then hurry to cut it with a cauterizing iron, or fill the place with wax: and tighten your hand until the blood stops flowing. If there is nothing present (to use), then place your finger on the location until the blood freezes. And cover the location with water of intense coldness until the sharpness subsides, and tie it as necessary.
And because the artery that is lighter and easier to extract is to be cauterized with this iron having two blades: and let the sharpness of the two blades be similar to a razor's edge. However, they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they are as sharp as two knives, coldness is required for both of them: and they do not cut flesh quickly. Since therefore they have a certain thickness, heat is required within them, and the flesh is cut quickly: when this work needs to be done, it is better than any other operation, and easier, and more convenient.
And this is the shape of the iron.
And the space between the two blades should be of the thickness of a finger, after you have marked two places with hot iron: and place both very hot ones, until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between its ends can be removed. Because this iron does not harden completely.
Chapter IV.
Chapter on the care of chronic and recurring tear ducts from the eyes.
When tears are persistent and flow from the veins on the exterior of the skull of the head: and no treatment medicine is applied to them with medicines, and the face of the sick person turns red, and one feels a walking sensation in the forehead, as with the movement of ants: and the eyes are weakened, moist, so that the hairs have already corroded with corruption: and the eyelids are heated from the acuteness of tears: then the ancients resorted to this treatment for them, and they named it the cure, with a knife.
And it is, to instruct the sick one to shave the hairs that are on his forehead. Then make three cuts in the forehead, each one equal in length to the forehead: and the length of the cut should be about two fingers, and the first one should be at the middle of the forehead, and the second one slightly lower towards the movement of the arms, and the third on the other side: and avoid cutting the arteries that are on the two sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the space of all the cuts be the length of three connected fingers: and have a piece of prepared sponge or dried cloth with you, which you can use to absorb the blood.
Then insert into it two pointed ends of a splint whose following shape is as follows: From the incision on the side of the temple, up to the second incision: and scrape off with it all the skin that is between the two cuts, which is above the eye. Then do the same from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then remove the splint and insert into the first incision another tool called a sharp scalpel, with one edge blunt, not sharp on the other side. And this is its form.
And place the sharp side towards the skin attached flesh and the blunt side towards the bone; and push it so that it reaches the mid-fissure; and cut along with it all vessels descending from the head to the eyes, except for the incision which should be continued until that which appears from the skin.
Then make it in the mid-fissure up to another fissure.
And when an equal amount of blood flows out, squeeze the places from the clotted blood vessels.
Then place linen cloth from old cooking on all the fissures and put above them boiled chickpeas soaked in wine, oil or vinegar. And ensure that no hot abscess occurs.
And on the third day, dissolve the ligament and administer a large amount of infusion with warm water. Then treat it with ointment of Basilicon and others that heal wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
Chapter on the treatment of sharp tears and catarrh in the eyes from internal parts of the head.
When someone experiences sharp and frequent catarrh or tears, the eyes appear weakened, small, and their sight is already impaired; the eyelids are ulcerated, hairs fall out and there is a strong pain deep in the head that causes sneezing: then take from these symptoms those materials and catarrh which do not come unless from multiple veins.
A better treatment for them is this. And you shall order a sick person to shave their forehead. Then make one incision in the middle of the forehead, or slightly off-center to the side by a certain width, starting from the left temple and ending at the right temple; and let the incision go as deep as the bone; and move your hand away from the temples that move during chewing until when the bone is exposed; then dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate with a scalpel or scissors from the two lips of the incision, made previously with a hot iron or with linen strips. Then tie it on top with thread; and soak the thread in wine and oil to prevent a hot abscess from forming.
And when you release it and see that a hot abscess is starting to decrease, then it is necessary to break the bone, until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then treat the wound with a drying agent that promotes tissue growth; as if you were taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of pitch, prepare an ointment from it and apply it to these wounds to promote tissue growth.
Chapter VI.
Chapter on treating a wound that affects the ear.
Every case that affects the ear falls into four categories: a mineral stone, similar to a stone such as iron and glass; or from plants like chickpeas and beans; or liquid such as water, vinegar, and similar substances; or of animal origin.
When a stone falls into the ear, or one of its kind that does not grow within the ear and cannot be added, expose only the ear; if you see a stone, then pour some oil or sesame into the ear. Then administer the extraction, and make it sneeze with powdered mixture, and apply oil in both nostrils at the onset of sneezing; when you place ear fragments in cotton or wool, stretch the ear upward.
This sentence is repeated many times [with this care].
If it does not come out, then administer the extraction with Gestifull (Pizzighelli's Subtle). Its shape is as follows.
Therefore if it comes out with Gestifull, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction with a small subtle hook.
If it still does not come out through that [method], then make a cannula from brass and insert the end of the cannula into the ear hole deeply; apply what is in the tip of the cannula with softened beeswax mixed with oil, so that the airway is only for the cannula; then draw it out with your strong suction.
This sentence is repeated many times [with what I have said]. If it still does not come out this way: then take some helkalimbat or water (prepared gluten), which birds are captured with; place a small amount of it on the end of a rod after you have centered the cotton properly placed over it; then insert it into the ear canal with ease, after you have straightened the ear from moisture.
If it still does not come out with everything I have said, then hurry to cut [it], before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
The method of cutting [it] is, that the bloodletter first uses a lancet on the head; and draw out from him according to the bloodletting's strength. Then make the patient sit between your hands, turn the ear upward, and make a small incision at the base of the ear in the fatty area depressed there; let the incision be shaped like the moon until you reach the stone; then remove it with what is possible for you using your instruments.
Then from your hour, seal and care for the fissure until it heals.
If something falling into the ear is from one kind of grains that grow and swell, then administer its removal.
But if it does not obey you for extraction, then take a thin, delicate spatula in this shape.
And administer with it the removal of that kind of grain falling into the ear, and do not do this when you think that the grain is already moistened by the steam of the ear, until you place many fragments on it: then remove it with uncinus or with a delicate probe or with suction, as we said, for its extraction is relieved.
In the water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the sick person to sneeze with its nose blocked at first: and already the ear has filled up with some hot water; and there lies on top of it the ear where the water is. If therefore it comes out through that (ear canal), it is good.
And if not: then take many small, soft stones, about the length of a finger, and heat them slightly with fire; and let the sick person introduce one from these into the ear canal of his own: and he should spit on one foot from that part, and hit with another stone the stone that is in the ear. Therefore, let him not cease to do this with stones and stones until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out so that you take with a sponge or a reed one end, and insert into the ear its other end; and heat the other end with fire until it is burned as much as possible. Then take another reed and do the same thing many times until all the water comes out; and remove it with a cannula as described above with the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into it (the wound), if it is a small body such as a louse, care for it as I said in division.
If it is of a large body, which appears to the sense: then administer its extraction with tweezers and unciform instruments; and its removal is easier for all who are held in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you care for it with what I said in division and in the treatment of distillations, and your care does not help: then it is necessary that you look at the ear in sunlight. If therefore something appears from the worms (there), then extract it with tweezers or with delicate unciform instruments.
If however nothing appears from there, then take a cannula, of which this is the shape (described as), narrow at the bottom and wide at the top; and insert its fine end into the ear according to the quantity that the weak one can tolerate; then suck it with strong suction. Do this repeatedly until all the worms come out.
If they do not obey you to go out, then encircle them with the point of a cannula with wax, as I said in the stone (chapter).
If they do not come out with what I said, then administer the distillations that have already been experienced by the ancients in the elimination of worms; and you will find this in the treatment of distillations.
And let your flow (of oil or medicine) be which you pour into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or bronze, narrow below, in which there is a small opening, wide above.
Therefore let the thing that pushes (in the concave part of the cannula) be made of bronze well-made. And if you wish, take radish, and insert it into the affected ear with a suitable lining; then pour oil, or vinegar, or whatever medicine you prefer into the tube; and let it be in the ear; then introduce the heated radish onto the top of it, and press it gently with your hand until the oil is pushed out into the hollow part of the ear, and the sick person feels it; and what is poured into the ear should already be slightly warm; beware that nothing cold which distills into it is very strong; for medicine does not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of an obstruction in the Ear.
Sometimes infants are born from their mothers' unperforated ears.
And it also happens that the obstruction of the ear arises from a wound or flesh born therein.
And this obstruction sometimes occurs deep within the ear canal, which cannot be seen; and sometimes it occurs in the outer part of the ear canal, and it can be seen.
Therefore, that which occurs deep within the ear, which cannot be seen by sight, is difficult to cure in many cases.
And in that which can be seen by sight, it is necessary to place the sick person's ear on the sun and look into it; then if you see an obstruction appearing, open it with a thin spatula whose shape is as follows: its end should have a small notch, whose part should be sharp; and the rest of the spatula should be soft on both sides so as not to hurt the ear.
If the obstruction is born from flesh within the ear, then hold it with a thin hook and cut it out with great force until all the flesh is removed.
If there is an incision in the depth of the ear: then take fine copper wire, linen, and heat it slightly; then insert it into the wound of the ear.
If you find an incision accompanied by illness and hearing loss, attempt its opening with ease; be careful not to wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place linen in the ear according to the size of the opening that you have closed with an Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are confident about the healing of the wound.
Or take linen, immerse it in rose water, sprinkle on it ground zinc and use it.
If you see the ear beginning to abscess: then you must remove the linen and let it drain with another piece of linen that has been soaked in a cerate made with rose oil, until the warm abscess settles; then take care of it until it heals.
If there is bleeding: then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear; use the rest of the treatment that was mentioned in the section on distillations to stop the blood flow.
Chapter on Althele's treatment for eyelids.
Chapter VIII.
These are the Althelil (affections) that happen in the eyelids of the eyes, which are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold them with tweezers (or with a hook), and cut them at their roots with a spatula. Then place it on the affected area crushed.
If blood flows out of them (the affections), then cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautery.
And it is better to cauterize them after the incision. They often return when there remains something of their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn and do not return.
§ On the treatment of tumors on the eyelids of the eyes.
Chapter IX.
Often something happens in the eyelids that resembles a tumor in its strength and hardness, and it is called Grandino because of this; it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper eyelid and lower eyelid.
Therefore, the operation in them is to examine whether it is a Grandino that is coming out of the eyelid, which appears on the eyelid and moves to all parts, and its nature is easy.
Therefore, make an incision across it (the tumor). Then scrape off all parts of it with ease until it comes out. Then hold it (the scraped part) with a hook and cut it.
If its removal is not prepared for you unless after you make a small incision through the eyelid, then it harms weak people.
If the incision is large: then gather it (the scraped part) with suture; and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. Ointment indeed restores it, and fleshes it out.
If the grain is turned towards the inner parts of the ear and it faces the internal surface, then turn the eyelid and hang the grain with a hook; besides, you will need an incision, and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is stretched by an incision, it does not harm anything.
Then clean the eye after the incision of the grain with salt water; and care for the place with it until the weak one is healed.
Chapter on the treatment of the eyelids.
Chapter X.
The Axirnath is a pimple that is generated in the upper eyelid; it indeed mostly happens to children; and it weighs their eyes down, and cataracts occur to them in the mornings, and they are unable to see the light of the sun, for this reason, because tears flow towards them, and you can see them constantly lying on their faces, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are below the eyebrows, which have already swollen; and indeed the swelling of Axirnath is noticeable to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel it among them.
And the method of operation for it is that the weak one puts his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth, and prepare a piece of it, and make a circle out of the cloth according to the size that contains the Axirnath from all sides. Then put it on it and press it with your fingers from all sides, so that the Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of this moistness with a small incision and not a larger one than that which is made in phlebotomy at depth.
It is necessary that you find the entire skin until you reach Axirnath, for in many arrangements does Axirnath proceed from the fissure according to the shape of a white plum-stone.
Extract it with a cloth, which you have soaked between your fingers for the outside parts; and you turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and beware, lest you add in the fissure, so as not to reach with the spatula to the eye, and harm it.
If Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, you add a little in the fissure with ease, until Axirnath comes out. Then extract it as we have said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the place, and bind it with small stones.
And among men are those who grind salt and place it in the hollow of the fissure, so that it melts what remains from that moisture.
Then take care of it until it heals.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs in the place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
Chapter on Ataxmir of the eye: that is, when the eyelid becomes softened, so that it weeps as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow in the eyelids beyond the course of natural hairs and turn white: then they harm the eye, and cause diseases such as continuous tearing, softening of the eyelids, and clouding, until it leads to the cause of the destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmir of the eye is cured according to four modes. Or by cautery with fire. With sharp medicine, as stated in the chapter on cautery. Ataxmir is cured by incision and suturing. By means of reeds, as I shall say.
Place the head of the sick man on your chest. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it therefore turns, it is good. And if it does not [turn]: insert a needle into it where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate with the thread above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and pull the thread towards the upper part with the eyelid, and turn it with a flat instrument.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with a spatula slipping from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal.
Then pull out the thread, and place under the eyelid a small fleck of cooked wheat or cloth: then mark on the eyelid with a signet using encaustic, as in the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: because it is diversified in men.
For there are those who need to be cut from the eyelid according to its large size, according to its softening part.
Then with the spatula find on top of the two lines that you have marked, and start from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal, and let there be one crack near the natural hairs, as in a swelling of the radius.
Then insert the hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then scrape it all off. Then gather with suturing the two eyelids, with a sharp needle and fine woolen thread: and remove blood, and let that which superfluous exudes from the threads above the eyebrows adhere, if you wish to do so: and if not, do not treat it.
Then release the suture and the thread for three or four days; afterward care for it.
And if you wish, release the wound without suture, and take care of it, so that it dries up and contracts. For the eyelid is to be raised during the sealing of the wound and its closure; but it will be better later on.
This method of treatment was taught by Ataxmir the ancients.
However, there is concern over the patient in this case, and it comes from a good surgery, not fear.
And there is another method in Ataxmir as well: and it is to make marks on the eyelid, like the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have told before.
Then raise the eyelid with three separated or joined combs, following this shape, then cut off what is excessive with small scissors, according to this shape, with evenness of the cut.
If it is not possible for you to hold the comb and it does not match, then take a needle with thread, and insert it in the middle of the figure; and insert another thread near the greater tear duct, and another thread near the smaller tear duct; and tie the threads evenly between your fingers.
Then raise your hand with an equal elevation; and raise the skin where it is marked, as we have told before.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with suture; and care for it until it heals.
If, however, a boil occurs at your incision or your tear, but it is filled with pus; apply that boil with cerate and similar substances, from soothing ointments.
And sometimes the eyelashes may also turn inside out.
Therefore, you should use what we have said in the incision; but suturing is more artificial for both. On treating Ataxmir with dogs.
And turn the eyelid, and cut the fissure that is inside, as I have described. Then make two dog's jaws or two thin sticks, whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be smaller than the width of a spindle; and you have already cut at both ends where you hold the threads.
Then attach each of them to that which projects from the eyelid of the eye and tie the two dog's jaws together tightly on both sides with a strong ligature, and leave it for some days. For the tightened skin will die, become black, and rot until it falls off by itself.
If it slows down (healing), then cut it with scissors. Then take care of it until it is healed.
When it has consolidated (healed), lift the eyelid and do not pluck the hairs.
And this is the shape of two dog's jaws that you should make according to this form and size (dimensions).
Chapter 12.
On plucking out hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation is to take a fine needle and insert a thread from fine silk into it gently. Then join the ends of the thread and tie both with a very fine knot; let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then prepare another thin thread called Alinxotat under it and tie its ends if you wish.
Then place the patient's head in your lap and bring it close to the sun so that the operation may be seen clearly; because this is a delicate or small operation.
Then insert the needle with Alinxotat into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you pull out the natural hair from above.
Then draw out the needle above the anulixotatus (a type of wound or abscess): and insert the needle into the anulixotatus, if it is one, two, or three, not more than that.
Then draw your hand with it until the needle along with the anulixotatus comes out of the eye with its natural hair.
If the anulixotatus is being pulled out and the needle does not come out with it: draw the anulixotatus downwards, with the thread you have made in it, until the anulixotatus comes out through the upper opening, and you see it with the eye: then draw out the anulixotatus and the thread; extract both, and close the eye; and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then attach a long hair from the natural hairs to it and draw it out with that: or leave it until it grows out on its own, and then draw it out.
Chapter 13.
When this ulcer happens to the eye, it is called "Leporina".
This ulcer is either natural or acquired.
The acquired ulcer occurs from the consolidation of a wound, or an incision, or a cautery, and similar things.
The method of treatment is to open the consolidation, separate its lips, and place a linen cloth between them, and tie it until it heals.
It is not necessary to use in the treatment of this ulcer things that dry and constrict, for if you do that, the ulcer worsens rather than improves; instead, use things that soften, such as fenugreek; embrocation with water, in which althea has been cooked, mixed with flax seed; unguent of dyaquilon, which has been melted with some oil; and wrap it with linen and treat it with that.
Your treasure of care is to strive with all your ability, so that it does not become consolidated according to the original form.
This indeed is not other than a correction of X-ration, so that the shape of the place does not return as it was entirely.
Section on the care of X-ration in the lower eyelid, and it is a roughening or contraction upward to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This that is below, is what is truly named X-ration. It is natural and it is accidental.
And the accidental one arises from a wound, or a fissure, or cautery, and similar things.
The way of operation in it is to take the point, which has a double thread, and to anoint it with flesh, and to make it penetrate from the left tear-duct to the right tear-duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
Then stretch the skin with the point upward, and cut it with a broad knife. If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take the rod, and place it in the fissure, and turn the eyelid with it: and cut two fissures on the inside of the eyelid, and let their ends be at the corners of the incision, until they converge and form an angle: until when gathered together this shape is formed, and it is the letter lauda graeca.
Then remove that skin by the amount of its sharp lower part, from the one following the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts: or it with a thread of wool.
Then care for them with what we said, with softening medicines and bandages, until they heal.
If the alxahtrati occurs from a split, either by suture or cautery: then it is necessary that you explore the split flat beneath the eyelashes, as was previously done. Then separate between two lips with a linen cloth, as we said before.
In summary, the treatment of alxahtrati, whether it is above or below, consists of treating it according to the procedure prepared for the shape of alxahtrati.
Indeed, it has many diverse forms; the skilled artisan prepares his ability in any way possible to him, so that he may return the figure to its natural form or as close to it as possible, and the patient himself, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in various arrangements.
Chapter XV.
Chapter on the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva, or cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, one must insert the end of the rod under the eyelid and lift it up; or extend it with a hook; then cut the adhesion with a thin spatula, not with the sharpness of the spatula's cuts but blunted slightly; so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation and the spatula is removed without causing damage to the eye by its sharpness; and your incision should be as if you are scraping off the adhesion easily, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form and the adhesion heals completely.
Then pour salt water into the eye and wash it; or let it drip onto him from a syringe made of sheep's horn with water dissolved in wine.
Separate a linen strip between the eyelid and the eye. Place wool soaked in egg white on the eye. Use it three days later, or with solid ointments until it heals.
On the incision of the nail and swelling of the skin around the eyes.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the nail has two ways. Either it is horny: and it is like the hide of a deer, soft and brittle. Or it is not horny, similar to frozen milk-white moisture: which, when touched with iron or attempted to be grasped with a nail, is severed and the nail does not bite into it.
And both types do not start until from the greater tear duct, until it gradually penetrates the vision, and prevents light, and the movement of the eye.
And the method of operation for its incision is: that the sick person places his head in your lap. Then open the eyes of the sick person with your hand and lift the eyelid. Then gather the nail with a small nail few times and extend it upward. Then take the awl and insert a horse's or cow's hair, or that of a sheep, into it: let it be threaded and double the point of the awl slightly, and pierce it in the middle of the nail: and penetrate with the awl and tie the nail with the thread and extend it upward: and remove the hair from the side of the nail following the pupil, as if you are pulling it with the hair to the end of its.
Then cut the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal bone with a fine spatula or with small forceps; and let the natural flesh of the lacrimal pass without it happening that, due to the incision, there is a constant flow of tears.
And sometimes, the nail extends with the only tweezers; or with thread, as I said. Then scrape it with a soft spatula, whose form is this.
And take care that the soft spatula does not touch the horny layer and there occurs a break there and the pupil is pierced.
Then after the incision, throw into the eye something of ground salt or made from wax and linen, and let it remain until another day. Then care for it with what is necessary, until it heals.
If the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert a needle into it nor does the tweezers fit into it, then this type of nail should be treated frequently with medicines, and it heals as I told in the division.
If you want to cut it, then open the eye of the sick person, and take a fine, soft, delicate, blunt spatula in this form. And smooth the nail above with a rasp, with subtlety. If you see that it hardens and breaks and the rasp imprints on it, then pour from your hour into the eye a solution made of wax and linen or red wax or finely ground salt; and let it be closed until another day.
Then repeat the above procedure until the entire thing is removed. Unless it is a warm abscess in your eye; then let the former go and care for the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the procedure on it with the rasp, until it heals.
Prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it harms the eye greatly, should be suspended with a hook and a portion of it should be cut off; not at the end, to prevent the flow of tears.
Then let blood from the lacrimal or red, or made from zinjarium, until it is healed. (Lacrimal: tear duct; Zinjarium: probably a type of copper vessel used for leeches or cupping)
Chapter on the incision of Alguardenic and flesh born in the eye. (Alguardenic is not found in any known medical texts, possibly a mis-spelling or error)
Chapter XVII.
A red flesh composed or laid over in some human eyes is sometimes born, which covers the pupil or approaches it, or presses on the eyelids and possibly turns the eyelids outwards; resembling a rosebush.
And the operation for this is also that the sick person should place his head on your chest. (Inferius means chest or breast) Then open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh with suitable hooks; hold it with a single forceps or tweezers. (Collige = collect)
Then cut the flesh first, until its entirety is finished with a scalpel. (incisorio = knife or scalpel) And beware of the eye so as not to harm it during the operation; and make your cut such that you cut it, or with a spatula (spatulam), which we mentioned in the incision of the nail; or with small forceps, with which the flesh is collected, according to what its form will be after this chapter. (Asebel: probably a tool used for collecting tissue during surgery)
When your cut is completed and all of the Alguardenic is removed, then fill the eye with salt water; or drizzle red powder on it, and similar substances from corrosive medicines; and place a piece of cotton with egg white over the outside of the eye to protect it from hot infection. (Apostemate calido: hot inflammation)
If anything remains from the cautery and warm blood governs you, and you fear a hot abscess; then let the eye be, and treat the same along with what will calm the abscess.
Then again upon it with an operation until it heals.
And similarly do with the added flesh that occurs in the eye of this kind.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that any treatment of the weak eye, either by natural or accidental way, be performed with iron; and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that the limb can tolerate this operation.
Chapter on removing a seed from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
The red veins that weave over the eye, preventing the vision from operating; and they weaken the eye with the passing of days.
Therefore, it is necessary for you first to determine if the eye in which there is a seed (Sebel), is strong and there is no other illness besides the Sebel; then collect the Sebel from that eye.
And it is to command the weak one (patient) to place his head in your lap.
Then suspend the veins with a single or double hook according to your discretion; and let the hook be fine, doubled, in this shape, or there be two hooks graduated in one body, in this shape.
Then collect the veins with fine forceps and remove the blood by the hour; until you see that the veins are removed from the eye and resolved; and be careful not to injure the eye with the tips of the forceps.
Let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be very firm in your operation; so as not to injure except the veins.
And when you have finished, then pour into the eye either green or red; so that its acidity corrodes what remains from the Sebel.
If it is not possible for you to collect the whole thing within that hour, then pack the eye with something that alleviates eye pain; and leave it for some days until the pain subsides; and secure it from infection with warm poultice; afterwards, repeat over it in the same manner until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps.
Chapter on reducing a nose to the mouth.
Chapter XIX.
Physicians call the fistula known as Arissat, which you treat with a cautery or with an acidic medicine burning it, according to what has been previously stated about its treatment.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in that; unless to look for an abscess near its birthplace, and extract all the moisture and pus that is in it until the bone appears.
When the bone appears, and you see corruption or blackening in it, then grind it with an instrument of this form.
It is called the head of a rasp.
Make it from iron, and let its head be round like a rasp, with points made by a file, or by the more subtle point of an alisclifers; and place it over the corrupted bone.
Then turn it with your fingers and press your hand slightly, until you know that the corruption is now ground away; and do this several times.
Then restore the place with the most powerful ointments of styptics.
If the place consolidates, and flesh grows in it, and the flow of pus ceases; and it remains for forty days without being renewed, or infected, or any accident happening to it; then you will know that it is healed.
And if not, there is no skill in that, except to reduce the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this form.
And it is as follows for you to expose the second bone with iron, or with sharp medicine: and when the bone is detected, then take the trepan in this shape, having its end iron and triangular: and the wood of it is a pyramid extended up to the end, just as you see.
Then place that upon the very bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and extend your hand slightly away from the eye. Then turn your hand with the trepan until it penetrates the bone and feels weak; by this you will know that wind is escaping from it, when you hold your hand over its nose.
Therefore then, restore the place with medicines drying, as I have taught you.
When therefore flesh is born and the place becomes hard; then the matter that was flowing outward returns to the nose; therefore it is easier for that over the weak.
Section on Reducing Swelling of the Eye.
Chapter XX.
When the eye protrudes completely and neither sight is damaged nor decreased; then it is necessary to dissolve the weakened part. Then phlebotome it. Afterward place poultices on the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then place over the eye a liniment made of acacia, aloes, frankincense, and sarcolax. Then squeeze the eyelid shut with many plasters.
And the method of plasters is to take soft cloths, many, and fold each piece over four; make many from them. Then place one on top of another, according to how much the eye needs; then squeeze them with a stiff cloth firmly on top.
Repeat poultices with suction without scarification.
Then remove the windy (afflicted), and let the squinting eye rest day and night.
If the ligament becomes soft again, then it must be tightened much more: Then remove the ligament after a day and night, as we said.
If you see that the eye has returned to its original sheathing, this is good: and if not, then apply plasters, leeches, tightening (of the eyelid), and windy (afflicted), until it heals.
Chapter on Incision of the Sheathing.
Chapter XXI.
When there is a rupture in the sheathing of the eye, it then comes out and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of sand, and defiles the human form due to this, and one wishes to cut it: then the operation is done according to what I have said: and it is to introduce a needle at the root of the sheathing from below to above.
Then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate: and let the first needle go according to its placement.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie it with the sheathing in a circle around the needle: and tighten it much.
Then pull out the needle, and place wool soaked in oil over the eye on the white of the eye: and let it remain until the thread comes out with the sheathing.
Then care for the eye so that it is comforted until the wound heals.
And sometimes the sheathing is tightened from all sides with a circle made of cloth until the eye protrudes considerably.
Then it is pierced with a fine spatula that reaches to the depth of the eye, and moisture is spread on the white of the eye, and the eye falls down and enters immediately: then tighten it until it heals.
Treatment of the Alcomnat.
Chapter XXII.
This sickness called Alcomnat is nothing but pus that gathers in the eye, similar to descending water, and it itself is not [the eye].
And the method of operation in this [case] is that you make the patient sit on a prepared chair or straight.
Then take the head of [the patient] with both your hands at two sides and move it until you see the pus go down to the lower part of the eyes. Then it is to be shaped [the pus] and not allowed to go down, and the eye should be opened: let the patient see as he saw before: and if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
If [the pus] does not come out as described, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine probe and cut through it on the horny fold at the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal layer in the corona until the pus comes out.
When it comes out [the pus], then pour hot water into the eye in which you have mixed honey or warm water in which you already boiled fenugreek and honey: then treat the rest with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter on the care of water that descends into the eye or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have already said the types of water and which one is suitable for piercing according to the discussion and explanation: then take that same one in accordance with health.
Then you should make the patient sit between your hands, facing the light and close to the sun: then tie the healthy eye shut and squeeze it very hard: then with your right hand close the left eyelid if the water is in the left eye or the left hand if the water is in the right eye.
Then take your right hand, if the eye is left: or take your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the tip of your right hand near the crown on the surface of the white part of the eye visible by the smaller lacrimal duct: then push your right hand with force and you turn it while moving, until it penetrates into the white part of the eye; and feel that the instrument has reached the empty space.
It is necessary that there be a measure of the journey of the instrument into depth, the space from the pupil to the end of the dark part; and this is the border of the eye. You will see it there in the very pupil of the eye because of the clarity of the cornea tissue.
Then place the instrument until it reaches the place where the water is located. Then press it down once after another.
If the water descends immediately, then the blind man sees immediately what is above him and the instrument in his eye.
Then rest for a little while. If the water descends, then remove it and let the instrument come out.
When it is fastened and does not rise up: then remove the instrument with ease; and you turn your hand gradually.
Then dissolve something from salt in water, like a clear gemstone; and clean the eye with it inside. Then place over the entire eye a swab of wool soaked in rose oil and white linen; and tie it with the healthy eye.
We and those who are of our time place over him camphor powder mixed with white linen on the eye.
If the instrument does not obey you to enter the eye due to its hardness, because it is from a man whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you take a spatula called "Alberid", and this is its shape:
Pierce therefore only the joint itself, and not the ultimate end of the hand into the opening; it is only so that you make a way to a subtle place.
Insert almagda as previously mentioned.
Prepare for the completion of your work, a well-made sleeping chamber should be prepared for the sick man, where he can sleep on his back in a dark room; let him be prevented from all movements and coughing; and place food for him that soothes his nature; and do not move his head to either side at all.
Let the bandage be according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark room and test his sight; make him see things. Then lead the bandage until the seventh day.
It is not necessary that he do it at the hour of healing or immediately after incision; on the contrary, let someone else do it because water rises quickly through an intense gaze.
If, however, there is a hot abscess: then it is necessary that you dissolve the eye before the seventh day; and correct it with what calms the abscess until it is calm; then remove his sight from him, and place over his oral cavity what regulates his vision for several days, he being in that dark room.
Then gradually leave the house and convert to his own beds.
And know that a student is not often excused from watching; then he dares to perform an operation.
Now indeed a certain one of them who are from Alayrach has come to us, who said that a large perforation was made in Alayrach for drawing water.
Therefore, I have not seen anyone in your land who has done it; nor have I read it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
These are the forms of shapes from a handle, so that it stands upon one who does not know it.
Make them from copper: and let their extremities be with the same subtlety of triangular shape, and their extremity sharp.
Chapter XXIII.
Treatment for newborn flesh in the nose.
Sometimes are born in the nose various fleshes similar to many-footed scorpions: and from it is a cancerous flesh, stoney, dark colored; and from it is a soft flesh, not dark colored.
Therefore, for that soft flesh which is not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must make the weak one sit opposite the sun with his face between your hands, and open his nose, and throw the hook into those fleshes; then draw them out towards the outside, and cut what you have caught with a thin spatula sharp at one end, until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
If something remains from that which the removal is not possible: then scrape it with one of the fine instruments until there remains nothing of it. If blood dominates you or a hot abscess happens: then oppose it as required; or it is from malignant abscesses, then hurry to cauterize him until the blood is separated and all fleshes are removed.
Then throw into the nose after the cut vinegar, water or wine. If the nose opens and liquid comes out to the palate, then you know that he is already well.
If the liquid does not penetrate as required, then you know that there is newborn flesh within the bones of the nose, which did not reach with the cut.
Then it is necessary that you insert a thickened thread of linen with many knots; and place between every knot an amount equal to a digit or less; and have the weak one, so that he sends forth one end of the thread into the nose with a radish, or as possible for him after he has made it similar to a syringe; and draw out the smell until it reaches the cavity, and exit above his throat.
And indeed many times this is done like Attomus' boy in schools; and it is easy for him who wants to do so.
Then place two ends of the thread, one that exits above the nose, and the other that remains in the nose. Then as an assistant you tie flesh with the knots on the thread. Make this until you know that the flesh is already with the knots of the thread.
Then remove the thread; and place linen which you have soaked in Egyptian ointment inside the nose after the blood has been drained; do this for three days or more until the ointment has completely eaten away what remains of the flesh.
Then place a lead tube at the end of the matter into the nose for some days until it heals.
If it requires treatment to dry it out, use that.
For the nose purge, when olive oil and other medications are distilled into the nose, make it of silver or copper; it should be similar to a small lamp, open like a snail shell; and its passage likewise.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a cane.
And the snail shell instrument for nose purge should be full, pierced; which has a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when you heat oil or what you wish from juices and fluid substances in it.
Chapter XXV.
Multotiens nascitur in extremitate nasi Thelul, et magnificatur, et augmentatur cum diebus, donec foedus fit aspectus eius translates to: "Thelul often appears at the end of the nose and grows and becomes more prominent with days until its appearance becomes disgusting.
"And on account of this, it is necessary to cut it at the beginning of its appearance and to remove all of it. "Then place over that spot, either a cautery or a medicine burning in its place.
"If cutting it does not cause it to disappear before it becomes prominent, then examine if it is hard, dark colored and has few sensations; in this case do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous ulcer.
"For often I have seen that someone cut an apothema and great harm came to the one who had it.
"If the apothema is soft to touch, not dark colored and it appears that cutting it can be performed on its entirety, then evacuate the weak part of it and cut it without fear, without dread; and care for the place with it so that it drains and constricts until it heals.
"Chapter XXVI.
"On suture of the nose, and lip, and ear.
"Know that when discontinuity of one of these cartilages occurs, the operation does not help much unless in certain men.
"Therefore when something happens to anyone from that, you should examine if it is a recent wound with its blood; in this case apply double the size of the wound with stitches; then take care of it until it heals.
"And if the discontinuity of the lips has already separated and each part is healthy; then it is necessary to remove all parts appearing from the skin until it bleeds. "Then attach the two lips with stitches and bind them, and sprinkle over it powder of dragon's blood and pulverized olibanum; and put on top of powders a fragment of consolidated emplaster such as diafinicon or another stronger emplaster; and leave it bound for two days or three. Then dissolve it, and change the medicine; and let it go until the threads separate by themselves. Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
The method of suturing is to gather the solution of continuity with needles, as we have said in the surgery of the abdomen; or gather the solution with thread, as I have told you.
Chapter XXVII.
Chapter on the extraction of lip nodes.
Many men suffer from ulcers similar to hard grains of wheat in the internal parts of their lips, and some of them are smaller, and others are larger.
Therefore, one must turn the lip, and search for every knot of it, and hang it up with a hook, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision with fine sediment until the blood is separated.
Then it is to be anointed with vinegar, and the place where there is the obstruction is to be rubbed with it until the wounds are healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
§ On the incision of a child's flesh on the gum.
Often, a piece of flesh grows over the gum, which the ancients called abscess.
Therefore, it must be hung up with a hook, or held with forceps and cut at the root, and allow the pus or blood to flow out.
Then place fine sediment or other powdered purgatives on the place.
If that piece of flesh returns after treatment, which often happens, then it should be cut a second time and cauterized; for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter XXIX.
§ On the scraping of teeth with iron.
When they accumulate on the surfaces of Teeth from both interior and exterior parts, between gums and rough cortices, and sometimes turn yellow or green, until corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul through it.
Therefore, one should make the sick person sit between your hands and lean his head in your lap, and file the pulp and tooth, where you see the cortex, until nothing remains of it, and similarly do for blackening, greenness, yellowing, and others until they are cleaned.
If what is inside them is removed at the beginning of the reasoning, it is good; and if not, then apply the filing on them day by day, second, and third, until finally the effort reaches what you desire.
And know that the tooth requires rasors of various shapes and forms, many figures; according to which it is prepared for your operation; because the rasp used to file the tooth from below is different from the rasp used to file between the teeth, due to their other shapes.
And these shapes of rasors should be prepared by you, which you see.
Chapter XXX.
Chapter on the extraction of tooth pain.
One should cure the Tooth from its pain with all skill and be patient in extracting it. For there is no replacement for it when it is extracted; since it is a substance raised up; until there is no excuse for extracting it, then one who is sick must extract it himself, to strengthen and assure you that the tooth in pain is extracted.
For many times pain deceives the sick man and believes that it is in the tooth and extracts it himself; then the pain does not subside until the sick tooth is extracted.
We have already seen that from the operation of phlebotomists.
When it is confirmed to you that the toothache himself is sworn, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with a spatula, in which there should be something of virtue, until it dissolves the gums from all sides: afterwards move it yourself with your fingers, or with subtle forceps in the first place gradually, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps there at a good position, and hold the head of the weak one between your knees: what you have already tightly held, so that it does not move: then pull the tooth in a straight line, so as not to break it.
If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary that you fill that hole with a cloth and tie it with the end of a subtle radius so as not to break it during your constriction with forceps.
And you must be careful when making the scarification around the gums from all sides.
And keep your strength so as not to break it and a part remains and returns over the weak one from that greater pain which was first there.
And be careful not to do what unknowing phlebotomists do in haste and the arrogance of their own removal of it, apart from what we have said.
Many times they make great infirmities come upon people, which are more difficult to break and all the roots remain, or some of them: or they pull it out with certain bones of the jaw: as we have often testified.
Then it is to be washed after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If there happens to be a bleeding from the places (for it often happens), then rub something from pigeon-shite and fill that place with it; and if not, cauterize it yourself if you do not have pigeon-shite.
The handles of delicate forceps with which the tooth is moved should be long at the ends, short at the handle, thick so that they do not split when pressed upon the tooth; as you can see, the thick parts of the handles, until when you close them, they do not bite themselves, or split: short in length, and made of iron from India, or skillfully fashioned flatiron with sharp ends: and at their ends should be teeth, some of which enter into certain ones and tighten by a suitable constriction, strong.
And sometimes the ends are shaped like the beak of a bird which is called stork, and they are strong in constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
Chapter on the Extraction of Teeth and Removal of Broken Bones of the Jaw.
When something remains after the extraction of a tooth that breaks apart, then it is necessary to place hot iron with butter for one or two days until the location becomes soft; then introduce alum or forceps into it whose ends are similar to the beak of a bird which is called stork. The form of this forceps is:
Extremities should be made as flat as a file or as an aliskilfegi.
If it does not obey you with these forceps, then it is necessary to cauterize over the root, and to undermine the whole flesh, and introduce a tool called small Palanca, whose shape is as follows.
Make the end short, slightly thicker; do not saturate it so that it does not break.
If the root comes out through that [opening], it is good; if not, help with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows.
The shape of the first is a triangle, in which there is a certain thickness.
The shape of the subtle triangle.
And with other instruments and tools like the toothpick.
Also help with this tool similar to a large nail, whose shape is that of a twisted triangle with some thickness so as not to break, and do not saturate it.
And know that there are many toothpick-like tools; and similarly the rest of the instruments are not counted, and the wise artisan, skilled in his art, finds himself an instrument according to which the operation and the illnesses signify to him.
Because from diseases there are those for which the ancients did not provide an instrument, due to the diversity of their species.
If the bone is broken from the jaw or other bones of the mouth, or it rots; then examine over it in its place with that which suits it from instruments and forceps I have mentioned for root extraction, and help with geste, whose shape is as follows.
Let there be some thickness gradually, so that the bone can be tightened or held with it, and not flee or move away, until the bone comes out; and restore the place with appropriate medicines for it.
If however there is a small putridity in the bone, then scrape it from its putridity and care for it until it heals.
Chapter 32.
On locking the protruding teeth over others.
When teeth emerge not according to their natural course, the shape becomes foul, and particularly when this happens in women and girls, that is, in those who menstruate.
Therefore, you must consider. If a tooth is born after another tooth and does not settle, or its removal or grinding is not possible, then uproot it. And if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose shape is as follows:
It resembles a small beak and is made of hard iron, with an extremely sharp tip.
Make your cut several days later, and because of the hardness of the tooth, so as not to disturb another tooth.
If it is projecting, exposed for grinding: then grind it with a file made of iron, whose shape is as follows:
Let it be made entirely of iron, and the handle small with many sharp points, like a file with which needles are filed: with which you grind the tooth gradually over several days with ease, so as not to disturb another tooth and let it fall; then soften it, and finally sand it with certain rasps.
If the tooth breaks off from which part of the tongue is injured: then it must be ground until the roughness of the fracture is removed and smoothed out; and it should not injure the tongue nor distort speech.
Chapter XXXIII.
Chapter on drilling teeth with gold threads.
When there is shock and disturbance of the front teeth due to blow or accident, and the weak person cannot hold what he eats so that it does not fall out; and you have treated them with medicines for swelling, but the treatment has not helped: then it is appropriate to string them with a gold thread. Because silver becomes green and rots after days, but gold never changes.
And let there be a thread of medium thickness and coarseness according to its quantity, which can pass between the Teeth.
The shape of the reel is such that you take the thread and insert its double between two healthy teeth; then you weave it with its two ends between the moving teeth (whether one or more), until you reach with the needle to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving until you reach the part from which you started; and tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom until it is completely removed; and let your constriction, which you use to tighten the thread, be at the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out.
Then cut the excess parts of the thread with scissors; and tie both ends together and twist them; and hide these within the healthy tooth and the moving tooth so as not to harm the tongue; then release the tightened part only when it remains so.
If it is loosened or cut, tighten them with another thread, and it will remain in that state for the entire time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of the reel of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that a tooth or teeth return after the loss of one or both at their respective places, and they are retained as we have said, and remain so; this does not occur unless by a skillful and experienced craftsman.
And sometimes a tooth is fitted from the bones of an ox; and it is made in the shape of a tooth, and placed in the place where it strengthens and tightens the tooth, as we have said; and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Whenever a ligament occurring beneath the tongue is found, it may be either natural, as when a man is born with it, or accidental, resulting from a healed wound.
The procedure for this is as follows: open the weak jaw at its hinge in your own mouth and lift the tongue; then cut through the sinewy ligament across its width until the tongue is released from its grasp.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it comes from the healing of a wound: then thrust a hook into it and bore through it across its width until you reach the sinewy ligament, and the knot is released.
And beware that there is no tear or opening in the deeper flesh, and do not cut into an artery there, lest there be bleeding.
Then it is irrigated with rose water or vinegar, or cold water.
Next, place a linen cloth under the tongue to keep it pressed down every night, so that it does not heal again.
If there is bleeding, then cover the spot with a piece of damp cloth. If the bleeding persists, then cauterize the spot with a lentigo-type cautery, which is suitable for this; then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes there occurs a cyst beneath the tongue resembling a small frog that hinders the tongue from its natural function and perhaps grows to fill the jawbone.
The procedure is as follows: open the weak jaw so that the cyst can be seen in sunlight, and observe it closely.
If you see it is dark or black, hard and insensate, then do not touch it, because it is a cancer.
If it is cut to the white matter, where there is moisture, then throw in the hook and cut it with a sharp chisel, and release it from all sides. If blood veins during your operation, then put a piece of gauze crushed on it until the blood is cut off; then return to your operation until you extract it with its appendage.
Then wash it with vinegar and salt; care for it with appropriate treatment until it heals.
Chapter on the treatment of two molar cysts.
Chapter 36.
Whenever glands resembling goiters appear near the throat, that is, those which are called amygdalae: when you treat them as we have said in division and they do not heal, then consider.
If the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with few senses: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and its root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing the flow of blood, rather let it be until it matures. Then either perforate it or let it burst itself.
And if it is of white color, round and its root is fine: then it is necessary to cut it.
And the operation in it is that you consider before its operation whether the abscess of it has ceased to be warm and completed rest, or has decreased by a slight decrease: then let the patient sit facing the sun, and his head in your lap: and open his mouth, and let a servant take hold between his hands, and press his tongue down with an instrument, whose form is as follows.
Let it be made of silver or bronze, which is thin like a knife.
And when you press his tongue with it and the abscess is shown to you and falls onto it: then take a hook and fix it in the amygdala, and extract it as far as possible, except that you pull something from his tunics along with it.
Then cut it with an instrument, whose form is as follows: (A sketch is provided here, I'm unable to provide an image in text format) It is similar to forks, but its extremities are curved so that the opening of each of them is facing the other sharply. Therefore take care that it is made from iron or brass coated with alum.
If however this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, whose shape is as follows: [insert image or diagram of the spatula's shape] Be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut one almond, cut the other according to the same shape of the incision.
Then after the incision, the sick person should rinse with cold water or with vinegar and water.
If however there is a flow of blood, rinse with water in which the bark of pomegranates has been boiled or with leaves of myrtle and similar things from poplar trees, until the flow of blood stops: then take care of him until he is cured.
And sometimes boils other than almonds appear in the throat. Cut them therefore according to what I said in the incision of the two almonds equally.
I myself have been cured of a woman suffering from a boil that was born in her throat, which was drawing toward choking, and she had few senses, as it had almost closed her throat: and the woman breathed with a tight mouth, and already she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water: and now death had come upon her if it had remained for one day or two.
The boil had risen only to the extent that it had expelled two branches until they came out through the two nostrils.
I therefore rushed quickly and tied a hook on one of them. Then I pulled it out and a large piece was removed.
Then cut it off at the opening of the nose.
Then I made that which came out from the other nostril.
Then I opened its mouth and pressed its tongue; afterwards I fastened a hook on the ulcer; then I cut off part of it, and no pus ran out but a little blood; therefore the woman's throat was healed, and she began to drink water immediately, then she ate food.
Therefore I did not stop cutting from the ulcer for a long time; and the ulcer kept growing in place of what I was cutting, until it grew too long with that (woman).
So I cauterized the ulcer in her throat.
Therefore she stood after her application; then I walked away, and I did not know what God had done with her after me.
Chapter on the excision of a mouth ulcer.
Chapter XXXVII.
When a catarrh descends to the mouth, and an ulcer forms, and it is long, then it is called 'perpendicular'; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, then it is called a 'bubble'.
When it is cured with what was said in the division, and treatment does not help; and you see that the ulcer has become warm and soft; then it must be cut.
And when what comes together from it is round and not long, and it is red or dark or black, and there is no feeling in it; then it must be cut. There is fear for the weak in that (ulcer).
Therefore when you see it according to the way I said, white and long, make the weak person sit facing the sun; then press his tongue with the instrument whose description precedes; afterwards fix a hook in the mouth, and pull it downwards; and cut it with one of the two instruments that were said in the incision of the two wisdom teeth.
It is necessary that you do not cut from it (the patient), unless what is added exceeds the natural limit without addition.
If you cut more from it (the patient), you wound speech and discourse.
Then after the incision, use what I have said regarding the incision of two almonds (teeth): and take care of it until it heals.
If the sick person is afraid of the incision: then it is necessary that you use your skill in cauterizing it without fear and dread.
The method of cauterization in it (the sick part) is not anything other than with sharp water: and it is that you place the head of the sick person in your armpit. Then press his tongue with the instrument which I have said. Then take from the water which I have said in the chapter on cauterization, and make a not-extinguished lump of plaster, not thick nor thin, and fill with it the hollow of this instrument, whose shape is as follows:
Let the extremity where the medicine is placed be concave like the concavity of a conical shell (radial groove).
Place the instrument with the medicine on the boil itself: and let the sick person lie on his side so that saliva runs from his mouth through the internal medicine, so that nothing falls from it to his throat and harms him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you, from above, place it on the boil with a quantity of half an hour, until you see it turned black and calmed by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish to take a curette, and wrap it around the edge of the boil, and pour the ointment with the medicine over it, and insert the curette with the ointment on top, until the ointment adheres to the boil.
Apply this frequently until you achieve what you desire with regard to cauterization of the vein. Then release it; for indeed, it will burn and fall off after three or four days.
If you need to repeat the medicine, do so; and after cauterization, cleanse the area around the vein with a cotton dipped in butter, and clean it with the same medicine; and irrigate with cold water.
It shall be treated externally with ointments, and internally with poultices, until it heals.
Therefore, this method of treatment is healthier than incision and further from fear (risk).
And sometimes the vein is also cured with something more subtle than cauterization and incision; it is cured by suffusion, as described below. Take calaminthe, hyssop, origanum, rutus, sassafras, chamomile, abrotanum and similar herbs; grind them all together or some of them in a pot, submerge them with vinegar, and boil; the pot should be well coated with lime plaster; and there should be an opening in the middle of the pot, over which a concave instrument should be placed as follows.
It should be made of silver or bronze; the end with the granules should be inserted into the mouth of the sick person until the vapor reaches the vein through the tube until the vein becomes obscured greatly.
Then repeat over it frequently until it burns.
And be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess. Usually, however, the following is added to an abscess: and it should not be done unless at the decline of its warmth (heat).
If this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed, and roll the bark of an ox's horn on its end; so that the bone of the sick person is not burned; since the bark of the ox prevents burning the bone; and this is part of good treatment with safety.
On the extraction of spines, and bones from the throat.
In this context, "spinarum" refers to fishhooks or similar objects
Often a bone or fishhook, or some other sharp object adheres in the throat.
Therefore, it is necessary to extract what appears visible on top of the object that impedes vision, after pressing the tongue with an instrument in sunlight and it becomes clear to you that it is in the throat.
And what is not apparent to you and hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make a emetic before the food has been digested in the stomach. For perhaps the attached object will be expelled through vomiting.
Or the sick person may swallow a fragment of nutmeg, or the root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread crust; or he may take a dry soft sponge fragment and tie it up with thread, then swallow it. When it reaches the place where the spine or bone is located, and it is extracted, then it comes out.
If it does not come out as we have said: then use an instrument made of lead in this shape.
Let it be thicker than a radius but less so slightly, and at its end let there be a hollow, into which you can insert easily; and the tip should have its head raised upward.
And let it touch neither the epiglottis itself nor cause a cough; lest it push the bone or spine with it, or the physician insert his hand himself.
But if the sick person inserts it himself, that is better; because of his knowledge of the place where the thing is attached; and he pushes downwards or pulls his hand with the instrument upward, all of this according to the amount prepared for him, until it comes out.
Chapter on the Extraction of Leeches.
Chapter XXXIX.
When the leech is treated with what I said in the division of cure with medicines, and it does not heal, then consider at the throat of the sick person in front of the sun, or under the sun after pressing his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
If your sight falls upon the leech, remove it with a small hook or a thin and well-placed probe.
If it is not possible with them (the small hook or thin probe): then take a hollow cannula, and insert it into the throat of the sick person up to his throat; then introduce into the hollow of the cannula hot iron with fire. Do this often, and let the sick person refrain from water all day.
Then let him receive a vessel full of cold water, and open his mouth in it; and rinse his bone with it, and do not swallow anything from it; and move the water an hour after another with his hand. The leech drops immediately upon feeling water.
If it does not come out as described, then fumigate the sick person with bedbugs, or with the tool mentioned in the treatment of an ulcer.
Do this repeatedly, for it will fall by itself.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot containing live prunes with fire, and the pot should be covered with a lid having an opening; and at the opening place the end of the tool.
Then pour the fumigation and place the sick person's mouth at the end of the cannula, and close the mouth so that the fumigation does not escape before you know that the fumigation has reached the leech. For the leech will drop immediately.
If it does not drop, then repeat the fumigation repeatedly.
Let the sick person bear thirst, eat salt and other things, but do not let him drink water.
Therefore, it is necessary for it to come out with this treatment.
And this is the form of the tool with which the leech is extracted from the throat when it falls onto it.
It resembles forceps, as you can see; except that it has this hook which enters the throat. And its end resembles the beak of a bird called ciconia, on which is the roughness of a file; when it grasps something, it does not let go at all.
Chapter on opening abscesses, their incision, and treatment in general.
Chapter XL:
The appearances of abscesses are numerous, various according to their remembrance, namely one and one in this book; and they are diverse in their perforations, and in the cutting of them from two ways.
One is of the nature of an abscess itself, and that which encompasses it from humidities.
And the second mode is due to locations where it occurs in the body.
Because an abscess happening in the head is different from an abscess happening in the anus; and an abscess happening in a fleshy place is different from an abscess happening in joints; and each of them has its own judgment according to the operation.
And among abscesses are those which should not be perforated unless after the maturation of pus in them and its completion; and from these are those which should be perforated while they are raw and do not mature according to their completion.
As abscesses which are near joints.
Because when an abscess happens near a joint and extends, as long as it becomes putrid what is in its surroundings, perhaps the ligaments or the nerves of that joint are corrupted; hence it is the cause of the contraction of that member.
Or it is an abscess near the main member; because if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, it will harm either that one or through the main member.
Or it is near the anus, so perforate it while it is immature; and it is not necessary to perforate a raw abscess, not completed digestion, except that it is near the anus, so that it does not become putrid deeply and extend towards the interior of the anus, and becomes a fistula, or becomes at its end which does not heal.
It is necessary that you know the hour of perforation of the abscess, which has ripened according to the completion; and it is at sedation of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and pulsation, and acuity of the head of the abscess; and the remaining signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same perforation at a lower place of the abscess, and of greater protrusion; and the perforation should be directed towards the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of hands and feet, and in the places of arms, shoulders, necks, veins, and finally in all places without reflection.
In those which reflect (themselves), go with the perforation according to that limb.
But when the abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better to leave the perforation of it until its digestion has confirmed, as we said according to completion.
Because if you perform the perforation on it before that (the digestion has confirmed), the course of the virus from it is prolonged, and there are many dirt and foulness, and perhaps its edges harden, and its depth.
And some abscesses are to be perforated according to the breadth of the body for necessity; or according to that limb which needs it.
And it is necessary that you administer a small perforation for small abscesses, and a large perforation for large abscesses; or multiple cuts according to the likeness of the size of the abscesses.
And there are among abscesses, in which it is necessary that the skin be concave; and it should be cut when it has already become like a cloth, and made into an end, which is already dead; such as what often happens to boils and buboes.
And among them are those which are cut by a section having three angles. And from these, one which is cut as the figure of the myrtle leaf.
As an inguinal abscess.
And among them are those in which a round section is administered, and a crescent-shaped section; and similar ones from sections.
But that which has no head, like superficial abscesses, must be pierced by a superficial perforation or just with a flat one.
And it is necessary, when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, to pierce it so that it does not burst and you extract all of the pus at once; rather, extract a part of it. Then lancet an abscess until another day. Then extract something from the pus again.
Do that repeatedly according to degree, until it comes out; especially if the person is weak in strength, or a woman pregnant, or a small child, or an old man decrepitus: for the animal spirit is many times resolved with the discharge of pus; and perhaps the weak person dies, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore beware of this chapter with great caution.
And after your perforation, by which you pierce the abscesses, it is necessary that you clean the wound; and consider. If therefore the wound of an abscess is small, or the section is flat, then administer linen cloths from linen or an old pot. And if the abscess is large, and there are many fissures of perforation, it is then necessary to insert linen into each fissure until they meet.
And if you have cut a part of the skin in an abscess, or if you have hollowed out its circumference; then it is necessary to fill it with an old pot, or as when a cloth is sewn, or shorn with linen wool without moisture; and tie it up until the third day.
Then cut it open, and care for it with what is necessary from an ointment, until it heals.
If bleeding occurs during your operation hour, then administer cold water and vinegar. After being soaked in them, place a cloth on the location of the bleeding multiple times.
If the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer treatment and medication, as I have described in many places of this our book, and by division.
If it is winter time and the location of the excision is among many nerves: then it is necessary to pour warm powders with wine and oil, and place them on the locations.
And if it is summer and the locations are fleshy: then it is necessary to place warm powders soaked in water or oil, or with wine and oil, and cool the entire thing. Until the third day, as we said, it is necessary to dissolve the excision, clean it and administer what is appropriate for its treatment until it heals.
This is therefore what is generally necessary for the knowledge of treating excisions.
According to the method of distinguishing, I have already said for every excision, how the way to its treatment is divided individually.
Chapter 41.
Chapter on the excision of excisions occurring on the skin of the head.
In the skin of the head occur small excisions, which are of the kind of knots, which are contained in the bags, which are like pouches themselves, as if they were sucked out like hen's bladders.
And their kinds are many.
Among them are fat ones: and among them are those that contain moisture similar to mud: and among them are those that contain moisture similar to scabies and powders: and those similar to them, and among them are the hard, stone-like ones.
And in the incision of all, and their extraction there is no fear, when at their incision, the artery does not make opposition.
The operation on them is to try it with the instrument whose shape comes after this, which is called "Introductory probe", until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it with a transverse incision along the length of the superficial incision according to this shape: in this manner.
And begin with the incision along line b to line g. Since the moisture is evacuated, then remove the cyst that contains this moisture, and do not leave anything in it.
For often it returns if something remains from it.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt; fill the wound with it, and let it remain until another day. For the cyst itself corrodes what remains from it.
Then again over the wound with Egyptian ointment twice, thrice, and if necessary, until you are confident that nothing remains from the cyst; then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
If the abscess contains a thick knot: then cut it according to this shape, with an incision having the form of a cross; and throw forceps between the divisions of the incision, and remove it from all sides; and try your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If the artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And similarly do for an abscess that contains stone, by incision and the same treatment, as we have said.
Incision on an abscess containing stone is easier because there is little blood or moisture. And sometimes there are some of these abscesses which are in the head in certain men, in which there is not deep moisture.
Because I have cut off above the abscess on an old woman's head, and I found the abscess to be as hard and solid as a stone, rough, white, which could not be broken: and if anyone struck it with something thrown at it, it would wound itself.
However, in other cases of abscesses in the head (except for these abscesses that occur in children's heads and at the roots of ears), their section should be a superficial one.
Or make a perforation in them always from below part of them, so that the course of pus may be relieved towards lower parts.
Then care for it with what is suitable for it from treatment.
Chapter on the section of goiters (swollen necks) in the neck.
Chapter XLII.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, under the buttocks, and in the groins; and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
On those which often occur on the neck, there is one kind and many; they are generated mutually; and every pustule from them is within its own proper tunica, as is in nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have said.
The species of these pustules are many. For from them there are hard ones; and from them there are those that contain liquids; and from them there are malignant ones, which do not obey treatment.
In that which you see good disposition from them in touch, of which it is evident that it is near to the skin color and moves to all parts, and is not attached with the neck muscles, nor with the buttocks, nor with an artery, nor is deep: it is necessary to separate it by superficial incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body along the line, b, to the line, g. And peel it off from all sides; and stretch two lips of skin with a scalpel or with several scalpels if needed, as we said in abscesses of the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is above caution, not to cut a vein or nerve.
Let the instrument not be very sharp; so as not to add your hand to the incision, or to disturb the sick person and cut what is not necessary.
If you cut a vein, or an artery, it forbids you from the operation; then place in the wound zegi powdered, or some powders that separate blood, and tie up the wound, and let it be until the sharpness of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes soft; or it begins to stink.
The blood is cut through the tunica, therefore return to your operation until you finish.
Then ask your index finger if anything remains of the small stitches: therefore cut and clean them.
If there is a large vein in the root of the stitch, then it is not to be cut from its root: instead, it should be tied with a strong double thread and left until it falls off on its own without harm.
Then fill the wound with an old lining, which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of yourself.
If the stitch is completely cut, then it is necessary that you bring together the lips of the wound: and sew them immediately, after you see that there is no superfluous remaining.
But if you see that there remains superfluity due to the size of the stitch, then it is necessary that you go towards cutting the root of it and pulling it out: and apply the suture as we have said.
And that which contains humidities from the stitches, pierce it with a superficial perforation: so that you may see its matured place: and set the perforation at the place following below the body, as we have said.
Then apply linen with ointment and similar things after the perforation to burn off what remains from corruption, until you see that the wound is clean: then take care of yourself with a stronger flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
Section on epiglottis due to suffocation inside the throat.
The ancients described this section on the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it: and this is their writing.
In those with synanchia, it is necessary to perform a section of the Epiglottis: since no benefit can be derived from it, because all veins and lungs are weak.
In those with a hot abscess in the mouth, throat or both tonsils, if there is no illness in the throat canal, it is necessary to perform a section of the Epiglottis to avoid loss from its swelling.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the Epiglottis, it is necessary to make a section of three or four circles around the Epiglottis using a small incision across its width, in that place which is between two circles, and this section should be made in sifac (a cartilage-like tissue) rather than in cartilage. This location is suitable for sectioning because it is devoid of flesh, and blood vessels are distant from it.
If the physician is timid, then it is necessary that he stretches the throat skin with a probe. Then he cuts the skin until he reaches the throat canal; he should cut the blood vessel if he sees any of it.
Then cut the sifac as we said; this is a sign of a throat canal section by phlegm that flows out from it when it bursts and the loss of voice.
And leave an open wound for some time.
When the hour comes when there is fear of swelling, gather together two lips of the wound skin and just the skin itself without the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
Says Albucasis. The summary of the discussion we have described is as follows: Exposition is not necessary except when they see that one of these abscesses has already suffocated the throat; and a weakened person who wishes to cut his breath is raised above death; they go to section the Epiglottis so that the weakened person may breathe over the wound site with some kind of breathing, and thus be saved from death; and for this reason they commanded that the wound be left open until the malicious nature of the illness has passed, which lasts about three days; then they command to close the wound and care for it until it is healed.
And that which I saw with my own eyes is, that one maidservant received a knife, and sent it into her own throat, and cut with it a part of the trachea of the lungs.
And I was summoned for her treatment, and I found her gasping, as is the gasp of the dead.
Therefore, I examined the wound, and found that blood had flowed out of it in small quantity. Therefore, I was reassured, because she had not severed the vein nor the artery; and the wind was coming out of the wound.
I approached therefore, and examined the wound, and treated it until it was well; and nothing happened to the maidservant except hoarseness of voice; and she returned on better days to a better condition.
Therefore I say that in the sectioning of the epiglottis, there is no fear.
Section on hernia of the throat.
Chapter XLIIII.
This abscess called hernia of the throat is a large abscess, according to the color of the body; and it is found much more often in women.
It is according to two modes: for it is either natural or accidental.
In the natural, certainly there is no congenital condition.
Accidental is, in two modes: one of which is similar to fatty nodes. The other mode is similar to an ulcer that comes from the swelling of an artery. And in this (there is) fear, and it should not be presumed with the iron, towards it, unless in that which is small: and you prove it, and you explore it with a probe. If you find it similar to a fatty node and it is not suspended with some veins: then cut it, as knots are cut; and extract it along with what contains it from the cavity, if it is in the cavity: and if not, then examine its entirety. Then care for the place where it should be treated, until it heals.
Chapter XLV.
[Title: On Cutting over Types of Knots.]
There are many types of knots, and I have already said all their species in division: and it is necessary that here the difference between a Knot and an Abscess be explained, when there is doubt.
I say therefore, that when an Abscess is heat and fever, and violent pains, until the boil subsides, and the overflow of pus is completed; then fever and heat subside.
But a Knot is not heat nor fever, nor pains; and it contains them in a bladder or sac that belongs to it, which is proper to the body: and it is closed like a pea or a date, and made like a walnut, and greater or smaller.
And they are, in two types: either fatty; or containing moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, as I said in division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a Knot, you should test it, and investigate it first with an instrument that is called a Probe, according to its form, which will come in the chapter that follows this one.
The method of investigating boils and all nodes is to take this instrument and insert it into the moist place found in the boil: then you rotate your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then, lay your hand according to the measure of the size of the boil.
Then extract what has been inserted, and observe what emerges in its track.
If what emerges is running moisture, whatever its color, then cut it off with a superficial incision, as I have said regarding the other boils.
And if no running moisture emerges in the track of the insertion, then you know it is greasy: cut it off above it with an incision having the form of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and hang it up with hooks, and scrape the skin off from all sides with ease: and keep the container if possible over it, so that you can draw out the pus with the node.
If the container breaks apart during the operation and it is not possible to draw out the pus, then extract it fragmentarily until there remains some.
For if a little or much remains, the node returns most frequently.
If it prevails over you and a little remains: then fill the wound at its completion with some corrosive sharp powders: and suture the wound, and place warm poultice over the boil where it sits, and treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If the node is large, then either two lips of its own accord will form, or you must treat it with that which makes it incarnate (i.e., grow inward).
But if it is contrary to a pulsating vein or non-pulsating one, then proceed, and fill the place with zega (a kind of powder) that has been crushed, and leave it sutured for two or three days until the wound becomes putrid and the boiling of blood subsides: then return to incise what remains from the node.
In capitulo quod sequitur dictur de figura corporis hum
External instruments for cutting and piercing.
These are the shapes of instruments and they are of three kinds.
Among them is the large one, among them is the middle-sized one, and among them is the small one.
Let them be made of iron, square at both ends properly, so that they may penetrate easily into a festered wound.
These are the shapes of perforating instruments, and there are three kinds of them. One of them is called a beryl, that is to say, a piercing instrument.
Among them is the large one, among them is the middle-sized one, and among them is the small one.
They come together to treat festered wounds, and ulcers, and abscesses, and buboes which are within bones.
And others are round, smooth, and blunt like the large needles which are used for cushions, namely of citron, or brass, or iron, or silver.
Better among them are those made of citron.
They are also made of black lead, which come together to probe abscesses whose concavity is for reflections so that they may be reflected with their bluntness along with those reflections.
There are again three kinds. Because there are long ones, medium-sized ones, and short ones, according to the size of the abscess and its constriction.
The shape of forceps, and there are many kinds.
Because there are simple ones, that is to say those with a single curve; and there are three kinds as you see, large, medium-sized, and small.
And among them are blind forceps: and there are three kinds.
And among them are forceps with two curves; and there are three kinds of these too: and among them are forceps with three curves; and there are three kinds of these too; and all of these are necessary in their place.
These are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and ulcers are cut and scraped, and they are of three types, since one is large, another is medium, and still another is small.
The extremities by which cutting is done are sharp, the other extremities are not sharp; they are not used in this way except to provide aid in scraping nodes, when fear of incising a vein or nerve arises, and so that the weak may heal and find temporary relief from the burning sensation that is found with the scraping of ulcers.
They are made of iron and are similar to a drill with which alcohol is made; and there is a hidden spatula-like point at the wide end, which runs both internally and externally as desired, just as you see.
The form of the spatula-like instruments hidden between the fingers during the perforation of ulcers; these are not grasped by the weak; and they are of three types, large, medium, and small.
The form of the ventosas (surgical instruments) with which blood flow is cut; and they are of three types, large, medium, and small.
They should be made of iron or brass, round, shorter than you see, and fine.
And it is necessary that these forms of the ventosas be large and small with you so that you can cut blood quickly when necessary, and then when medicine is not present with you.
However, you shall not use them for the cutting of blood in every part of the body, nor shall you use them except in fleshy places: such as the thighs, hips, arms, breasts, abdomen, groin, and similar parts of fleshy areas that are moist.
And sometimes they become small instruments similar to the fists' cores, according to their shape; with which the blood is cut off when it flows from the site of phlebotomy or incision of a vein or an artery; and sometimes they become round-shaped ones according to this form.
Chapter XLVII.
On the Care of Breast Lumps in Men that resemble those of Women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell during sleep (that is, when they begin to become dirty in sleep), until they resemble women's breasts; and remain unclean after this.
Whoever is disgusted by this, it is necessary that he cuts the breasts with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this form from line a to line b, then scrapes off all the fatty tissue. Then fill the wound with ointment of incarnateum (a type of ointment or salve). Then gather two lips of the wound with suture, and take care of it until it heals.
If the breast, however, falls to a lower position and becomes soft due to its size, as happens with women; then it is necessary that it be excavated on both sides of the upper breasts in two crescent-shaped incisions similar in form, one containing the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller, according to this form from line a to line b. Then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips and remove the fatty tissue, and administer what I have said about suturing and powders, which is necessary for care until it heals.
If, however, you do not complete the incision that is necessary for you to make, due to the restlessness of the sick or due to bleeding; then fill the wound with a cottaged cloth soaked in a corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes what remains from the fatty tissue. Then care for yourself until you are healed.
On the Perforation of an Abscess which happens under Titillicus.
Chapter XLVIII.
These abscesses which occur under Titillicus, are of the types of hardened boils that contain cysts and those that contain moisture.
Therefore, those which contain moisture should be opened by lunar section according to this form from line b to line g. When all that is within the abscess has been evacuated with pus, then fill it up with an old cloth and leave it for another day.
Then remove the cloth, and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
If the abscess is of the kind of hardened boils (nodules), then cut it open as we said when cutting on hardened boils equally.
If the wound extends such that it discharges pus, then administer cautery to it, according to what we said in the preceding text.
Chapter XLIX.
Chapter: On the incision of an abscess due to Artery and Vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it hardens, often an abscess occurs there; similarly, an abscess and swelling occur in veins as well.
And the signs by which it is recognized that an abscess and swelling are due to an artery or a vein are as follows: for if an abscess is due to an artery, it is long, compacted in the depth of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, it feels as if there is a grating sound.
And what is due to a vein is round in the open part of the body.
And incision over this abscess is an error, and particularly when it is under the armpits, groins, neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very dangerous. Therefore, its care should be avoided with iron, and what is even more so in the extremities or head, it should be avoided.
Therefore, over that which is due to the swelling of an artery opening, make an incision in the skin in lengthwise direction. Then open the incision with scissors, then the artery; and free it from tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert a probe under it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread at two places, as I taught you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
Then puncture the place between the two ligaments with a lancet, until all the blood that is there comes out, and the abscess is dissolved.
Then administer a treatment that generates pus, until the ligaments fall off; afterwards, care for it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the abscess is due to a vein incision, then you should hold with your hand as much of the abscess with skin as possible. Then insert the needle at the place you held with your hand, and make it penetrate. Let there be a double thread in it until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie the cyst with a good suture; as I told you before, in the suture of a sheep's gut, attach it to both sides with two ends of thread.
If you fear that the thread may be drawn out, then insert another needle with another thread under the cyst near the incision. Press and bind your threads in four places.
Then cut the cyst in half until it comes out what is inside; then cut off the excess skin and release what was tied from there.
Then place the potion you have immersed in wine and oil on top of it. Then apply the treatment which is made with linen cloths and ointments until it heals.
Chapter L. (Roman numeral)
[Section title] On cyst occurring due to twisting of nerves.
As a cyst occurs in arteries and veins, similarly it occurs in nerves; which happens to them due to trauma or excessive labor and similar causes; and mostly occurs at joints of hands or feet, or in any place where joints move; and the cyst is severe.
It resembles the color of the rest of the body and is found in multiple locations without pain; when it is squeezed with violence, it feels weak, like a numbness.
And the cyst is not gathered deep within the body; on the contrary it is under the skin and moves in every direction and does not reach toward the front or back.
Therefore, it should not be incised with iron where it is located at joints. Perhaps it may happen as contraction.
In what there is in the head or the forehead, find the skin with cautery. If therefore it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps and cut it off from the root.
And if it is large, then hang it up with a hook and peel it; afterwards remove it, and dress the wound with suture; take care of it until it heals.
Chapter LXI.
Chapter on incising an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
Accidents to some men often in their bellies, and in the remainder of their bodies, a growth called Fungalia, which is similar to mushrooms.
Its root is subtle, and its head is thick, and they are turned inside out with their lips. And there is among them something small, and there is among them what can be greatly increased.
And indeed I have already seen a man, and in his belly there were two growths that were more similar to mushrooms than other things: there was no difference between them, white, with fine roots, and they turned inside out, were closed, and moisture always flowed out from them.
I therefore cut them and found the weight of one as X VIII ounces and in the other as VI ounces. The operation on their incision is that you consider if the patient is weak, and the growth is white, moist, with subtle roots: then make the incision with a wide spatula, and have cauteries in your presence.
For often much blood is expelled upon the incision of it: therefore approach if blood conquers you, then cauterize it.
If you see a weak, fearful and timid person from the incision with iron, then take a well-made wire made of lead, and bind it to athelul: whose method is as we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then add in the binding of lead. Therefore do not cease to bind the lead, whenever it presses against the growth, until it is cut off and falls out without effort.
If however the growth of thick roots is, then there is fear and horror in its incision: especially because it is in the belly.
However, it is possible to make an incision in the middle of it. Then cauterize it, so it does not return.
Then treat it, until the wound is healed.
Be careful not to cut what is of a dark purple color, having few senses and an offensive appearance; for it is an apostematic cancer; and I will come again with the reminder of Cancer after this.
Chapter LII.
Chapter on the treatment of hernia in the navel.
A swelling of the umbilicus occurs for various reasons. It arises from hernias of the sciatic nerve, which is above the abdomen; or it comes out either bowel or intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. It arises from blood flowing from a vein, or an artery, as was mentioned before. Or it arises from obstruction of wind in it.
If it is due to a hernia of the sciatic nerve and the passage of worms; then its color is similar to that of an abscess; it is soft, painless; and its position appears diverse. And if it is due to the passage of the intestine, then its position is much more diverse than what we have mentioned before. When you press it with your fingers, it disappears; then it returns and perhaps there is a sound; and it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath and causes severe pain.
If it is due to moisture, it is soft; then it does not disappear when pressed with your hand, nor can it be compressed, nor does it increase in size.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs appears an abscess turning black from the clavicle.
But if it is due to fleshy matter; then it is a heavy, large, hard abscess and pus collects according to its quantity.
If it is due to wind, then when touched it is soft.
And the treatment in this case is to determine whether the swelling of the umbilicus is due to blood from an artery or vein, or wind; then it is necessary to prevent its treatment. For there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I said abscesses due to an artery or vein.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to intestine or hernia: then it is necessary that you order the patient to hold his breath and stand stretched out. Then sign with the encaustic around the entire navel. Then order him to lie down on his back upon your hands on his back. Then circle with a broad lath around the navel at the place which you marked with the encaustic. Then extend the middle part of the probe upward with a large hook. Then bind him around with a strong cord or with silk thread and the knot should be that of the alembic.
Then open the middle part of the probe which has been extended beyond the knot. If therefore you find it already caught by the knot: then extract the alembic, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen; and if you find a hernia, then take it with the hook, and cut off its superfluous part.
If however it is an artery or vein (which is contrary to you): then circle it much. Then return to your surgery. And take two needles and insert two strong threads into them; and insert the two needles into the circle which you made around the abscess in the form of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then stitch the abscess in four places on the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave a gap, until the rotten flesh extends: and falls off by itself; or cut it when it has become soft and rots away.
Then take care of him with whatever is required from the unguents until he is healed.
If the protrusion of the navel is from a hernia or dampness in him: then it is necessary to hollow out the abscess as we have said. And you draw out blood or moisture which you find there.
Then care for the wound along with it to make it close up.
Chapter LIII.
Chapter on Treating Cancer.
We have already discussed the types of cancer in the section on diagnosis and treatment methods for it; how to treat it with medicines and the need to avoid cutting or damaging it with iron. We also mentioned that cancer originates in the matrix (breast) and advised against using cautery in its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a location where it can be completely removed, such as cancer of the breast or hip, and similar locations, from limbs intended to be amputated; especially when it is a small, newly developing cancer.
But when it has become old and large, one should not approach it (to operate).
For I myself was unable to cure anyone from that affliction; nor have I ever seen anyone else succeed in treating it.
And the operation on it, when located as mentioned above, is to make an incision and release the patient from black bile several times (to drain it). Then perform venesection on the individual if you find a clear sign of its presence (the cancer).
Then prepare the patient by applying a preparation to the area where the operation will take place.
Then insert needles into the cancer that suit its location. Then hollow out the cancer from all sides with the skin, according to examination, until no trace of its roots remains; allow blood to flow out and do not remove it quickly or cut into it directly. Instead, press out the larger blood vessels with your hand or as possible with the instruments available there.
If the flow of large amounts of blood from an incision in an artery or vein hinders you, then cauterize the vein until the bleeding stops. Then care for yourself with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
On the Care for Dropsy.
Chapter LIV (Roman numerals). We have already spoken about the types of Dropsy and how water accumulates; and all signs, and its treatment with medications.
And that which is treated with iron is only the type of ascites alone; and it does not approach iron when treating the type of tympanites; neither deeply for the type of hypersarcies, because it is fatal.
When you have been treated for this type of Dropsy (tympanites) with medications and the treatment does not help; then consider. For if the patient has already come to weakness, or there is another illness besides Dropsy (such as cough, looseness of bowels, and similar conditions); then beware not to treat him with iron; because it is dangerous.
But if you see a patient with an excess of strength and no other illness besides Dropsy; and he is not a child nor old; then the method of operation for him is to lift the weakened patient standing in your hands, and a servant behind him presses his abdomen by hand, forcing water down to the lower part of his chest.
Then take a sharp needle of this shape. Let it have two sharp points and long, with a sharp tip like a needle. However, there should be something short on it so that you do not go through with it during the operation to the intestines and injure it.
Then consider. For if Dropsy generation is from the intestines; then it must be extended with a cut of three fingers' width below the navel towards the lower part above the breastbone.
If however generation of Hydropsis is due to liver disease: then let your section be left from the navel by three fingers.
And if it is due to the spleen, then let your section be right-sided: and it is not necessary that the section should be on the side where the sick person wants to lie, so that excess fluids do not flow to that weak place.
Then pierce the skin entirely with an instrument. Then insert your hand into the incision, and with a spatula scrape under the skin, as if you are peeling it off: let the quantity that is scraped off be the size of a fingernail or about that much.
Then pierce the peeled skin, until the spatula reaches an empty place: and that is the watery area. Then remove it, and insert an instrument of this form into the opening. And it is similar to a cannula: it should be made of silver, copper, brass, lead, cleaned; on its lower part there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other side: the end of it should have a cut like the opening of a reed, as you see; at the top of its upper end is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately descends upon the instrument, therefore let out as much liquid from the hour as is a half measure.
Because if you let out more than necessary from it, the sick person may perhaps die by depletion of his animal spirit; or he may suffer a syncope approaching death.
But let out from it according to its strength and according to the signs of the sick person's pulse and the quality of it.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
What it is, because it is immediately retained due to the skin that retains the opening which is on the sifac; about which I have told you to pierce it in this manner.
Then on the second day use the instrument again if you see that it can bear it; and also extract a small amount from water.
Do this for some days without fear, and keep yourself away from error; until there remains in the water only a little.
If you fear for the weak one, and let out a large amount from the water; then take care of him with warm sand, much sweat in the bath and sun, and wait for thirst; and take care of him with the most drying medicines until he is cured; and cauterize over the stomach, spleen, and liver, after the extraction of the water; according to what I have told you in what preceded.
Chapter on the care of infants born in places where their urinary tracts are not pierced.
Chapter LV. (Roman numerals)
When someone among infants is born from the womb of his mother and the head of the child is not pierced or the opening is narrowed, or it is in a wrong place.
Therefore it is necessary to help with the piercing of it immediately when it is born, with a very sharp spatula, according to this shape.
Then place in the opening a thin awl made of lead and tie it; and hold it for three or four days.
When he therefore wants to emit urine, it is to be removed and mixed. Then return him.
And if you do not put lead, it is already possible that the urine flowing over the place does not allow him to close.
But he whose opening is narrowed, is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days until it is expanded.
Those who have a hole in an improper place are injured. Because from the one who is born, a hole is at the end of the spine: therefore it cannot copulate to the front until he raises the penis with his hand to the upper parts. There is no generation for him because semen cannot reach the womb in a straight manner: and it is a very foul disease.
The method of treatment in this case is to have the sick person lie on his back. Then extend the head of his penis with your left hand using a strong stretch, and cut off the head of the penis at the place of priapism, with a sharp knife or lancet, similar to cutting reeds, or like rooting something out, so that it becomes similar to the head of the penis. And let the hole fall in the middle as necessary.
And be careful during your treatment to avoid bleeding. Indeed, this often occurs. Therefore, place a bandage on the area that is bleeding and care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter on Alabaster that occurs in the foreskin and penis, and on rotting, blackening, and sticking.
Chapter 66.
Often these Alabasters occur in the penis, and it is a swelling of foul flesh.
And from this one kind is malignant, and another is not.
Therefore, if it is not malignant, you should hang it with a fine hook and cut off the entirety of it until it is clean. Then put a bowl containing Egyptian ointment over it. Then care for the man himself afterwards with dyafinicon ointment until he is healed.
If the Alabaster is malignant and of a foul color, then you must administer cauterization after its cutting and removal.
If Albather is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and a part of it is inside and a part outside, then you must first remove the Albather that is inside, until it hardens, then take care of it externally; because when you are caring for it at the same time, the foreskin will not heal except that it may break open.
And this also happens in the testicles, and the foreskin turns black and rots. Therefore, you must hollow out everything that has turned black, as well as what is about to rot or already rotten.
Then apply linseed soaked in honey that has been crushed, with the powder of walnuts and sieved herbs.
Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If there is a bleeding, then administer cautery with lunar cautery in this manner:
For the cautery is useful for two conditions at once, namely for bleeding and wounds when they are wounded.
If the head of a rod is corroded and destroyed completely within an hour: then you must insert a canal into the penis made of lead for the sick person to urinate through it.
However, in the case of the adherence of the foreskin with the head of the rod, and this adhesion does not occur except in a man whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required on it; and sometimes adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess: therefore, you must remove it with a blunt spatula (Spatumili) until the ligament dissolves, and the head of the rod is released from all sides.
If it is difficult to determine exactly which one it is, then you must remove something from the head of the rod and from the foreskin. When the foreskin is delicate, it may be perforated quickly due to its delicacy.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin linen cloth that has been soaked in cold water, to prevent them from sticking together again.
Then it is treated with wine of mummies until it sets.
Chapter 57.
Chapter on the purification of infants and the treatment of errors that occur to them.
Chapter 57. Circumcision is not a release from continuity, like other wounds; however, since it is our operation, done by our will, and its use is particularly in boys, it is necessary to mark the operation as better and the way leading to health as easier.
Therefore, the ancients did not say anything about circumcision in any of their books; because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience.
That is because I found most of the craftsmen and phlebotomists to use mundification by circumcising with a new knife and forceps; and they use cauterization, ligature with thread, and incision with the nail.
And I have already tested all these methods, and found no better one than mundification with forceps, and ligature with thread.
Because in mundification with a new knife, the skin often escapes. Because the skin of the foreskin has two layers; therefore, perhaps it is the upper layer that is cut and the lower layer torn; consequently, there is a need for another incision to be made, resulting in pain. And with the cauterization that is done by cautery, that is, by the fingers (as used by cobblers), the incision of the tip of the male member is not made secure; because perhaps it enters the opening of that member.
In the process of amputation when a nail, perhaps it pierces iron, and corrupts your operation; indeed, the skin of a child is naturally short, and often such things happen that do not require mundification; I have already seen this.
In the use of amputation with forceps and ligament using thread, I have found it a good experiment: since forceps are proportional to the incision; therefore, because the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. Since therefore you press your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportionate and they make a single incision at the same time; and there is a compression of the shape, holding the skin on all sides with it, so that no error occurs altogether.
And the method of your own operation is to estimate a boy particularly, if he is among those who understand little, which you do not do, except that you tie the thread on his member only; and let it be until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy as much as possible for you because he receives understanding from it. Then make him stand among your prepared hands and not be seated; and conceal the forceps in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy sees them absolutely, nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his member and blow on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the penis appears. Then clean it from the fact that it collects dirt.
Then tie the marked place with double thread. Then tie below it a little ligature in addition. Then hold with your index and thumb the place of the lower ligature well, and cut between two ligatures. Then quickly peel off the skin upward and extract the head of the splint. Then let the blood flow slowly (it is better this way) and sprinkle powder on top. Place a cloth over the powder on which the boiled lamb's lung soaked in rosewater has been crushed with fresh good oil: leave it on this until another day. Take care of it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
The shape of the forceps for cleansing is as follows.
There should be two pointed extremities and they should converge; the end of the nail should not extend into them. The length of both points should be equal to the length of two handles equally.
But an error occurring during cleansing is that all the internal skin may escape or part of it near the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch it from your hour with your nail before the excision of the place and cut it evenly.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and cut it.
If it passes three days and there remains what is inflated under the splint, then leave it until the abscess settles down, and peel off the crust easily, cut it as prepared for you, and be careful not to touch the head of the splint. It will not harm him that.
Therefore, take care of it with the remedy that consolidates the wound with the powders mentioned in the treatise on powders: and if it is cut through the skin beyond measure and goes upwards, it will not harm him either.
Take care of it with that until it heals.
Head LVIII.
Chapter on the extraction of retained worm in the bladder.
Urinary retention in the bladder occurs due to an obstruction made from a stone, frozen blood, pus, flesh born, and similar things from those which we have said under the methods of treatment in division.
And if the urine does not resolve and you see that its retention is due to a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary that he be weakened on his knees bent. Then let his feet be placed on top of his back, and he shall stretch out his stomach from the upper part of his back and tighten his weakened breathing as much as possible for him. Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is compelled to expel the stone, the urine is discharged.
If the urine does not resolve with what has been said and there is great pain for the weak: then it is necessary to administer extraction of him with an instrument which is called syringe, whose form is as follows: It should be made from silver, subtle, soft, concave like a bird's feather quill in delicacy and radius, long like the palm of one hand and its middle: let the nozzle be delicate at the tip of it.
And the method of urine outlet through it is as follows: take a double thread and tie at its end wool or cotton, good binding: insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: cut with scissors if there is excess wool, but forcefully introduce it into the nozzle like a gush.
Then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and white goat's cheese: let him sit the weak one on a chair, and warm the bladder and his penis with moist oils, olive oil, and warm water.
Then introduce the syringe into the vein with ease, until it reaches the root of the vein.
Then fold it above the part of the navel. (This appears to refer to a bandage or wrap.)
Then push the syringe into it (the vein) until it reaches the bladder, and let the weak one feel that it has reached an empty place: this is not done according to this order unless because the channel through which it goes is where there is a twist.
Then extend the thread with wool slowly. (This appears to be part of a suturing process.) The vine will follow the wool. (This sentence seems unclear in context, as it does not appear to have any medical or
Then remove it (the catheter), and make the vine run through the urine way: and repeat the syringe, and do not stop doing that until the bladder is emptied, and the weak one finds relief. (This appears to be part of a process for draining the bladder.)
Section on the quality of the cleansing of the bladder with Clepsydras. (A Clepsyda was an ancient water clock used to measure the flow of liquids, and in medical contexts
Chapter LIX. (This could be a chapter or section number from
When there is an ulcer or blood congeals or pus forms in the bladder, and it wants to distill waters and medicines into it: then make it with an instrument called a Clepsyda, and this is its form. (It seems that the Clepsyda is being described as a medical instrument used for treating conditions of the bladder.)
It is indeed deaf, that is, closed. (This sentence appears to be describing a characteristic of the Clepsyda or similar medical device mentioned And there are three holes in it, two on one side and one on the other side, as you see. (This description continues to describe the Clepsyda or similar medical device.)
And the hollow place where it is pushed should be according to the quantity that it can do without addition, until when it is drawn with it something is attracted from humidities: and when it is pushed, with it whatever is expelled is sent far away: this is how a Clepsyda works, which throws out naphta, that is, Greek fire in the wars of Mars. (This sentence appears to be describing the operation or function of the Clepsyda or similar medical device.)
When therefore you wish to discharge liquids into the bladder, introduce the end of a cannula into the liquid and draw up what forces it upward; for the liquid is drawn into the concavity of the cannula.
Then introduce its end into a tube (syringe), as we have said before. Then force the liquid up with it (the cannula), for the liquid reaches the bladder immediately, so that it feels weak.
Make a fine enema for the bladder.
Let it be made of silver or tin; its head should resemble a syringe slightly smaller in size, and below it there should be a cavity where a string can pass through.
Then take the bladder of a sheep and place the liquid in it, with which you wish to administer an enema to the bladder. Then tie up the bladder between two pouches with a strong suture using thick thread, and heat the liquid slightly over the fire.
Then introduce the end of the enema into the tube (syringe), then press your hand over the bladder with the liquid while applying a decent pressure until it feels weak, because the liquid has already reached the bladder.
If however the bladder is not present (for you), then take a piece of parchment, make a circle out of it, and pierce a hole in the entire circumference of it. Then insert a thread through the holes as they are wound (rolled). Then join the circle together like parchment is glued; after you put into it what you wish from the liquids, oils and water.
Then tie it up in an instrument, and use it as you did with the bladder by expression with your hand, until the liquid reaches the bladder.
De oculo exsectando.
On the extraction of a stone.
We have already discussed the appearance of a stone, its treatment with medicines, and its distinction between stones generated in kidneys, bladder, and the whole; we have also stated that operation on a stone is performed with hand and section; furthermore, the stone generated in the bladder properly is meant; and moreover, that which occurs in the spermatic cord; and finally, I am telling you this with a clear explanation and abbreviation.
The stone generated in the bladder most frequently occurs in boys.
Moreover, among its signs is that the urine exits from the bladder like water in its subtlety; it appears in it as white sand, and an afflicted man rubs his spermatic cord, labors with it, and often hangs down. Then it becomes erect and exits together with the anus in many of them.
The healing of boys is easy until they reach fourteen years of age. It is difficult in the elderly. But it is moderate in young men, because it is between that [condition] and its cure is easier for the one whose stone is larger; and if it is small, the treatment is reversed.
When we come to the treatment, it is first necessary that we cleanse the afflicted one with an enema, which draws out all the feces that are in his intestines; indeed, sometimes it prevents the discovery of the stone during examination.
Then the afflicted one should be taken with his feet, shaken and moved downwards; so that the stone descends to the depth of the bladder or leaps out from a high place several times.
Then let him sit between your hands, prepared; and his hands should be under his buttocks so that the bladder becomes totally relaxed towards the lower part.
Then ask him and touch him from outside.
If you feel a stone [calculus] in the space (bladder or urethra), then immediately approach it with incision on top of it.
If it does not fall with your touch at all, then you should wash the finger with oil of the left hand if the boy is weak; or the middle finger if he is a young man; and introduce it into his anus, and ask about the stone, until it lies under your finger; and gradually turn it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and push it towards the outside to the place where you wish to make the incision; and command one of the assistants to press on the bladder with his hand, and command another assistant to raise the testicles with his right hand to the upper parts; and with the other hand, remove the skin that is under the testicles in the part from the place where the incision is made.
Then insert a pointed probe (speculum) of this shape: And find the place that is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, on the side of the left buttock; and make the incision over the stone, and your finger should be in the anus; and make a transverse incision so that the incision outside is wide and the inside is narrow, according to the quantity, so that the exit of the stone from it is not larger.
Perhaps the finger pressing on the stone in the anus during incision will compress it and come out without difficulty.
And know that from the stone are its angles and edges, for this reason its exit is difficult due to it.
And from it [stone] is smooth, like a testicle, and round; and the exit of it will be easy.
To him who has angles and edges, add a fracture (incision).
If it does not come out, then it is necessary that you apply pressure on it; or you tie over it as one ties a cord around a stone, which does not loosen from it; or you insert under it a subtle instrument with a curved tip.
If you cannot press on it, then slightly enlarge the opening (foramen). If something restrains you by blood, cut it with a knife.
If the stone is larger than one (small stone), first push on the bladder bone. Then cut it over there (the bladder). Next, push a small one after that; and do the same if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then ignorance is to cut through it with a large incision. Since it happens to the sick that one of two things occurs to him, either he dies or there is constant urine discharge; this is because the place does not heal at all.
But administer its evacuation until it comes out; or apply pressure to the fracture with forceps until you extract it gradually.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with turpentine, aloe, and dragon's blood; bind it, place a cloth soaked in oil and wine (or rose oil) and cold water on top of it to settle down the abscess.
Then turn the sick man over onto his neck and do not loosen the bandage for three days. When you loosen it (the bandage), anoint the place with oil and water.
Then care for him with diaphanus ointment and basilica ointment until he is healed.
If a hot abscess or similar occurs in the wound, add catharsis and other such remedies; like if blood freezes in the bladder, and urine is prevented from passing out of it; and this is known by the passage of both blood and urine. Insert your finger into the wound, and draw out the blood. If it remains, it provokes the corruption of the wound, and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and apply to it everything that is appropriate for healing, until it heals.
And during the entire healing process, you must tie two thighs together and apply a poultice, because of the medicaments that are placed on the site.
If the stone is small and located in the penis, and a bladder stone presses against it, preventing urine from exiting; then treat it with what I described before you reach the incision. For many times you will be released from the incision by this treatment, for I have already proved it.
And take a "Perforator" made of iron, with this shape: triangular at one end and sharp; fixed to wood.
Then take a thread, and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the "Perforator" iron into the penis easily, until the "Perforator" reaches the stone; and with your hand rotate the Perforator slowly on the stone; and you force the perforation until it makes the stone penetrate from the other side.
Urine is released immediately.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outside part of the penis. It breaks and comes out with the urine, and the sick one heals.
But if this treatment is not prepared for you for some reason that prevents it; then tie a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut across the stone on the penis between the two ties. Then extract him. Then loosen the ligament and clean the frozen blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread under the stone, unless to prevent its return to the bladder: and another ligament on top, unless so that when the thread is loosened after the stone's exit, the skin returns to its place, and seals the wound: and for this reason, it is necessary for you to do so, when tying the upper thread, to lift the skin upward, so that it returns at the wound's edge, and seals the wound, as we have said.
Chapter 61.
Chapter on the Extraction of Stones in Women.
A stone is rarely generated in women.
If a stone happens to one of them, then the cure is difficult and it is forbidden due to many reasons.
One reason is that the woman may be a virgin.
And the second is, because you will not find a woman who will disclose herself to the doctor when she is chaste or married.
The third is, because you will not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially in the operation with the hand.
The fourth is, distance from the place of the stone: which requires a deep incision, and there is fear.
If necessity forces it, then one must accept a skilled woman: and such women are rarely found.
If you are unable to do it, then look for a chaste doctor, subtle and experienced in women's matters, or a woman who is familiar with this art: make her present, and especially instruct her to perform everything that you tell her about the stone.
First, check if the woman is a virgin: then one must insert a finger into her anus and search for the stone.
If therefore it is found (the stone), immobilize it with his finger, and then command the midwife to insert her finger into the weak bladder, and to investigate the stone, after she has placed her left hand on the bladder and compresses it with a good pressure.
If the stone is found, it should be gently moved from the bladder opening towards the lower part with utmost strength until it reaches the root of the hip.
Then cut it near the middle of the bladder at the root of the hip from whatever side it is prepared, and feel for the stone in that place; and his finger should not be removed from the stone, pressing down on it; and let the incision be small in the beginning. Then introduce a ray into that incision.
Then introduce a ray into that incision. If (he) feels the stone, then he should add to the incision according to the size proportional to which the stone is coming out from there.
And know that the shapes of stones are numerous. For this reason, it is small and large, smooth and rough, long, and round with branches.
Know its shape so that it may be signified to you about that which you wish.
If blood overwhelms (you), then add a little crushed wood ash at the place, and hold it for an hour until the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out; and make sure that you prepare yourself with the instruments which I have said for the removal of stones in men, in order to help you in your operation.
If the flow of blood overwhelms (you) and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an incised artery; then place powder on the spot and tighten it with appropriate ligatures; do not move it; and leave the stone and do not extract it yourself. Perhaps a weak woman may die. Then care for the wound.
When the sharpness of blood subsides after days and the place rots, then return to your procedure until the stone comes out.
Head, LXII.
Section on watery hernia.
A moist worm (ramex aquosa) is not anything else but a gathering of moisture within the albubo (sifac), which is beneath the scrotal skin containing the egg (ovum): and it is called albubo (sifac).
And sometimes it is in its own panniculus (fatty tissue) which nature has prepared for it on the testicle's part until it is considered mature: which is another egg and lies between the albubo (sifac) white, as we said; and this does not happen often.
And the generation of this ramex (worm) is indeed due to weakness that happens to testicles: therefore, this material flows into them. And sometimes it occurs due to a blow upon the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. For the color of this moisture can be sloping towards lemon (citrinitas), or red and blood-like (sanguineus rubeus), or feculent (foul-smelling), black, or watery white, and this is what is more common.
And the signs by which it is known where the gathering of moisture is, are these: If it is in a white boil as we said, then the hemorrhoid is round and shorter in size like the figure of an eye; and it does not appear as a testicle, since moisture keeps it contained from all sides.
And if there is moisture within the pouch itself, then the hemorrhoid is round like part of an eye, and therefore it bursts because it is another egg.
And if there is moisture between the skin of the testicles and the white boil, then it falls under the sensation (of pain or discomfort).
Therefore, when you have knowledge of the color of moisture, then test the color of moisture in the hemorrhoid with a square probe, whose shape precedes (the hemorrhoid). According to that which emerges in the footprint of the probe, judge regarding what is between it (the hemorrhoid and the probe).
When we come for treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you order the sick person to be bled if it is possible for him, and look at his body full (of fluid).
Then he lies on his back on a low bench and puts many cloths under him.
Then you sit on the left side of him, and order the servant to sit at his right, who extends his arm from one side of the skin of the testicles to the part of the rectum (anus).
Then take a broad spatula and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length up to the comb (pubic bone); and make an incision according to the rectitude of the line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white boil encompassing; and scrape and observe it, or be careful not to cut it; and let your scraping be more on the part that hangs with the testicle towards the egg (anus); and examine carefully with your scraping according to the quantity that you can handle.
Then, perforate a bladder full of water with a wide perforation and drain out all the water.
Then separate between two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the bladder upward, and do not touch the skin surrounding the testicles holding it: and cut the bladder in any way possible for you to cut it, either entirely or piecemeal, especially the thin side. For if you do not examine and scrutinize [the area], there is no security in the incision lest water return.
If however an egg comes out externally from its own skin during your operation hour: then when you complete the incision of the bladder, bring it back. Then join two lips of the skin of the testicles with a stitch.
Then take care of it as any other wound until it heals.
If you find an egg corrupted by another blackness, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels, which are the supports, fearing bleeding.
Then cut off the testicle with its support, and extract the egg; afterwards take care of it as I said before.
If however water is accumulated in two parts, then you know that there are two branches: therefore cut the other part as equally as you did in the other.
And if it appears to you that the operation should be one, then do so; afterwards cleanse the blood. And insert into the incisions a wool soaked in oil, or pink oil; and place another wool outside which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles, and search the bowels; and put double cloths on top of it, which are small towels; and tie them above with a ligament having six knots according to this form.
Then two cloths are taken, washed, and filled with carbonic acid, according to this likeness: and the ends of it which are pressed [together] should be covered with wet wool; and they are tied together in the loins: one end is received on the anus up to the back, and the other on the part of the neck: and two ends below on the lower legs, and two other ends above on the groins; and the whole tie is tied together in the loins.
And at times, this ramel is artificially treated with a cautery in place of section, with iron: and it is to receive the cautery scalpel, subtle, and cut the skin of the testicles: and it is to be lit, as we have told: until when the sifac white containing water is exposed: then receive the cautery, according to this form.
The letter is made similar to Greek.
Then pierce it with that [tool], and it is set on fire until all the moisture exits.
Then spread out the sifac with a spatula, and burn it with a subtle cautery that has been set alight, and cut it as much as possible for you, until you have excised all of it.
And be careful not to let the fire touch the egg.
Know that this operation is safer, farther from bleeding, and better than the operation with a section.
But if it opposes you in the hour of section, or in the hour of cauterization, an abscess, or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary that you take care of what opposes you from that with a cure suitable for it, according to what has been mentioned.
But if the patient is afraid and does not await this operation, because of its horror: then administer a perforation according to what I have told you: and it is.
When you are assured by that which I have said about the meanings, that the ramel is watery: then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat.
Then pierce the abscess at its lower part with a wide spatula: and place the perforation along the length of the body, and let it be an opening wide, until all the water runs out.
Then place it on a heated place, and bind it, and let it run out the remaining water: then take care of it until the wound heals.
If there is an obstruction to the flow of water at the hour when you pierce it [the bladder], and this is not due to anything else except that a white membrane causes the obstruction in the wound opening, and prevents the exit of the water: then it is necessary that you insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which water is drawn from hydropic patients, whose shape has been described earlier: or add [something] during the operation of the wound.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, approximately so. When it has accumulated, then it should be punctured in the same manner, and the patient will pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
Treatise on the care of fleshy roots.
Know that, when cutting upon this fleshy root [turnip], there is a danger of leading to death in many dispositions. Therefore, it seems to me that its abandonment should be saved from it.
And I remember the operation on it, and the appearance of the cauterizations.
Therefore, I say that many cauterizations occur in the bodies, from which testicles are composed, and this happens for various reasons, such as.
Or due to an excess of sharp or acid fluid, which flows towards the testicles. Or due to a blow.
And the color of the cauterization is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it; and it is a heavy cauterization.
And perhaps it is a stone-like cauterization, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it happens due to a knotting of the arteries, and swelling of them; as has been already mentioned regarding its memory: or due to the swelling of veins.
Therefore, what is from the swelling of the arteries can be known by the disposition of the cauterization, when you compress it with your fingers. Do not touch him completely.
What is caused by the swelling of veins does not dissipate when compressed with fingers.
Now it is possible to make a incision on this kind of thing and on other flesh; and it is so that the skin of the testicles is cut. Then stretch the egg upward and remove it along with the white; free the suspensory ligaments from the bag, tie the bag; and cut the suspensory ligament after you have freed it from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is hardened with these born fleshes, then you must pull out the egg and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion between something from the scrotum or inside the bag; then you must release all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
If there is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind; then you must cut all of it and remove the egg as we have said.
When your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
Section on the treatment of branches that occur with a tree.
A tumor is enclosed by some swelling, resembling a bunch of grapes with the softening of the testicles; and it becomes difficult for weak movement and exercise, as well as walking.
And in the treatment of this illness is due to fear, because of the memory that preceded it.
However, we must say the operation according to what the first ones did.
I say that you should make the weak person sit on an elevated seat. Then push the suspender of the testicles downwards. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with the bowls which are near the thigh; let another servant hold it and stretch it with a violent extension.
Then make a broad incision across the bowls (scrotum) with a sharp and long cut, until the testicles are exposed.
Then scrape off all the fat from every part, as we told you in the extraction of arteries in the temples.
Then insert a needle with a double thread into them (the vessels), and tie it at the places where they meet veins; and tie it again at the end of them. Then cut it (the vessel) in a straight middle section along the body's length and extract what collects from the foul and corrupted humors.
Then care for the wound with wound treatment, in which pus is generated to drain the testicles that nourish one of them. It is not harmful through it.
If the vein happens to encompass all the vessels, then they must be drained because of this for the testicles with the vessels: so as not to be deprived of its nutriment due to incision and decay or burn, and not be beneficial with them.
Chapter 65.
Chapter on the care of intestinal roots.
The passage of this root (intestine) is from the incision that happens on the stretched sifach over the abdomen in the groin part of the liver.
Why do the intestines come out through this rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from the sifach or its extension.
These two kinds of rupture occur from various causes: either by impact, jump, shout, lifting of a heavy object or similar things.
And the mark when it is from extension of a vein. It happens gradually over a long time and not suddenly; it is an abscess equal in depth to the surface; because sifach compresses the intestine.
And the mark of it when it is from a cut sifach, because it causes a strong pain suddenly at first; and it is an abscess different, appearing under the skin nearby; and this is due to the outlet of the intestine, and the course of it towards the exterior sifach.
And sometimes it comes out with the intestine: and this is called an Intestinal branch, and zirbia; and sometimes it happens with diarrhea.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine with feces, and is retained there; and this is a danger to the sick, because it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in treating the disease with iron there is fear; therefore, one should be careful about accidents in this.
And the method of operation is to order the sick person to reduce the intestine with his own hand towards the concave parts within if he obeys the return. Then it lies on its back on its neck between your hands and raises its legs.
Then stretch the skin that follows the skin towards the upper parts, and cut the entire skin of the testicles in length. Then tie the incisions with hooks on both sides of the cut according to what you need to open the cut with them; and the cut should be according to the quantity that is possible so that the egg can come out from it.
Then scrape the sifak and what is under the skin of the testicles until the white sifak appears hard from all parts; then insert your index finger into the area following the testicle, into the area between the white sifak, which is under the skin of the egg, and between sifach according to it, and without the adhesion that is in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move with the right hand to the inner skin of the testicles; and as this is done, extend the albumen upward with the left hand; and lift the egg (ovum) with the albumen towards the part of the section; and command the servant to extend the egg upward; and you dissolve the adherence that is behind by a complete dissection.
And ask your fingers if there is anything there from the intestine rolled up in the hard albumen. If, however, you find something from it (the testicle): then push it down towards the lower belly.
Then take the awl, in which there is a thick thread, made of ten threads like linen: and insert it into the last albumen, that is, the membrane, which follows the section, that is under the skin of the testicles; then cut the ends that project from the thread until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them on top of others in the shape of a cross; and bind with it the thread which I mentioned, that is, the strong ligament of the testicle membrane, until no fluid from the sacs that nourish them can pass to them: so that a warm abscess does not occur there. And place the second ligature beyond the first ligature, distant from it by more than two fingers. And after these two ligatures, release from the albumen under the skin of the testicles an amount equal to a finger's breadth; and cut the rest all around in the shape of a ball, and remove the egg.
Then cut in the lower part of the skin of the testicles along a line where blood and pus flow, as we said in that which was mentioned before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and apply the ligament that we mentioned. And sometimes a white sifach is cauterized as we said, after its incision to fear blood flow. This translates to: It often happens that (something) is (happening). The original sentence does not provide specific details And release the ligament until it falls by itself.
If the case should delay, then fumigate it with hot water; and place over it what I said until it falls.
Then care for the wound with the rest of the treatment of wounds, until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI (Roman numerals).
Chapter on Pneumonia.
In this pneumonia, I have not seen anyone who dared to treat it with iron.
And at first they said that it happens as we narrated in pneumonia that is with wheat. It is to tie vessels after cutting on them easily below; then cut in the middle, and care for it afterwards with what opens it up until the vessels fall out; and care for the wound according to what I said until it heals.
Chapter LXVII (Roman numerals).
Chapter on Disruptions that occur in groins.
When rupture occurs in groins as we said and the place emits and something from the intestines does not descend towards the testicles; and if it descends, it is insufficient, and it returns every hour; but if this continues for a time, a tear is added to the sifach until the intestines descend into the sifach.
It happens with the extension of sifach that is in groins as we said. It is because the sifach is extended; then it is softened, the place is scraped and it emits.
Care for it with cautery as its preceding narrative said.
And sometimes it is cured with iron, in this manner: and it is, that the sick one lies upon his back on your hands. Then cut the place of rupture and protrusion, by incision in width, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tie the ligature and those under the skin until the white sifach is exposed, which is below the skin that follows it.
Then take a radium (small rod), and place it upon the protrusion from the sifach, and press it to the depth of the abdomen.
Then make two incisions upon the protrusions at the end of the radius from the sifach, and connect them with a suture; then remove the end of the radius.
And do not cut the sifach at all, nor stretch the egg, nor anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal branches (intestines).
Then treat that with the dressing for wounds. When you make a suture, clean it, and restore the wound, until it heals.
For the sifach contracts, and no protrusion is added to the rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to healing.
Chapter LXXVIII (78).
Chapter on the softening of scrotum skin.
The skin of the scrotum is often softened in some men because the flesh that is between them becomes soft and the appearance is corrupted.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat this, that he makes the sick man lie on his back, and cuts all the softened skin that is over the natural skin.
Then gather the two folds of skin together with a suture; and if you wish, remove the surplus of the softened skin by three or four stitches, or a strong one.
Then make a cut between the sutures.
Then, take care of the treatment of the remaining wounds until they heal and the threads fall off.
Chapter LXIX.
Section on Castration.
Know that Castration in our law is excommunicated: and therefore it is permitted to me, not to remember it in my book; and its remembrance is not necessary, unless for two reasons.
One of these reasons is that it should be in the knowledge of a physician when asked about it: and so that he may know its treatment if it happens to someone.
And the other reason is that we often need castration of certain animals for our benefit through it, such as sheep, goats, and cats, and similar ones among animals.
I say therefore, that Castration is done according to two ways. Or by attrition. Through a cut and a split.
In what is performed through rubbing, the method of operation is this: we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and become loose and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they resolve and are not perceptible to touch.
In castration through a cut and a split, it is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the sack, and cut above all the egg with one section until two eggs appear; then cut what remains after you have peeled both of them, and do not leave anything on it except a little sifaket (subtle matter), which is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one performed through rubbing; because rubbing perhaps leaves something of the testicles, wherefore the animal desires copulation.
Then take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
§ On the care of a Hermaphrodite in two ways.
Hermaphrodite is from men according to two modes. One of them is because it appears in him what follows space, or in the skin of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles, with a figure like a female wolf, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine flows out from that which is in the skin of the testicles.
In women there is one species, and it is like a female wolf over the comb like small testicles of a man, projecting to the outside; of which one is like Priapus of a man, and two like two testicles.
And the cure of the three species, two from men, and the species of one from women, is: because it is necessary that you cut the flesh added to them until the impression of them flees away. Then heal them with healing of other wounds.
As for the second species of men from which urine flows out, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any healing at all.
Chapter LXXI.
§ On the cutting of Tentigins, and the projecting flesh in wolf-women.
A tentigo (suture) may be added over a natural part until it becomes unsightly and repulsive in appearance; and sometimes it is extended so much in some women that it reaches to copulation.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold excess suture with hand or hook and cut; and not to cut too deep during incision, especially at the root; so that there is no bleeding.
Then care for it in wound healing until it heals.
Meat (flesh) arising is the flesh that is born in the opening of the matrix, until it fills the same; and perhaps it comes out to the outside like a tail; and for this reason some call the condition 'cauda'. Therefore, it is necessary to cut it as we cut a suture and care for it until it heals.
Chapter on the treatment of a woman's wound that has not been pierced.
Chapter LXXII.
A woman's wound that has not been pierced, or the opening is small. It may be either natural (spontaneous) or accidental (traumatic).
Accidental is due to an illness that precedes; and it may be from flesh arising, or spisso (adhesion), or sifach (fibrous tissue); and it may occur in the deep part of the matrix, in the sides of it, in the upper or lower part of it; and it prohibits coitus and impregnation, and possibly delivery, and perhaps menstruation.
Its identification is made by the appearance of an obstetrician if the protrusion is nearby.
If it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
If the protrusion is from fibrous tissue (sifach) and is near two lips; then push it out and tear it apart.
And it is to place two small plugs on top of the lips.
Then put your index fingers together and the woman shall be lying on her back with her legs spread apart. Then extend the two lips forcefully until the sifach is torn subtly and the opening is created.
Then take thread, dip it in oil and place it on the site; let the woman rub it every day to prevent hardening of the area.
If the sifach is thick and swollen, then it is necessary to cut it with a large, sharp scalpel-like leaf of myrtle.
If the opening is due to flesh growth, then hang it with hooks and cut it; use medicines that stop blood flow without causing pain such as acacia, dragon's blood, and resin mixed with egg white.
Then administer a wide cannula of lead to prevent quick healing of the wound and keep it for several days; apply linen cloth, then treat the rest with usual care until it heals.
And sometimes there may be birth of other flesh-growths in the womb; therefore they should be cut according to this method: before it becomes a cancerous ulcer (for cancerous growth that is in the womb should not come into direct contact with iron at all).
Chapter 73.
Chapter on Hemorrhoids, by Athaeliel and Botor of Red Wine for women.
Hemorrhoids are indeed an opening of the vein's outlets, until blood flows frequently and abundantly from them.
When hemorrhoids become chronic, they become piles; and I have already said about their species and signs in the division of them; here I will tell which ones receive treatment and which do not.
I say that hemorrhoids which are within the opening of the womb and do not appear to the senses: then there is no treatment with iron for him.
But those which are above the opening of the womb, where sensation falls upon them, are those that can be treated.
Therefore it is necessary to introduce a woman into a cold house. Then extend the anus with forceps or with rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle powder upon them at the flow of blood from one of the incision wounds without biting: such as asphalt, dragon's blood, pitch, and similar things.
Then push his feet against the wall at the hour of six (midnight). Then place her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and pomegranate bark, and of green walnuts, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and make it into a poultice with honey and vinegar, and apply the plaster on his back.
If blood is separated with it, that is good; and if not, let adhesive winds (blisters) form on the back, and on the breasts, without cutting or scratching.
Then take wool and dip it in the juice of tarathith, or the juice of arnoglossum, or the juice of the leaves of alaulla (wild bryony), Pontic wine, and make it sticky with it on a leaf.
When the abscess has ceased, then treat the place with ointments until it heals.
Albarth however is red like a boar's head and has a rough appearance.
Therefore it is necessary to cut what appears from it, as I said about hellebore equally: and treat it until it heals.
Quomodo operari debet Mulier in partu, et quibus cas
On the perforation of a Caesarean section that occurs in the womb.
When to operate on a woman in labor and what types of lesions may occur in the womb: cancer, stone abscess, ulcers, adubelati (herpes), fistulae, hemorrhoids, ragadiae, thilil, warm abscess.
And indeed, I have already said that all these diseases and their types, the symptoms of each one, and their treatments should be addressed in another discussion: it is necessary to discuss here the hot abscess that occurs in the womb, which is among those abscesses that collect pus. It is important to know how its opening with iron should be performed.
Therefore, consider this. If the pain of the abscess is acute at its onset with striking and burning sensation, and fever: if you feel it swelling, then do not perforate it. Treat it in a manner that helps maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
Then the woman should be made to sit on a couch with two chairs on either side, and recline or lean on her back, and place her feet at the lower part of the abdomen: her hips should be spread out, and she should put her arms under her knees and tie them together with a bandage at that point.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and administer the instrument used to open the womb.
And when you are to administer this instrument, it should be shaped like a rod that penetrates the woman's womb without exceeding its depth and causing harm to the weak.
If the instrument is too deep, then one should place powder on the cover of the deep matrix to prevent the entire instrument from entering deeply into the matrix. One should also place a stirrup, which runs through the instrument, on the upper side. This should hold the instrument and turn the stirrup until the deep matrix opens.
When it appears to be an ulcer and is touched with the hand, and it is soft and tender: then one should cut it off at its head with a broad-blade.
When pus is discharged, then one should put linen saturated with rose oil into the wound: or green oil, in which there is some styptic, and place a lint and make an incision in the deep matrix.
And place outside on the matrix, and over the comb, clean wool saturated with water in which boiled mallow has been.
Then it should be treated for two days with an ointment that suits it until it heals.
And sometimes the matrix and wound are washed so that they are cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of the lily or long aristolochia has been boiled, and then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden within the matrix, then one should refrain from treating it with iron, rather cure it with what has been said in the division.
Chapter LXXXVI.
Chapter on Obstetrics: How to treat living embryos that have come out abnormally.
It is necessary for an obstetrician to first know the shape of a normal delivery.
Therefore the signs of this are that when you see a woman being pressed towards her lower parts, and she wants to smell air and urinate on herself from what is above her in childbirth, and she hastens the exit of the embryo: then know that this delivery is according to a natural shape, and the exit is above its head, and the afterbirth with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When therefore you see these signs, then it is necessary that his belly be compressed, so that the embryo descends quickly.
When it descends upon his head, the second one also descends with it, and it is cleaned from these superfluities with good purification.
But he who is beyond this birth is unnatural, inadmissible.
Because sometimes the fetus comes out beyond his feet, and his body comes out before his head itself, and his feet themselves, and one hand or one foot: or the head and one hand come out: or the belly comes out: and perhaps it turns over on its neck, and similar unadmissible figures.
Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in all these matters and to avoid error and deception: and I am showing every figure of them, and how there is intelligence in it, and it is indicated by that, and it will remain on top of him.
When the fetus comes out beyond his head in a natural delivery, and it becomes violent over the woman, and the labor is difficult for her, and you see his strength already weakened: then make her sit on a chair or women hold her: and warm up her womb with fenugreek cooked and with moist oils.
Then the midwife introduces a small spatula between her fingers and separates the second one, and cuts it with her nail until it runs out of wetness: and compresses the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with fenugreek mucilage and sesame oil.
Then order her after the cleansing to be compressed: and make her sneeze with a snuff mixture, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. The fetus will immediately come out.
If two hands of the fetus emerge first, it is necessary that you gradually pull them back with ease. If it does not comply during delivery, then place the woman on a seat and elevate her feet upwards; then strike the seat on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the shock.
If the hands do not come out and the fetus dies, then cut them and extract the remaining part of the fetus; and tie his hand with a cloth, and pull him out equally; for he will also come out.
§ The exit of the embryo is above its feet. When the fetus comes out above its feet, then it should be pushed upwards; then it should be slowly turned over; and finally it should be pulled out equally.
Then grasp one of his feet and gradually stretch it.
When they emerge up to the hips, then command him to hold back and make her sneeze with a pinch; for he will come out if God so wills.
And if it does not emerge as we have said, then gradually pull the fetus back until you place him in his natural position. For he will then come out easily through the exit.
If it is not permitted as we have said, then take some mallow, aleppo pine oil, and softened gum; grind the whole in a mortar with good pounding; afterwards spread the paste of it on the woman's vulva and inside her womb. Then make her sit in warm water until she feels comfortable.
When you see that the lower parts of her are now warmed up, then apply to him a warm piece from myrrh and place it on top of him. When therefore the hour [of the operation] holds [comes], then make her sit on a chair. Then make her sneeze, and pinch her own nose and snout; and press the lower part of the abdomen gently with pressure. For feces will come out immediately.
The exit of the fetus over the knees and hands. When it comes out in this manner, then insert your hands slowly. Then the woman lies on her back, and let her feet hang downward; and she lies reclining on a bed, and embraces her hands. Then press slowly above her abdomen. Then extract what is beneath her feet from the anus, until it is prepared below [ready for birth]. If the fetus does not come out, then take her feet and shake them violently. Then press what is above the pubic bone slowly, until the fetus rises to the higher parts. Then insert your hands and press the fetus gently; and command the woman to be pressed, until the fetus comes out.
The exit of the fetus hangs laterally from the hands. Insert your hands for reducing [the fetus]. If it cannot be reduced [positioned], then lift the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed; and strike her legs violently with a strong blow.
Then apply the ointment you have prepared from gums [resins].
If she receives delivery, then make her sit on a chair. Then study the reduction of the hands and press the fetus according to its natural shape; and make her sneeze, and command her to press herself until it comes out.
The outcome of the fetus is above its neck, with hands spread open, and its face is towards the back of its mother. The midwife should hold the fetus' hand and then gradually turn it, equalizing its position with ease.
When it is evened out, then place oil and gum over the place I mentioned.
Then command him to move gradually. When you have done that, then make her sit on a seat and command her to lean towards the right side. Then command her to press down, and make her sneeze with pepper or another similar substance.
The outcome of the prepared fetus is on the side. When it descends to the mother's opening in this manner with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your nail until it is expelled due to moistness.
If the fetus hangs over its face and neck, then cut it from the navel so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus inside until you place it as needed; and command the woman to press herself several times, for it will come out easily by itself.
The outcome of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins often give birth: and sometimes three or four are born. However, this is unusual and rarely happens.
Five are indeed outside nature and do not live completely; and the afterbirth contains them, although they multiply, yet only one afterbirth; and they are separated by a string, distinguishing between them tied at the navel of each one of them.
And sometimes they come out like a single fetus in a natural easy delivery, and they come out in an unnatural way as I have mentioned.
If some of them are difficult at childbirth and reach what we said in unnatural figures, then care for them as we have described: let it be subtle and act with ease and slowness, and invent according to every figure with that which is prepared for him leading to health by his intellect.
Remembrance of the one formed in the womb from embryos, and they are aborted.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it has been verified by me, that a woman, while giving birth, expelled seven, and another fifteen, all formed ones.
What was done by the measurement of the glorious sage.
Therefore, this whole thing should be in the knowledge of Obstetrics. Perhaps it will come to a similar one: therefore, oppose it with what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
Chapter on the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you take care of a dead fetus with what I have said in division and it does not come out, and you must use manual operation, then you should consider the following.
If the woman is of healthy virtue and there is no danger to her from any accidents that might cause harm to her: then she should lie down on a bed on her back, with her head lower and her legs raised, and a servant should hold her from both sides or tie her to the bed so that her body is not pulled out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then wet the cervix with olive oil and mucilage of althea, fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then the obstetrician wets his hand with these oils and mucilages, then he introduces it into the womb with ease. Then he shall seek a place with it where he will fix the hooks on the fetus, and places suitable for that.
Then consider if the fetus is prepared to come down upon its head: then fix hooks in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its armpits, or in places near the ribs, and below the hypocondria.
If, however, the descent is upon its feet, then in the breastbone, and in its middle ribs.
And it is necessary that he holds the hook with his right hand: and places its sharp edge on that which is between the fingers of his left hand: and introduces it with ease, and fixes the hook in one of those places which we mentioned, until it reaches an empty place.
Then fix another hook, or a third one, if needed: so that the constriction is equal, and it does not deviate to one side.
Then it should be extended with an equal length, and not only in a straight line, but rather moved to all parts, so that its passage is relieved: as is done when a tooth is extracted.
And it is necessary that in what is between [the hooks], the extension should be softened. If a part remains in it, then it is necessary that the midwife binds certain fingers with oil, and introduces them from the side, to turn what remains with them.
If a part of the fetus comes out, then the hooks should be moved to another higher place: do this until the whole fetus comes out.
If a hand or another part comes out first and cannot be returned because of its constriction, then it should be wrapped with a cloth over it. Then extract it entirely until it comes out completely, cut it either at the joint of the foot, or at the elbow: and thus you should do this with one hand and in both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or if it encounters a dislocation during delivery, or water has collected around its head: then it is necessary to insert Spatumile (a pointed stick) between the fingers and break the head with it and remove the water; or tear it apart with the instrument called Almisdac, whose shape comes in the same chapter as those of the other instruments.
Similarly, do so if the fetus has a large head by nature, then it is necessary to cut off the amnion (algengematu); or extract it with misdach, as we said. Then draw out the bones with forceps.
If the head emerges and becomes dislocated at the neck: then break it, until all the moisture that is in the chest is released.
If it does not twist, nor submits to delivery: then cut the head piecemeal, as far as possible for you.
If there is an abscess or hydatids (hydropic cysts) below the womb, then you should pierce it until the moisture runs out of it.
If however the fetus is above its feet, then its extraction is easy and its direction to the cervix (matrix) is light.
If it becomes dislocated in the abdomen or chest: then you should extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand and break open the abdomen or chest until all that is within them runs out.
If the remaining limbs are removed and the head returns: then let the midwife insert her left hand. If the cervix (matrix) is open, then insert your hand deep into the womb and search for the head with it and draw it out with your fingers up to the cervix; then insert a hook or hooks and draw it out with them.
If the bone of the matrix (uterus) is dislocated due to a hot abscess that has occurred to it: then it is not appropriate for it to be laboring on it, instead it is then necessary to administer an infusion of moist substances, oily; and apply poultices; and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it can be turned: then what I said for a living fetus should be administered.
If that cannot be done, it should be cut fragmentarily, and extracted.
And it is necessary that nothing at all from the second layer (membranes) inside should be left behind.
When you have completed your operation, then what I said for hot abscesses that occur in the matrices should be administered.
If bleeding occurs, it should descend into waters of styptic (a substance to stop bleeding), and the remaining cure should be administered.
And indeed I myself have seen a woman, in whose womb a dead fetus was; then she became pregnant again on top of it, afterward another fetus also died. Therefore, after a long time, an abscess occurred in her navel, and it became swollen until it was opened; and it began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called for her treatment, and she was treated for a long time; but the wound did not heal.
Therefore, on it I placed some strong adhesive plasters; and the bone came out from the place. Then several days passed, and another bone came out. I was therefore amazed when there was no bone in the womb.
I therefore thought that since the fetuses were dead bones.
I therefore asked for the wound and extracted many bones while she was in good condition; and she lived thus for a long time, but discharged little pus from the place.
And I did not bind here this foreign matter, except because there is knowledge and help for that which the healing craftsman administers with his hand in cure.
Chapter LXXVII.
On the shapes of necessary instruments for the extraction of a fetus.
The form of the Spindle for opening the Matrix.
Here is the form of a Structure (Clamp), to which books are adjusted, having equally two spindles at the ends of the two pieces of wood. Nevertheless, this Spindle should be more subtle than the Clamp; and to make it so, either it can be made of Ebony, or from Birchwood.
And the thickness of all the wood should be as two fingers: and the edge of each of both is like one finger, and the length of each of them is palm and a half, or less: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood there are two reinforcements made of the same kind of wood, which are now firmly fixed on either side, whose length is half palm or less: and the width of each is as two fingers, or less.
And these two reinforcements are inserted into the bone of the Matrix, so that it opens when you turn the two Spindles.
Another form similar to that one, but more subtle and lighter.
Make it of Ebony wood or Birchwood, in the likeness of forceps (tweezers). Nevertheless, at the end of it there should be two reinforcements, as you can see here above: and the length of each reinforcement is a palm: and the width of each is two fingers.
When you wish to open the Matrix with it, then do this: make the woman sit on the bed, with her legs apart, opening what is between her thighs. Then insert these two reinforcements together into the Matrix: and you hold the end of the instrument below her hips. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with tweezers, equally according to the amount you wish for the opening of the Matrix, until the Midwife does what she wants.
Form of Dizziness other than what the ancients called Form of Pushing, by which the fetus is pushed.
The form for breaking a large head (skull): it resembles a pair of forceps with teeth at the end, as you can see.
And sometimes it becomes like a pair of forceps in this form (the one mentioned earlier), as you can see, with teeth similar to those of a saw, on which the skull is cut and crushed.
The form of a scissor with one spike.
The form of a scissor with two spikes.
The form of a spatula with two ends for cutting off the head (skull).
The form of two broad spatulas.
These instruments are used in greater numbers according to their variety, and the more prepared they are by the craftsman, the faster they are for the operation, and higher among men due to their quantity.
Therefore, do not overlook that an instrument is not prepared with you. It is inexcusable to be without them (the instruments).
Chapter LXXVIII.
Chapter on the second extraction (cesarean section).
When the Afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary to instruct the woman, to retain her breath. Then make her sneeze and pinch her nose and your hand over her mouth. If she does this, it is good.
If not: then take a pot, and make a hole in the cover of it; and put in them herbs opening the womb, such as balm, rue, anise, camomile, sage, cassia wood, centaury: take all these herbs or some of them, and submerge them with water, and place them over fire.
Then place the plug of reed on the hole of the pot cover, and another end into the womb; and hold it until the vapour reaches the cavity of the womb.
Then make her sneeze as we said before. The afterbirth will come out easily.
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then instruct the midwife to dip her hand in sesame oil or althea mucilage. Then insert your hand into the womb and search for the afterbirth with it. When you find it, then take it out slowly.
If it is attached deep within the womb, then insert your hand as described before until you find the afterbirth and draw it out slowly so that it does not fall down the womb due to violent attraction; rather it should be moved with ease from side to side; then more should be added to counterbalance the attraction. It will obey then, and be saved, and come out from the attachment.
If the womb is contracted, as we have already said: treat it with sneezing, and with the potion from the pot with herbs.
If it does not come out as we have described, beware not to tire yourself in the repetition of the extraction.
It is necessary that what comes out to the bone matrix from it (the wound), you tie it to the woman's hip. Then, fumigate her with a four-ingredient ointment. Indeed, it will rot her after days, and it will melt and come out.
However, when it rots, lift it from her abdomen and head, and harm the weak part of that. Therefore, suitable fumigations should be administered for that.
Some of the ancients have already found suitable fumigations from nasturtium and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated during the retention of Secondina (afterbirth) and menstruation.
Make it similar to an alcohol flask or a jar, and its wide end should be placed over the fire; the fumigation should be placed on prunes; hold her until that fumigation is consumed; then repeat another one.
Chapter LXXIX.
Chapter on the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born and their anuses are not perforated, which have already been circumcised by a sharp scythe. The obstetrician must therefore perforate that with her finger; and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp Spatula; and let her avoid touching the muscle.
Then place upon him a cloth soaked in wine and oil. Then take care of him with salve until he is healed.
If she fears that it (the placenta) may stick, then place a lead pipe in the opening, and let it remain there for many days, and remove it when the child wants to come out.
And now occurs obstruction of the anus, also from the hardening of wounds or abscesses. Therefore it must be cut (the obstruction), then treated as we said with the treatment and lead.
Chapter 80.
Chapter on the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are nodes and swellings that occur near the outside of the anus; or in a space of one member; and there is one fistula or several.
When the node is cut open, watery liquid, white or pusulous, flows out from it.
And at times they (the fistulas) penetrate through these. Therefore they are recognized by what comes out when there is diarrhea or bloating in a sick person; and perhaps worms come out from them.
There are fistulas among these when they penetrate through the space, reaching to the bladder or the root of the penis. There are fistulas that penetrate as far as the joining of the hips and as far as the coccygeal node.
From that which is recognized as a fistula penetrating to the anus, even if it does not penetrate, it is to insert your index finger into the anus; and to insert a probe made of metal or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
If there is a twist (tortuosity) in it, then introduce into it a thin probe made of lead, or a hair from horse's mane, until you feel the probe, or a hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it all the way through, nor does anything come out from the opening, nor any wind or worms as I said: then you will know that it is not penetrating; therefore proceed to treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urinary passage: then its sign is the outflow of urine from it, and its prohibition is this, that the place should be made firm with medicines.
But if it is penetrating to the junction of the hip or to the hip bone: then its sign is that the probe reaches up to there, if it is not twisted up to the bone; and the finding of pain in the surrounding area, and that pus comes out from it always; and that medicine does not help in it, nor does it become firm with an ointment.
And in all such penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all; and the treatment of them is labor and vanity for him upon whom they are formed.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing is hoped for with a scalpel; according to what I tell you, and I have already proved; and it is, that it lies weak between your hands on its backside; and you loosen the legs of it up to above its hips; and its hips should be inclined towards its belly. Then introduce a probe made of lead or copper if there is a twist in the fistula, until you know where it has reached.
But if the patient feels pain near the anus, then you must insert your little finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel that it has already pierced your finger by itself, detected, except that you feel between your finger and the bone or flesh: then you will know certainly that it is penetrating; do not labor on it, because there is no healing in it, as we have said.
They say that flesh heals in some men, and that the remedy for it which is hoped for is, to heat a cauterium (small rod) with subtle fire according to the width of the fistula (abscess or channel), as was mentioned before, and to insert the heated cauterium into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then do this twice or thrice, until you know that all the flesh added to the filter, which is similar to a chicken feather pen, has been burnt off.
Then take care of it with linen wrapped in butter until the burnt flesh comes out; then take care of it with unguents that cause and consolidate the skin.
If it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
If it comes out (the foreign body) and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick covering of skin or flesh between it and the foreign body: and you see that the fistula follows the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you go on cutting with the foreign body as it is in the fistula until the incision reaches the end of the foreign body, and the foreign body is released and falls out.
Then clean the filtering flesh that resembles a chicken feather pen, to ensure there is nothing left of it.
If blood defeats you and causes the flesh to separate between you and your operation, then it is better that you cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Because cautery with fire brings good dispositions, burning of those added tissues, and the excision of blood and moisture.
Then treat it with linen wrapped in butter or boiled cabbages until the place emits pus, and the burnt flesh comes out into the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments, which make the flesh hard; and there are ointments containing styptic and drying properties.
For when it is restored, then it heals; do not fear repetition.
If the fistula has already reached the depth of the anus and is prolonged beyond the body's superfluity: then insert your finger into the anus, and investigate it.
If you therefore feel a membrane between you and her that is made of sifak or flesh, and it is near to penetration: then there is no operation in this case, except according to the way of trust and hope.
This is because there are three methods for administering it in him: either to cauterize the same, as we said; or to excise it until you reach the concavity of it, so that it is possible for you to insert linen and cure from nearby. And do not proceed too much with the excision, so as not to cut the muscle containing the anus, and there be an unfortunate result of evacuation without will. Then treat it with what I said.
Perhaps it will heal; or else you remove the membrane itself and cleanse it after you cut it near to the anus, as we said, either with the probe, or with another sharp instrument. Then cleanse those tissues filtered which are in the excision, as far as you can with examination.
Then strive for the restoration of the entire wound with a section, and at the superior part where it consolidates; and the fistula remains open on the internal part of the anus, and it will be easier on the sick one.
Sometimes the fistula is drained in this way; it is when you insert a probe into the fistula, which is on the side of the anus near the body surface with skin and margin of the anus; then take a probe pierced at its end, which is like a needle aleskef, that is to say prepared from calfskin, in this shape. Insert into it (the fistula) a thread rolled up from five threads, about the same size. Then insert a probe with a thread into the fistula until it follows its hollow.
If it penetrates the internal margin of the anus nearby, then pull out the thread from that opening; so that you insert your finger into the anus and pull out the end of the thread, and gather both ends together; and tighten each one, and let go after one or two days; and the more the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well until the flesh between the two ends of the thread falls off; then care for the wound until it consolidates and heals.
If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating; then make it penetrable in whatever way you can prepare yourself, unless it is too deep. For you do not have the skill to do that without damaging it (the fistula).
Then treat it as I said until it heals.
The shape of the spatulum with a sharp point used for draining a fistula, whose sharpness is very acute, and one part is not acute so as not to damage what is not necessary, as you can see.
Chapter LXXXI.
On the suturing of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows upon their incision; and treatment for fissures.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds. Or they are within the anus, like bladder stones or cherries; or they resemble the seeds of grapes. And there are small ones and large ones; and blood always flows from them, and it is single, and they are numerous. They are also outside the anus and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are for the most part few in moistness, from which runs yellow water or a small amount of blood with persistent flow; and they are according to the color of the body.
And its treatment that is within the anus is as follows: you should instruct the patient to purge; and it shall be expressed until it appears in your sight. Therefore, also, grasp them with scissors or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
If they cannot be held with scissors due to their moistness and softening, then grasp them with a rough cloth or thick cotton pad, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them again, and dust some warm powders over the place of the incision to make it cauterize. Or cauterize them according to what was described in the chapter on cauterizing. Then treat them with the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
If the anus does not obey the expulsion, then administer a suppository to the patient containing a small purgative, so that he may be cleansed with it from the bowels, and quickly obey the expulsion when the patient purges himself.
If the atheres are external from the anus, then their nature is light and easy; it is as if you grasp them with your nail, or grasp them with a pair of forceps, and cut them. Then care for them with what has been said until they heal.
And if one recoils from the incision with iron, then it is necessary to administer a suture for them according to this manner. Take a thread rolled up and insert it into the point (of the wound). Then draw out the atheres towards the top, and make it penetrate with the point into the root on the other side; and roll up the ends of the thread, in the lower part of the point, and let them be wide; and tie the atheres tightly with a strong suture. Then knot the thread, and draw out the point.
Do this with all the atheres, and leave one of them; do not bind (them) to each other so that excess blood flows from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or caustic over the anus and put it on the anus; and command the sick person to rest. Then let him go until he falls (to sleep).
When the atheres have fallen, care for them with ointments, and with the rest of the treatment, until they heal.
Chapter on the Care of Fissures. For often they occur due to drying of feces and constriction of nature.
When they become old and medicine does not work on them; then it is necessary to shave with the pointed spatula or with your nail until they become wet, and remove the superior layer of skin which prevents their consolidation. Then care for them until they consolidate as needed.
If they do not consolidate; then shave them more forcefully than before until they bleed a lot, and then care for them until they heal.
On the treatment of the hernia of Almirmar, and not of those not hernias; and on the treatment of Athelil's sores, and of ants.
Chapter LXXXII.
You should know that Almirmar is not anything other than a round knot similar in color to the body; it resembles a nail head, and it can occur throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet or fingers, and this pain occurs during walking.
It is necessary therefore to cut what is around the nail, and hold it with forceps or a curette, and pull it out from its root.
Then care for that: and if you wish to cauterize it according to what was mentioned in its chapter.
Furthermore, there is a small prominence of one kind that is dry and rough, filtered, round on the surface of the body. And it often happens in the hands of children.
And its treatment is to stretch the prominence, and cut it; or sew it with silk thread; or with hair until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine; and now the prominences that grow backwards and not backwards are pulled out with the tool I will mention.
Moreover, a small prominence that is dry and rough, large on the surface of the body, penetrates deeply; and when cold is found, it feels like an ant bite throughout the body; and it mostly occurs in the hands.
And its treatment is to take a needle from the goose feather or strong vulture feather; and place the needle on the ant prominence until it encircles the prominence with the circumference of the needle. Then turn your hand with the needle until it cuts what is around the ant prominence; and place it deeply into the flesh, and pull out the ant prominence from its root.
And if you wish, do that with a brass or iron needle in this shape.
Above the needle there should be a loop of thread extending to its end, so that it is pulled tight on the finger and its rotation.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant prominence according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization of the prominences.
Chapter LXXXIII.
On the shapes of instruments used for enema treatment in illnesses of the anus, and solutions for the abdomen, and for colic.
When an enema is made of silver, or gold, or brass, or iron beaten.
And sometimes it is made with these small and large instruments, according to those for whom it is administered.
Therefore, what is given for the treatment of small children should be small; and those with weak or painful anuses, so also their enemas.
Large enema.
The cannula of this (enema tube), that is the upper part where it is tied, should be wide according to this method; and there should be a distinction so that it can be tied as you see, and the lower end which is inserted into the anus, should be closed, that is not open, soft, very, pulling towards fineness; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And the size of the hole should be according to the thickness of straws, and somewhat larger but not much, and there should be a bladder in which the medicines are placed, either from an animal's bladder, or from sheepskin, which should be small in shape like that of a syringe: whose root should be one palm.
And it should be perforated with many holes as is customary, and the space between each hole should be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into the holes a thread, perhaps from raw silk, which should be about ten threads or around that, and bind it with it like a syringe. When it is placed in this bladder, the upper part of the enema should be tied at two distinct points with a strong binding. Then administer the enema with it.
And this is the form of a circle as shown here, and of holes.
The quality of making a clyster is as follows: to fill the bladder or the bowel with medicine that has been heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and be careful that it is not excessively hot or excessively cold.
Then the patient lies down on his back and raises his legs towards above; and place underneath him a bedding or linen cloth.
Then anoint the end of the clyster with oil, or with white egg yolk, or with slippery elm gum, or similar substances. Then insert it into the anus gently. Then receive the one who is to administer the clyster with both his hands and squeeze it out forcefully until all that is in the clyster is evacuated into the intestines.
Then remove the clyster and let the patient raise his legs towards the wall.
If the medicine compels him to evacuate, then hold him as much as possible. And if he sleeps all night with it, it is more beneficial for the healing.
If you use the clyster on him with bowel diseases that cause rapid evacuation, then administer several more until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or ulcers in the anus, then make the clyster very subtle and soft, like those used for children's clysters.
And this is the shape of a subtle clyster on which the skin should be tightened.
Chapter 84.
I have already said in the division of wound treatment that it is appropriate for a book, and here I shall say their treatment with hand, and with medicines according to completion.
Therefore, wounds are distinguished according to their nature and the place on which the wound falls.
Thus, the types of wounds are often like a stone's throw: either a cut by a sword or knife; or a strike with a spear, wooden staff, or arrow; and similar to these things made from various objects.
Wounds that occur according to the parts of the body are such as a wound on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, or back; and similar to these from other members.
And I am telling the treatments of certain wounds, so that I may put forth reasoning and rule for the remaining wounds.
And I shall begin with simple head wounds, since the memory of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, (I say). If a simple head wound occurs and there is no bone fracture, consider then if it was caused by the throw of a stone or similar objects and only broke the skin; and if the wound is large and you fear the possibility of an abscess of hot matter, then hurry and perform cephalic phlebotomy immediately; do not delay this; and remove it from the blood according to its potency quantity, unless there is something prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood flowing out of the wound is scant. And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part. Let the weak person take care to avoid being filled, and wine, and heavy foods.
If something prohibits reduction (phlebotomy), then reduce from food, and do not approach meat or wine.
Place warm poultice on ulna if it gets a hot abscess; apply cooked wheat in rose oil alone, or with wine containing styptic agent.
If the ulna has a hot abscess, put warm poultice on it; if it is recent and still has its own blood, and air hasn't changed it yet, then apply the powder I will mention shortly; but if the air has already changed it, then put some unguent on it until it heals.
If the ulna is large or from a sword cut and similar ones, do not join its edges with small stitches; then join it with suture, as I will explain about abdominal wounds in relation to their suturing.
If the ulna has already been exposed by bone and hangs without retention, except for a small suspension; then cut it. Then take care of the ulna with medicines and restore the hard flesh in its place where skin is, and instruct the weak one to eat foods that are thick, such as heads (of animals) and cooked wheat, until it becomes soft; and similar ones.
If you find decay on the skin that does not adhere to the bone; then cut away the decayed part and throw it out; then take care of the remaining part.
If there is an artery or vein from which blood flows in these wounds that cannot be cut by medicine; then look for the artery. If you find it uncut, then cut or tie it with Spatulilus (suture material). If necessity forces and it does not allow what we have said, then cauterize it to stop the blood flow.
If these wounds are small and simple, the matter is easy and light; so apply this powder to them as it consolidates them before air changes them.
Method for treating a ulcerated wound. Recipe one part of olibanum, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime: grind all well and sieve it. Fill the wound with this and apply good pressure until it adheres well to it and coagulates with blood.
Then press it with small stones on top and let it be until it does not come off, so that it does not discharge. For the medicine will not be removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes lime alone does it when there is no olibanum or dragon's blood present for you at the moment; and the same operation is performed with it in many large wounds, when it is necessary to apply it on top of them and press them, and the wounds are recent and have not been altered by air.
If air has already altered the wound in some way, particularly when it is in the summertime, then there is no purpose for this powder: treat the wound with what I have said before, namely apply some digestive unguents on top of it; or apply on top of it poultices made from wheat flour, made with water and honey, until pus is emitted. Then treat the remaining part of the wound with the rest of the cure until they are healed.
If however it happens that the wound is a bone fracture and it is small, then extract it with trephine; and I will now say the treatment for skull fractures in what follows.
On wounds of the neck.
If a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound.
If the nerve or artery of the neck is cut, if it is a nerve: then there is no remedy in it, except to avoid treatment of it, as with ziniar and zegi and similar things which cause violent constriction. Because nerves harm, and they contract them.
And do not place anything cold at all on the wound: because the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is above the organs; and let it be that which is cured from soft medicines, such as lime plaster with sweet water several times infused with oil, or rose oil, and tuthia, when it is also washed even with sweet water: and the remaining mineral stones, according to this method, and moist unguents.
If the wound is large, then administer a stitch: or the rolled lips of it with pulverized chalk. Then heal it, until it heals.
If the wound has depth or occurs in it a cavity in the lower part of it, where already pus collects, then perforate it at a more depressed place within it.
If the artery is already cut in the wound and blood flow follows: then separate it or sever it and tie it; or cauterize it, if necessity demands that.
If the spondyles of the throat are already fractured, or all of them, and the cartilages have been saved: then attach the lips of skin with stitches above the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat, on the contrary support it, and reduce it to its natural shape. Then tie it up with a suitable suture and let it be for some days. Then treat it with ointments that contain astringents and drying agents until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it. If there are fragments of bone within it, extract all of them as much as possible: and what cannot be prepared, leave it until the wound rots, separates and is relieved.
If the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder over it as I have told you. If it seems that a bone is visible in the wound and a fistula forms: then treat it with what is mentioned in its chapter.
Chapter on wounds treated with spatulas.
If it is a wound made by a lance or knife and you can see its depth, then examine it. If pus comes out of the wound when the sick person is breathing heavily, then know that the wound is fatal.
If its depth is not severe and it is recent with blood, do not apply powder to it from the beginning, nor tie it up so that blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart and kill the sick person: instead, put on attracting ointment on it and dissolve it twice a day.
If you do not have the attracting ointment, then place old clay on the wound opening to dry what comes out from it due to moisture: and make the sick person sleep on the wound so that it runs together what collects in it.
If three or more days have passed since the wound occurred and there is no spasm for the sick person, nor a bad heart tremor, nor shortness of breath due to constriction, and you see that its remaining conditions are good: then know that the wound is healthy. Care for yourself and with bandages, and in all other treatment, until you are healed.
If the healing is excised and it opens again, then you will know that it has become a Fistula. Care for it from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from sword or knife cut, and it is simple on the surface of chest or back, then care for it with what was mentioned before in suturing, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone and cut off splinters from it: then examine the wound, and rush to extract those splinters, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound rots, because extraction of them makes it stink.
As for other wounds occurring in the remaining limbs, the judgment in treatment is that which we said.
Chapter on wounds of abdomen, and outlet of intestines, and their emergence.
Disruption that occurs in the abdomen is great, middle and small.
From a great disruption, at times the intestine or number of intestines comes out.
Therefore their insertion is done and its suturing is more violent and difficult.
And a small disruption also occurs in another way. Therefore it is more difficult to reduce them if you do not rush to its insertion to its place immediately; because it swells, opens and becomes larger; therefore the entry is difficult.
Therefore a medium-sized disruption is better; because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is with these two types.
Know that stitching of veins is according to four modes.
Two common stitches are used for stitching the abdomen, and for other wounds of the body; and two other stitches belong particularly to other wounds. However, those are more proper for the stitching of the abdomen; and I shall tell you one by one with explanation and clarification.
Therefore, when the wound is small and something comes out from the intestine, and it becomes difficult to reduce it; then that is due to one of the two modes. Or because of the smallness of the rupture, as we said; or because there is distension in the intestine due to cold air.
When that is the case, then one should heat it (the wound), so as to immerse a sponge or wet cloth in warm water alone. Or boil in water cumin, caraway, and spike, and wormwood along with it, until the distension is resolved.
At times it (the solution) makes wine in which there is stipitate; and that is better than water alone in resolving the distension.
When you see the distension already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which wormwood or mallow has been boiled. For that opens up the entrance of it (the wound) when the injury is small.
If, however, the return of it (the intestine) is extruded again after this treatment; then stitch up the rupture with a tool used to cut piles (hemorrhoids).
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared, than cutting; and it is not forced to cut after necessity and lack of instruments.
Let one part of it (the stitch) be twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp; and the end should not be too subtle like a needle, but rather bluntish; and that is similar to a thorn, as you can see.
When the wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it is necessary to reduce its shape back to its natural form in its own place, if possible on top of it; because it is better.
When the wound is wide at the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary to make the weak person lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then raise his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
Similarly, if the wound is in one of two parts of the belly, then place your intention and attention always in this, that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other part.
Thus, it is necessary to introduce it into large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds, place it as you prepare yourself.
Then make sure there is a devout servant present among your hands who holds the wound entirely with his hand; and join the lips. Then cut something from it for the one who follows to sew on something; and this is the common method of sewing one [layer].
And it is that you receive a needle or a number of needles according to the size of the wound. Then cut off from the edge of the wound the amount of a ring finger, that is, of a doctor; and sew one needle through the skin in two places, with the two places of the sifac which are under the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from another side, and you have already joined the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the sifac; and they become four layers.
Then sew with double thread around the needle several times from both sides simultaneously, until the two lips of the wound are joined by a good joining.
Then release the thickness of the digit and also fix another point on them; afterwards straighten it with thread, as you did with the first point. Do not cease to do that with the required needle until you complete the constriction of the entire wound.
And let the needle be of medium size between thickness and fineness; since fine needles deeply penetrate the flesh quickly, and coarse ones have difficulty entering the skin; therefore it is necessary that they should be medium in their sharpness and bluntness.
And it is not proper that the needle should be shaped at both ends of the skin close by; so as not to penetrate the flesh quickly and open the wound before its consolidation, and also so that they may not extend when sewed, so as not to prevent the wound from consolidating.
Then cut the point of the needle, so as not to hurt the sick man in his sleep; and place cotton balls on both sides of the needle to hold its ends; and release them until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
And this kind of sewing with needles in such a manner is more suitable for small wounds. Since it suffices to sew them with one needle or two, or about as many.
The second sewing is common, so as to gather together with the sewing the ends of four; that is, the ends of two skins and the two ends of sifac (or one end) in its place, when there is thread on the needle equal in sharpness and bluntness.
Then when you penetrate with the needle these four ends, draw back the needle from the side where you began so that the thread falls out from the upper part of the wound; so that the sewing is like the sewing of cloth where they bind together cloths, and place between every stitch an amount of thickness equal to the smallness of a finger.
Humans know this suture.
With this suture I stitched up the wound that happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the wound was larger than one palm: and from the intestines about two palms came out from the middle intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the stomach.
I returned it (the intestine) after it had remained outside the wound for 24 hours.
The wound was consolidated in a space that was about 15 days: and I cured it, and it healed; and he lived after that for many years, converted to his own habits.
And the physicians judged that it would not heal.
And it was a miracle that I did not cure it with ointment. Because I was in a place where no ointment was found nor anything from the medicines. I therefore put old dough on the wound twice a day, and I attended to its cleansing with water of honey until it healed.
I will speak about two kinds of sutures according to the narrative of the language.
And it begins with sharp suture: and you insert the needle from the outside to the inside part.
When the needle enters the skin and moves along the length and width of the entire body: release the end of the sinew in the side where you inserted the needle, and let it penetrate to the other end from the inside part to the outside at the opposite end.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate in this way at the same end: and release the end of the sinew that is on this side, and let the needle penetrate to the other end from the inside part to the outside; and make it penetrate with your penetration which you make it penetrate into the tendon end that is in that part until it penetrates through all of it.
Then also begin from the same side, and extract it as well with its extremity, which is from sifac on the other side, and draw out the point that has penetrated through the skin.
Then return it into the same skin, and its extremity, sifac on the other side, with this extremity of mirach: extract it from the skin that is on its part, and do this once and then the other, and do this again after, until you have extracted all of it according to the example.
The conclusion of this stitch is that the stitches of skins should be made so that one end of the sifac is on one side of the skin and the other end released on the other side, until it is completed.
The second type of stitch, which Galen mentioned.
This conversation is about how to do it as some physicians do, gathering all parts that join by nature and applying the end of the sifac to its other end, and the end of mirach to another. And this is done as I have told you.
It is necessary that you push the point into the end of mirach close to you from the outside and let it penetrate to the inside only, and release both ends of sifac. Then turn the point and let it penetrate from the outside to the inside towards both ends of sifac.
Then turn both and let both penetrate from the inside to the outside towards two ends of mirach on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than a common and easy stitch, and it is the stitch whose preceeding has been mentioned before.
Therefore, this is also the speech of Galen.
And they said certain ones. The hernia stitch is to be rectified with two needles. That is, introduce one thread into each of them: and begin with the needle-point from the one which is near to you, and make it pass through to the other side, according to the stitching of those who sew leather equally.
And know that, when a rupture is in the middle of the belly: then the stitching of it is more difficult than of the other parts of the belly.
But the judgment on the dressing of a wound is the judgment on all wounds.
That is, when you seize a fresh wound with its blood, before it changes from the air: and you reduce the bowel and bind it up, and tie it up: then place it on powder of the earth.
If the air has already changed the wound: then place some unguents upon it, which are present with you, until they cause pus: and let the threads fall, and bind them up with sifac, and cover with miret. Then care for it thus as is the care of all wounds, until it heals.
If there are not present with you any medicines, then place immediately upon it as soon as it begins to emit pus, old cloth: and change it twice a day, as I taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need another medicine in many dispositions, when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal members in injury, then it is necessary that you immerse wool softened in oil tempered with warm temperature or in rose oil: and place it on the circumference of the places which are between the groins and under the armpits.
If it feels pain or punctures or rotting in the bowels (for this often happens): then clisterize it with wine of soap, black, warm: especially if putrefaction has already reached the intestine and become a perforating exitus penetrating to the concavity of it.
And know that which is from the large intestine is easier to heal; and that which is from the finer ones, is harder to heal.
The intestine called Jejunum does not accept healing from a wound that happens to it in any way; and this is due to the multitude of its veins, and the size of them, and due to the subtlety of its body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
If however that which proceeds from the wound is serous and you are able to seize it fresh: lead it back according to your reduction method, by which you reduce intestines equally.
But if space has passed by it and it is already turned green or black: then it is necessary that you tie it with thread above the place which has become dark from it, to prevent blood flow. For in serous there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of thread hanging from the bottom part of the wound outside it: to relieve your pressure on it, and removal of serous at the site of the wound, and discharge of pus from the wound.
Memory of the wound that occurs in the Intestine.
When there is a rupture in the Intestine and it is small: then it can be restored in certain people; because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a thrust of the lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it was an old wound; and it became a Fistula, and it discharged feces, and it became windy.
So I placed the treatment until I was not confident in its healing; nor did I cease to refine it until it healed and the location became solid.
After I saw the place already consolidated, I feared some accident happening to the weak man, that an accident evil would occur in his belly; and it did not happen to him from that accident evil. And he remained in better dispositions of himself, eating and drinking, and copulating, and entered the bath, and was trained in his own regimen.
And some of the experienced ones said that when a wound occurs in the Intestine and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner. It is, to take ants with large heads. Then gather two lips of the wound, and place one ant with an open mouth on the two lips of the wound. When therefore the head is upon it, and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it will stick to it, and will not be released.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing that with the ants according to the size of the wound in its entirety.
Then reduce it (the patient), and suture the wound. For these heads remain attached to the Intestine until it is fed, and it heals, and no harm occurs to the weak man completely.
And now it is possible that the Intestine can be tied even with a fine thread; which was removed from the animal's intestine, attached to it after it is inserted into the point.
It is, to take the end of this thread from the intestine, and scrape off much of it. Then tie a fine linen thread at the end of it (the intestine). Then insert that thread into the point, and suture with it the intestine. Then reduce him to a rupture.
This method of suturing with ants and the intestine, is not except by the way of confidence and hope.
Know that a large, broad ulna (forearm bone) is especially troublesome if it is in one of the slender intestines; then there is no skill except subtlety, and there is no healing of it at all.
On the care of scrotal hernia and fistulae.
You should know that every wound or boil that becomes old and grows, turns into an ulcer and does not consolidate, and always emits pus without being cut off; then it is universally called a fistula in whatever member it may be, and we call it scrotal hernia.
And indeed a fistula is, according to the truth, a filtered knot, hard, white; with which there is no pain, but it has a depression like the feather of a bird; and for this reason some call it "Risat", that is, the feather.
And it is moist in some hours, which emits pus. And perhaps its moistness is cut off in some hours. And sometimes this moistness is much and it is little; and it is thick, and it is fine.
And I have already mentioned in division when I spoke of wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal and flesh is not born in it, is not this but because of one of the nine causes.
One of these is because the blood is scarce in the body; or because it is malicious; or because there is hard flesh between it and its edges preventing the growth of flesh; or because there are many dirt and corruption; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter that is sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for its healing; or because the falling decay in the region is a kind of pestilence, or by the property of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: where the digestion of diseases is difficult, and the healing of boils is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone in it, or the number of bones.
And I have already shown you all those causes and their signs, as well as the treatments of them along with medicines in division: it is necessary here that I make you know the treatment for Fistula and Ulcer, which is made through the way of surgery with the hand.
You know therefore, that a Fistula occurs in all members of the body. For among them are Fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or organs; or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs: or the vertebrae of the back, or any of the joints composed together: such as the hand, and the foot: and there are those that approach the proximity of the main member, and similar ones.
Which of these Fistulas is in this manner, is difficult to heal from illnesses and does not receive treatment, and the care with it is labor and ignorance.
If there is any of the Fistulas whose depth does not reach those places that I mentioned and you hope for its treatment, and you wish to come to know it, then take a probe made from brass or iron if the Fistula runs in a straight line, and search it with the same.
If there is a winding in the Fistula, then explore it with a fine lead probe. Because lead with its own body is softened and molded around the winding.
If the Fistula has multiple openings, it will not be possible for you to sign on it with a probe. Cleanse therefore one of its openings from among its openings.
For the moisture with which you cleanse it runs towards other openings and flows out from them.
Then examine and search according to the method that is possible for you, so that you know whether there is a bone or nerve there, and if the Fistula has a long hollow or is near: or it is one Fistula with many openings that covers the whole thing, with all your strength: with your questioning, as you question the sick person, and by feeling pain under pressure with your hand on the spot, and similar signs from its occurrences.
When you have therefore stood over all things in a correct position, then go for treatment according to confidence: and it is that you should consider at that time, whether it is a Fistula nearby appearing, or in a safe place distant from the juncture, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I told you: then cut the Fistula according to what has been mentioned in my narrative, and remove what is in it by filtration, and corruptions of flesh, which is born in its opening from flesh, or membrane, and similar things: and take care of it until it heals.
If a Fistula is in deep recesses and is correctly placed: then it is necessary that you cut it as deeply as possible for you. Then cleanse it from all corrupted flesh of its own.
Then administer a linen swab dipped in sharp medications and introduce it as far as the concavity of the Fistula which you have seized with an iron: do this several times, until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the concavity of the Fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh, until it heals.
If it does not heal by this method, then cauterize it according to what we have said.
If the cause of the Fistula is bone, and it has been confirmed to you in this way: then investigate it and cut it according to what I have told you: if it does not forbid you anything from vein, nerve, or main member, as we said.
If a bone is exposed to you and there is something corrupted and blackened in it: then grind it down until the entire corruption is removed. Then take care of the bone with that which causes it to heal until it heals.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as it did: then you know that you have not reached the complete eradication of corruption.
Excise therefore over it again, and search for the reason of its recurrence, and thoroughly cleanse the wound with all your strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, that is good: and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the depth of a distant part of the body, which you did not reach. It is not in that case your ability, but to let it go according to nature.
If the rotten bone is small and accessible to you, pull it out with fine forceps that are suitable for the purpose.
If there are many bones, then you should carefully pull out all of them, without leaving anything behind with your strength.
If however the water prevents you from anything in making an incision, and there is no fear or error, then cut those waters and fleshes, if they are there, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones at your hour, then place something on the wound that will rot it; and let it go until it rots what is around the bones from fleshes and waters.
And keep the wound from healing. And tie the section which you made during your operation. Or place on top of it, if you are afraid, warm pitch softened with oil; or warm pitch immersed in Egyptian ointment, or any green ointments.
For when those waters rot and separate from the bones, their removal is facilitated, and their pulling out.
If there is one large bone, such as the bone of the leg or hip, or similar, and what has rotten from it is a large part, then shave it with the final rasp, until the blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If what is in it [the wound] has become rotten and it is a large part and the rot has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to sew it up and cut it completely to the place where the rot has reached: then take care of it until it hardens.
And I tell you about the case that happened to a man in his leg: put it as an example and aid for your operation.
There was a young man of about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg, caused by something moved upon him within the body, that is, from the inside, until it reached the material at the leg, and an abscess formed a large one: and there was no external cause for him.
Therefore, at that time with the mistake of physicians, until the abscess was opened, many substances gathered with it. And the care was put off for him until his leg became fistulous and many openings were made in it: which all discharged pus and body fluids.
Therefore a multitude of physicians cared for him for about two years, and he was not wise in the art of handwork, until I was called, and saw his leg and the materials that were flowing from those openings with a great flow: even the whole body of the man was already stiff, and his color was citrine.
I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached the bone.
Then I examined all the openings: and found that they were reaching each other from all parts of the leg.
Therefore I approached, and cut above one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone: and found it rotten: which was already rotten, decayed, rotten, pierced through, until it had reached the marrow.
Prepare therefore what I have found and prepare it from corrupted bone.
And I have appointed that there should not be in the bone except that corruption which was to be cut off and sawed. And now I will uproot it (the corruption).
Then I placed the wound repair with strengthening medicines at a distance (long space). And it is not solidified.
Then I tried again and found continuity of corruption with the bone: and I sawed what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I attempted its repair. And it is not repaired.
I therefore tried again and did not cease cutting the bone into pieces and attempting its repair: and it is not repaired, until I cut about one palm's breadth from the bone and extracted that along with its marrow.
Then I repaired it with medicines and it was quickly solidified and healed: and this iteration was not necessary in its operation or cutting, except for the disposition of debility of the patient, his small tolerance and my fear of him concerning death: because it happened to him at all hours from excessive evacuation of syncopal attacks.
He was therefore healed completely and there grew hard flesh at the place of the bone, and good arrangements were made for his body, and its strength returned: and it turned back to its own dispositions: and no harm came to him from walking at all.
If however the protruding bone at the body's place is already broken, then it should be sawed in this way: and that is: that you take a tendon, tighten it at the end of the protruding bone: and command someone to extend it upwards: and put another thicker ligament from wool first. Then tie [it] over the bone that is skin: and extend its extremity, so that you may draw the flesh towards the lower parts: and you shall expose the flesh on the place which you wish to cut, so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
Place a stick or a board beneath the bone at the bottom properly: because when you do this, it is not forbidden to cut corrupt flesh.
It is necessary that the saw be above the place of corruption a little, so that there is not corruption in the depression of the bone: and it should not appear to the senses in its appearance, and compel another [to be] its substitute for the saw.
If the bone is corrupt and not prominent but continuous with another part, and corruption is in its middle or a part of it, then expose the flesh from all parts entirely. Then place a stick beneath [it].
Afterwards saw it from the first part, where there is corruption, until the saw is continuous with the other part: and let the saw be according to length a little away from the corruption, as we said.
If the corruption is at the junction, cut the corrupted joint and saw the bone where it is continuous with another part.
But if corruption is at the continuation of two joints, then there is no remedy except abrasion.
If corruption is in the beak of the hand or the foot, then the matter is very difficult in that [case]. But it is necessary for you to examine how the corruption appears to you. And abrade it and clean it according to whatever disposition is possible for you, and with whatever remedy it can be corrected for you: when it does not make opposition to the Vein or Nerve [for you].
And know that the saws and knives for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their size, and their subtlety, and their magnitude, and their smallness, and their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare an instrument suitable for every kind of operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you the type of instrument you need, when your study is prolonged. And the knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the methods of diseases: then indeed you will find that which is suitable for each disease among the instruments.
I confirm to you the number of instruments at the end of this chapter, which you place as examples upon which you cut, and the proof by which you test others.
Form of another Saw.
Form of a Scraper for joints. Let the head of this Scraper be in the shape of the head of a star-shaped nail and its points be shaped like the points of an elongated fork.
And it is not suitable unless it is used to scrape the joints when they are broken or a large and thick bone.
Form of a larger Scraper.
Form of a wide Scraper.
Form of a Scraper with a concavity.
Form of another thin Scraper.
Form of another Scraper with a curved end.
Form of a small, fine Scraper.
This resembles a saw and its end is like a saw: it is used in many places for the scraping of bones.
Form of the Razor that suits its purpose, which has been made from bones.
The end of it is triangular and sharp-edged.
Made from India. And similarly, it is necessary that all the things I have said be made of razors, scalpels, and saws.
On the incision of limbs, and the sawing of bones.
Limbs become putrid either from an external cause, or from an internal one.
If you have treated the corruption with medicinal treatment and it does not improve: and if you see that the corruption is advancing into the limb which has not been affected by anything: then it is necessary to make an incision in that limb until the point where corruption reaches, so that the sickness can be expelled through it either from death or from a greater evil caused by the loss of the limb.
And the sign of this is that the limb turns black until it is thought to have been consumed by fire or has become rotten after turning black: until the rot spreads until the point which follows the limb and creeps throughout the entire body.
Therefore, when an incision is made and similarly if the cause of corruption is from the sting of some poisonous creatures such as sea scorpions, weasels, hedgehogs or similar ones.
If corruption or a sting is in the limb of a finger, then incise the finger and do not leave any space for the corruption to advance until it reaches the rest of the hand.
And similarly if this occurs in the hand, then incise it from the root of the palm and do not leave any space for the corruption to advance until it reaches the arm.
And if it penetrates into the arm, then incise the arm at the elbow joint.
If however corruption passes through and you see him about an elbow: then in that case is the death of the weak. And to administer beyond that in treatment, is quantity virtue.
And similarly do with the foot, when corruption invades a toe; then cut it off at one node: and if it enters into the heel of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. If however it rises to the knee, then cut off the leg at the juncture of the knee.
If however corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no remedy in it except for abandonment and leaving the weak to die.
And the manner of cutting a limb or sewing it is that you tighten the ligament below where you wish to cut, and then tighten another ligament above the place. And stretch one minister ligament downwards; and stretch another minister ligament upwards towards the top. And you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until the flesh is entirely exposed. Then it is cut or sewn.
And it is necessary that you lay linen cloth over all the parts, so that the knife does not touch a healthy place; and an additional injury is added to the weak, and a warm abscess.
If however there is a flow of blood internally while you work, then burn the place quickly; or lay on it some powders that absorb blood. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligament and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you what happens to a man in his foot; the same thing happens that I am telling you.
That is, because blackening happens in the foot as a result of burning that resembles fire burning; and corruption first occurs in his toe, until it began to involve the entire foot.
The man cured himself, after he saw corruption occur in a limb with great severity, which he discovered from pain and burning: and he cut it off at the joint, and he healed.
And when a long time had passed for him, that same corruption happened to him in the index finger of his hand.
Therefore he came to me, and I attempted to regain that loss with him by placing medicine over his hand after cleansing his body: but the loss was not gained back, and it started to spread to another finger: until corruption began in his hand.
So he called me to cut off his hand: and I did not want that, hoping for recovery of the loss from me: and I also feared death itself for him at the cutting of his hand. Since the man was above his loss.
Therefore when he gave up hope in me, he returned to his own land: and it came to me about him, because he acted quickly, that he cut off his entire hand: and he healed.
And I did not bring this narrative, except to be of help for that which falls under the nature of this illness: and to be a signification, and according to which it should be done.
Chapter on the treatment of sinuses, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When a boil occurs in some fleshy parts and the space of the boil extends until it collects pus: then it breaks or perforates, and what is inside the pus exits, and there remains an empty place as if it were a vessel: and the skin that is over it like a cloth that has been softened: and it does not reach its ultimate corruption, nor presses on the bone, nor on the nerve, nor on the ligament: it deserves to be called a sinus: and it is not called a fistula: but if the space of it extends until the corruption presses into one of these parts, then it is called a fistula or a zuken.
The care of it is that you cut the entire skin as it rolls out; and especially when it has been refined and made like cloth; and trust that it will not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
If you expect the skin to adhere, and that is not due to the ultimate corruption; and if there is a thickening of flesh in the skin, then treat it with Clisterium; and it is necessary to consider towards the Anus.
If it is large and there is pus that smells foul from it; then clisterize it with the Egyptian medicine which is vinegar, oil, and zinnia, taking equal parts, mixed together in a vessel; and boil it over fire until the medicine turns red; and let it come to the consistency of honey.
Then take from it what is necessary for you; and dissolve it with water and honey, and clisterize the Anus with it; and tie up its opening, and let the medicine remain there for a quantity of two hours.
Then remove it by pressing; make that day as many times as necessary until the Anus is cleansed, and the foul smell removed.
And sometimes clisterize with water and ash, when this medicine is not present for you; and it is necessary to take ashes from vine wood or ashes from holly trees; and pour water over it. Then boil it, and clisterize with it until you trust that the Anus has been cleansed.
If the sick person cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water and ash, then clisterize it with water and honey to which something of crushed zinnia has already been added. Or clisterize it with honey and wine mixed together, since the property of honey is to cleanse and wash; and wine makes the Anus adhere, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness in the wine.
When you do that several times and trust that the sinus corruption is already removed: then cleanse it with it, along with what causes flesh to grow within it.
And you should take from the plaster dyafinicon: and you will dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic wine; or cleanse it with certain medicines, and other ointments, whose properties I have written about in the treatise on unguents.
If the opening of the sinus is narrow and a cannula cannot enter it to cleanse it: then widen it slightly with iron; or place linen wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment within it until it becomes wider.
And similarly, if the opening is also wide, then bring together its lips with stitching; and allow the amount that the cleansing agent can enter without addition.
And similarly, if the opening from which pus flows is raised to a higher place: then cut it in a lower area that is within it, so that the pus may flow out towards the lower part; since pus when constricted at depth prevents flesh from growing within it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus at a place below as desired: then try to prepare a body part so that the pus may flow out from there easily, according to your preparation. Try not to retain anything at all from the pus within it; and take consolidating medicines that are placed on the wound, appropriate for what you desire. Spread them out on a linen cloth. Let the linen cloth be of such size that it will provide communication for the entire sinus. Then cut with scissors directly through the opening of the sinus a hole larger than the sinus opening itself. Then spread a soft ointment over another cloth, according to the size of the opening; and place it on top of it, positioning it far from the orifice of the Sinus, so that the exit of pus from it is relieved; and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days, instead.
The one who is over the orifice of Sinus, that is the one you remove at all times, so that what accumulates in it may come out; and that you know if what runs out from it is much or little; or digested, or undigested.
And when this is done again, consider the place of the Sinus itself, whether its master feels pain in it, or not; and if there is pain in it, whether it is an abscess, or not an abscess.
When therefore your medicine is thus applied and you see the matter that comes out from the orifice of Sinus, then you know if the Sinus already adheres or approaches adhesion; then solve it in the morning or on the third day; and when you dissolve the wound, then change the cloth, and renew the ointment.
If, however, a subtle venom comes out from the Sinus after a long time, then do not despair of its adhesion, for healing of it is approaching; since there are people who have a slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act against this.
If, however, undigested pus comes out from the Sinus after several days, then you know that the Sinus does not adhere.
If, therefore, the adhesion of Sinus is delayed and prolonged; then add in the drying treatment of medicaments; but let the physicians do this so that the medicaments are wet in substance, and dry in effect; such as unguentum dyafinicon, when the excess is added to it from zeug.
And from the last one to be treated is this: to receive the ointment of dyafinicon, and it shall be dissolved with rose oil, and it shall be grinded upon it an equal quantity of ancient wine in substance.
Then mix it up together, and use it.
And now makes a similar action when you do not have the ointment of dyafinicon at hand, honey, when you cook it until it thickens, and use it instead. Or receive myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense: grind all of it, and powder it over honey while it is on fire. Then apply linen cloth over it, and bind it with a bladder: and line it with the honey you cooked, until it thickens; and powder the substance over it, and place it again on the linen cloth, and bind it.
And sometimes administered in it are long alexanders, the roots of celestial lilies, and is lily: also wheat flour, and chicory. Use them plain or combined, grind them, and sift the powder: and powder it over the honey I mentioned, and use it.
If the case of the bladder extends and is not cured by this treatment: then you will know that corruption is deep within it: either it has made an impression on the bones or in the hard parts, or ligaments: then cure it by the treatment of fistulas, as was mentioned before.
Chapter on the care of ulcers and scratched nails, and incision of fingers, and amputation.
Ulcer under the nail of the thumb or big toe, and perhaps in other fingers is called panaritium.
When its duration is prolonged and neglected in treatment and cauterized with heat, it may become corrupted and discharge pus until it rots the nail root; and perhaps it corrupts it entirely, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone, until there is a foul smell; and the tip of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
When you treat it as I have said, and your care does not do so: then it is necessary that you shave with iron the entire superfluity that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. Indeed, cautery is very helpful.
If the bone is healthy and the nail is also sound, and empty additions of the nail now press the flesh towards the inside and begin to pierce it, and wound it: then it is necessary that you put fine radium under the corner of the nail which pierces the flesh, and push it up; and cut the flesh easily, and put on top of it what remains of the flesh from burning medicines, corrosives, until it is removed completely. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the corruption has already penetrated the bone, then it is necessary that you cut out the bone, and remove it; for it will never heal as long as corrupted bone remains.
If you see the corruption and decomposition advancing towards the finger, then cut it at one node, according to its previous description. Then treat it until it heals.
If the nail happens to be rubbed or struck, and a strong pain occurs, then it is necessary that you use the leech first. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula crosswise from above to the desired length.
And be careful not to let the incision reach the flesh that is under the nail, for you will cause a violent pain to occur on account of it, and it will become a cause for the growth of additional flesh at the site.
Then take care of the place so that it alleviates the pains.
The finger that is born in some human hands may perhaps be entirely fleshy; and perhaps some of them have bones, and perhaps there is a nail in it; and some of them are born at the joint, or its growth occurs in some knots of the finger. Therefore, the one that is born in some knots of the finger does not move; and the one that is born at the joint of the finger may perhaps move.
The dissection of the fleshy one (of the fingers) is therefore easy. This means to make an incision at its root with a broad spatula.
But the treatment of the one whose growth is at the root joint is difficult. Therefore, refrain from making an incision of it.
In the one that is born at the end of the knots of a finger, then it is necessary to make an incision in the first place through a round cut up to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws that fit for this purpose. Then take care of it until it heals.
The consolidation that occurs in fingers often occurs either from the birth of a person (that is, it is born with him), or from a wound consolidation, or burns by fire, and similar things.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut off that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place linen or gauze soaked in rose oil between them to prevent them from consolidating quickly, and separate them; or place a thin lead sheet between them until the site heals as it should.
And similarly, if consolidation happens to certain fingers with the palm, then cut that consolidation, according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
Chapter on Defects in Incision.
Uites are swollen veins filled with melancholic exudates that occur in many parts of the body; and most often they occur in the legs, especially those walking much and suffering, and those carrying heavy loads.
Therefore, it is necessary to administer a strong purging of the body from black bile at times.
Then perform venesection on the patient's basilica vein.
The cure of these (varicosities) with iron is according to two methods. One method is to make an incision and draw out black blood. The method is also that a vein is raised and drained completely.
The section [of the vein] however, is according to this method. Firstly, apply a poultice on the leg with much warm water until the thick and foul blood is resolved. Then tie the diseased leg from the upper part of its thigh to the lower part of its knee with bandage. Then cut the vein at one, or two, or three places with a wide incision.
Then drain the blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, and it is necessary that a phlebotomist firstly attends to the diseased person. Then cut the nail downwards: until as much blood comes out as you see sufficient, and as much strength the diseased person can bear.
Then tie it and command him to abstain from foods causing black bile; and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and that does harm to the diseased person.
The method of draining is according to this method. Shave the diseased leg if there are many hairs on it. Then immerse it [the diseased part] in a bath; or apply poultice on the leg of it with warm water until it turns red and the veins swell up; or exercise it with strong movement if there is no bath present, until the limb becomes warm.
Then make a straight incision along the vein, along its length; or at the end of it near the knee, or at the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with knives and scrape off the vein from all sides, until it becomes visible; and at its appearance, it turns from red to black as if in a downhill slope. When it comes from the skin, it appears white like a sinew.
Then introduce the Radium under it until it is raised and comes out of the skin; suspend it with a blind hook, softly.
Then cut another section near that section with three fingers. Then scour the skin above the vein until it appears. Then raise it with Radii as you did before, and suspend it with another hook as you did at first.
Then cut another section or several sections as needed. Then raise it up and make an incision on the last section at the heel.
Then pull it out to the section above it.
And do this until you pull it out from the section above or higher sections, until it comes out completely; then make an incision on it.
If it does not obey you to pull and raise, then insert a needle with a strong thread and tie it and pull it out; or insert a Radium under it; turn your hand around all parts until it comes out. And be careful not to cut it. For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult for you to raise it up and a harmful thing enters the patient from it.
When you pull it out completely, then put linen soaked in wine and rose oil or olive oil over the wound area and take care of it until it heals.
If the vein is twisted with a curved shape and has coiling in parts and not as we said in a straight manner, then you must cut across it in all its curved parts and the points of coiling itself.
Then suspend it with hooks until you raise it up completely; be careful at your cut not to cut the vein or wound, for it will be difficult for you to raise or pull it out. Preserve your prudence.
The form of incision to heal a wound.
Form of excision for cataract.
It is not like other incisions in sharpness nor has a pointed end to avoid damaging the vein; and it is roundish and flexible, not too fine because if it were too fine, it would cut the vein with its fineness; rather, there should be excess roundness as we have said.
Extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in warm lands such as Alizegi and the land of the Arabs, and in dry, hot lands with little softness, that is, where no herb or tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And indeed its generation is from putrefaction which occurs beneath the skin, just as it happens within the bodies of snakes and ascaris worms, and worms generated between skin and flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this vein is that which occurs from a heated inflammation in the leg. Then it is incised. Then the vein begins to emerge from that incision place, as if it were a root of a tree or an animal.
When that end appears, then it is necessary to wind around it a piece of lead weighing one keil dram, up to two drams and knots; and allow the lead to hang from the leg.
Whenever something emerges from it towards the outside, wind that up in lead and knot it. If it extends too much, then cut a part of it, and wind up the rest. And do not cut it at the root before it has emerged entirely. Since if you cut it, it contracts and enters the flesh; it causes an abscess to occur, and pus in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it should be treated gently and drawn out gradually until it emerges from the end of it, and nothing remains in the body from it; and this vein emerges from certain people that is five palms long and ten. And now it has reached me, because the man has emerged from twenty palms.
If it is cut during your treatment time: then insert a probe into its hole and perforate it with a long rod until all that is in it from the matter is evacuated; and administer the putrefaction of the place with medicines for some days. Then treat it with treatment for boils (or abscesses).
And indeed this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot, or in the foot itself: and many openings occur to it, and a branch leaves from every opening.
Therefore treat it as we said in the section on ligature and with what was mentioned before.
Chapter on Surgery of Worms Generated Under the Skin, and it is called Boil Sickness.
This disease is called Boil Sickness in certain lands among us; because it often occurs in cattle and a small worm is born between the skin and flesh.
And it moves throughout the body, ascending and descending; and it is felt by the senses during its walking from limb to limb until it bursts wherever it bursts in the skin and comes out.
And its generation is from the decay of certain humors. As worms and snakes, that is earthworms and roundworms occur in the belly.
And it is feared from its malignity. Because when it moves in the body and rises to the head and reaches a place, then perhaps it opens there and comes out, and destroys an eye; and this happens often.
When one wishes to treat it and extract it, then this is not done unless during its walking and appearance to the senses.
Therefore, tie what is above it and what is below it with a strong ligature. Then cut above it, and extract it.
If it goes deep into the flesh, and you do not find it; then place a cautery on the spot with fire until it dies.
The greater fear is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If you find him (the wound) already advanced near the eye, then tie a good ligature below it (the wound). Then cut above it and extract him (the foreign body).
The sick person must use cleansing of his body with medicines that dissolve corrupt and bad humors.
And let him beware from foods causing corruption.
Chapter on the incision for Nakir's disease.
This disease is called Nakir in our land, and it is pain that occurs in certain members, then changes from member to member.
And indeed, I have seen it myself, as I am telling you. I was called to a sick woman in certain villages. And she pulled back her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And after staying for an hour, I saw a swelling moving with the thread, like a worm, rapidly ascending to her shoulder as fast as possible; so that it was like live silver running from place to place.
The pain withdrew from that place, and it was fixed in the shoulder.
Then sat for an hour, and ran through the rest of the body, until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that he was turning over his whole body, as I had seen.
Therefore, I marveled at the speed of his exchange from one limb to another. And indeed before that, I had not seen this illness in my eyes in such a manner as I saw it now. Nevertheless, I have seen many who find pain to be transferred from one limb to another; and I myself did not see it as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think it to be anything but because the woman was from those who are from dry villages with brittle veins; hence, it appears that the windiness was transferred.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this reasoning in those who are delicate and bodies with moist veins; hence, the concealed veins should not be considered.
Therefore, if you wish to heal him and the patient feels that pain; then, if it is visible to you as we have said, then press upon it quickly and beneath it; cut above it, until the windiness confined there is expelled; and cauterize the place.
If, however, you do not see it with your eyes: then heal him by pressing the body and that which expels windiness, and drive out the windiness with stinking pills and pills of serapion, and similar things.
Chapter on Extraction of Arrows.
The arrows are diversified according to their kinds and the places where they fall on the body.
The diversity of ears is as follows: because there are some with large points, and small ones; concave ones, and deaf ones. And there are those that have three angles. And from these are tongues. And from these are stars.
These, however, which are according to the limbs on which they fall, are according to two modes. Or the limbs are hollow from main limbs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar ones. When it falls on any of these limbs and appears to you as signs of death which I will tell you later, then it is necessary that you draw out the arrow from them, for death follows him where it is, in many dispositions. And when these signs are not visible to you and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb, then draw it out yourself and take care of the wound.
The sign of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the bone and exits from the siphac (a membrane covering the brain) is: because such symptoms occur from it as sudden deafness, scotoma (diminished vision), vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflation, redness of the tongue, spasm, confusion of intellect, and vomiting of cholera. Blood may come out from the nose or ears. Speech may be cut off and voice destroyed. White moisture comes out from the wound place, like dough. And it comes out from there resembling a watery consistency of flesh.
If those signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and remove the arrow if it does not come out.
The signs of an arrow when it falls in the heart are: that it is near the left nipple; and it feels as if it were fixed in a hard object, not in a soft one. And perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to the pulse's movement; and blood runs black from the wound. And this is followed by coldness of the limbs, cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore, know that death approaches without a doubt.
The sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound; and the vessels that follow the neck should be cut off, and the color of the patient changed. And it exhales a large, deep breath; and it seeks the attraction of cold air.
If the arrow falls into the pleura, which is in the chest; then it is near the small ribs; and there is a great panting with violent pain, with sighing; and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
If the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested comes out from the wound.
If the arrow falls into the abdomen and becomes fixed there, something like feces or bile or a ruptured intestine comes out from the wound. Therefore, there is no hope for treatment or removal of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and urine comes out; and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger than the patient; then know that it is deadly.
The remaining limbs, as the face, neck, throat, spatula, assistant, vertebrae dorsales, pelvis, leg, and similar members are saved according to several arrangements; when the arrow does not find an artery or nerve; and the arrow is not venomous.
And I tell you what I have seen about these arrows, so that it may signify to you concerning your cure.
This is, because a man fell down with an arrow into his tear duct of the eye, at the root of the nose. Therefore I extracted it from the other side, under his ear fat: and he was healed, and no damage happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which fell to him in the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not get anything more from it except its small end, which adhered to its wood: and the arrow was large among the arrows of the Turks, with a soft iron, in which there were no ears.
Therefore the Jew was healed, and no accidental evil happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian's throat.
And the arrow was Arabic, and it had ears. Therefore I cut above it between two cartilages: and already it was submerged in his throat. Therefore I sharpened myself with it until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who fell down with it into his abdomen: and we thought that he would die from it.
Afterwards, after thirty days had passed and nothing changed in his condition, I cut above the arrow: and I opened it up over it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no accidental evil happened to him.
And I saw a man who fell down with an arrow into his back, and the wound had consolidated on it. Afterwards, after seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
I saw a woman who had an arrow fall into her womb, and the wound healed upon her, and the arrow remained within her; and none of her conditions were changed, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural operations.
I saw another man to whom an arrow fell on his face: and the wound healed, and it remained, not causing him much pain; and similar things happened many times.
I removed an arrow from a prince of the King, which had fallen on his nose, and it had already deviated slightly towards the right; and the arrow was entirely hidden.
Therefore, I was called for his treatment after the fall of the arrow, up to three days. Therefore, I found the arrow wound very narrow.
I therefore asked her with a thin probe, and she did not feel it; and he himself was finding a puncture and pain under his right ear. Therefore, I hoped that this puncture was from the end of the arrow.
Therefore, I dressed the place with an attracting and digesting plaster, confident that the location would come out and a sign of the arrow would appear for me to cut over it; but it did not happen at the place where it was expected, indicating that the arrow had missed its mark.
I therefore continued with the plaster over him for many days; but it did not happen as expected, and the wound healed in the meantime; and the man remained weak from its extraction, until one day he felt the arrow within his nose. And he told me this.
And he told me this. I therefore applied sharp and corrosive medicine to that wound for many days until it was opened; and when I probed it myself, I felt a small end of the arrow adhering to wood.
Then I added the sharp medicine in the wound opening until it became clearly visible to us the end of the arrowhead; and it passed with that space of time approximately four months.
After the wound was opened and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and move it, but it did not obey and came out; then I did not stop refining and devising ways on it until finally, on a certain day with properly made forceps according to the shape that comes at the end of the chapter, I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed the physicians judge that the nose cartilage cannot be restored. I therefore restored it, and the wound healed, and the illness became whole again; nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you about the quality of some arrow extractions; in order to put this rule and meaning on what I have not said.
Because the parts and distinctions of this art are not comprehended with the narrative; nor does the book contain it, and the wise artist compares a little about much; and with what is present, concerning what is absent: and he finds a new operation, and a new instrument for descents of foreign matters in this art when they occur.
Therefore I say that arrows do not come out of the limbs to which they are fixed, except in two ways. Or by attraction from the place where it entered. Or conversely, by the other part.
And what comes out from where it entered is either a proceeding arrow in a meaty place; and it is attracted and comes out.
If it does not obey to come out at the hour when it falls; then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh around it putrefies; and the attraction of it will cease, and its coming out will take place.
And similarly, if it is fixed into the bone and does not obey you to come out, then leave it for a few days; and repeatedly it with attraction and motion every day until it comes out.
If it does not come out after a few days, then it is necessary that you bore around the arrowhead in the bone from all sides with a subtle drill until the arrows are expanded. Then draw it out and extract it.
If the arrow is already hidden in the body and concealed from sensation: then search for it with probes. If you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments that are suitable for drawing it out.
If you cannot apply pressure on it because of the narrowness of the wound and the length of the arrow in deep: and there is no bone, nerve or vein there; then mark it until the wound expands and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
If there are ears he must hold, then freely remove the fixed flesh from them on all sides, with every skill you can, and skills, if it cannot be done by dissection of the flesh due to a fracture of the ears or their twisting, until it comes out.
When you perform an extraction of the arrow, wherever it is, then use twisting with your hand, along with tweezers in all directions, until you make it come out: and with subtlety of ultimate subtlety, so that the arrow does not break, and the attraction of it becomes difficult for you, and its extraction.
If you cannot do it by the hour, then leave it for some days until what is around it putrefies. Then repeat it: for the tunica will soften. If, however, the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what I have said in its treatment as mentioned in its chapter: and guard your skill from cutting a vein, or a nerve, or a tendon.
And administer your skill in every way possible for the extraction of the arrow: and let it be with facility, calmness, slowness, or firmness, as I told you.
It is necessary that, when you pull the arrow, it should be weakened according to its shape, according to which it was at the time of the arrow's accident. Because it is more beneficial. If that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible from the shapes.
The arrow that comes out from the opposite part or already proceeds to the outside, or makes a hump at the end of the arrow by the sensation of the skin on the upper side and you see it bulging: cut above it, and the cut should be according to the amount that the tweezers can grasp.
Then pull it out: for it is easy to come out by itself.
If it remains in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness until the arrowhead impresses into the bone and expands; then pull it out.
And if not: let it be for a few days; then draw it again until it comes out.
If the arrow shaft is wooden in it, then force it out with it.
If the arrow shaft fell out, and force is to be administered: then insert a concave instrument into it so that its concavity enters the shaft's tip; then force it with it.
If the arrow is concave, then force it out with the inserting instrument. For the arrow is loosened by that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut out all the flesh where the poison is: if it is possible for you to do so. Then care for it with what is suitable for that purpose.
If the arrow falls into the chest, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side: and is near where you can reach it with a probe, and it is possible for you to cut over it: then cut over it, and avoid cutting the vein, or nerve, and remove it.
Then sew up the wound, if you see one, and take care of it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are extracted.
The tips should resemble a bird's beak, which have been made like iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not let it go.
And they are made in various shapes, large, small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, its smallness, and the width and depth of the wound.
Form of the Probing Hook concave.
And the form of the Probing Hook for the deaf.
This is the tip of the probe similar to a radius, so that it can be relieved into the concave arrowhead and pushed along with it.
Chapter on Phlebotomy of Veins.
Veins for bloodletting, the custom of which runs in the body, are thirty.
From the head there are sixteen: two pulsating veins which are after the ears, called the two Herbs: and two arteries which appear in the two temples: and two veins which are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called Watchers: and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead: and a vein at the end of the nose. And two jugular veins, which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins that are to be bled in the arms, are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic, and it is from the side of the woods; and they call it by the common people the vein of the head. And Black. And the Middle one, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalic; and they call it by the common people the vein of the body. And Basilica, and it is placed on the domestic side; and it is also called Titillicaris. And they call it by the common people the vein of the abdomen. And the cord of the arm, and it is placed on the elbow; and that is the one which is bled, and that is the one which appears above the thumb with a clear presentation.
And Saluatella: and it is the vein which is between the wrist and the little finger; and it has two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins. The one of them is which is a curvature under the nail of the thumb from the side of wood. And the second one (is) Saphena: and its place is at the heel, on the domestic side. And vein Nessus: and its place is at the heel, on the wilderness side.
And in the other limb (there are) three veins similar to those (mentioned before).
[Title: On bloodletting of two veins after the ears.]
The bloodletting of the two veins that are after the ears is beneficial for ancient catarrhs, and for hemigraine (headache), and for scrofula (tuberculous swelling of the lymph nodes in the neck), and for old maladies of the head.
And the quality of bloodletting (it) is according to what I have said (in previous text). And (it is) to shave the head of the sick person: and his back of the head should be rubbed in the place of two veins with a rough cloth rubbing well. Then the sick person should bind his neck with ointment until two veins appear. And their places (are) after the ears, in two depressed places of the head. Therefore seek them with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, there mark it with a hot iron (branding).
Then take the bloodletter (phlebotomist) with a cutting instrument (cultellus), and that one is called 'The One Who Cuts'. Then insert it (the cutting instrument) into the vein under the skin, until the bloodletter reaches the bone. Then draw your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut (make a shallow incision) in the vein along with the skin. And let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers joined, or about that: and make as much blood come out as you wish.
Then bind it with sutures, and let it heal by itself.
And now begins the first part of the book: incision and cauterization [of the affected area].
Venesection of the two arteries in the temples is beneficial for an old headache called hemicrania; and it helps for sodium praua, obtalmia assidua, and excess discharge of sharp fluids to the eyes.
And the method of venesection should be as I have told you. The sick person should bind his neck tightly until two veins appear clearly to the touch and their pulse is felt under your finger. Then you will mark them with a heated iron.
Then scrape the skin above the vein with your index finger and introduce the lancet under it, and scrape the vein towards the top. And cut it as you did with the two other veins, and let it bleed according to your need.
Then loosen the constriction of the sick person, and place your finger on the vein for an hour. Afterwards place a cloth over it and sutures, and bind it tightly; then let it heal by itself.
And now ends the reminder of these [procedures], and their incision and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
The benefit of venesection of the forehead vein is after venesection of the temporal veins, for old facial ailments; and for headache, redness, and foul ulcers.
The quality of phlebotomy [is] as I have told you. Compress the sick neck with a poultice until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called Fossorium.
Place the sharp point that is at the top of the Fossory over the same vein, and strike it with a chisel or with something else in the same manner; and allow blood to flow according to the amount you desire. Then solve the wound of the sick person, and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad leech. However, it should not be the sharp-edged leech, as the other leeches, but rather the broad-edged one. And the leech should be applied across (the wound) because the bone is nearby; and perhaps it will break when it is sharp.
The remedy for the two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two eyes is for the eye affected by scabs and redness; it is applied to the eye itself, and to the diseases of the face.
And the quality of the leeching of these veins is that the sick person should bind his neck with a bandage. Then apply the leech to them; and you be standing over his head.
And make the leeching across (the wound) to a length less than the width of the leech with a small leech and a broad one slightly smaller; because there is no flesh in that place. If the leech is sharp-edged, it may break.
Then let blood flow from the wound as much as is necessary for you. Place a piece of cloth over them and bind them overnight; and then unbind them.
The veins of the nose are useful for treating acute fever, violent sore throat, diseases of the face such as headache and redness which occurs on the face; especially when it is chronic.
The quality of phlebotomy in this case is to tighten the sick man's neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand and take a fine, long phlebotomy needle; and fix it in the middle of his leper's snout, between that which distinguishes the nose according to its correct position. Since the vein is not visible there and because blood begins to flow immediately.
It is necessary that you hold your finger with the phlebotomy needle a little: and make the blood run according to your need. Then tie it up at night. For it heals quickly.
Guidegi's two methods of phlebotomy are beneficial for the constriction of coughing, and the onset of leprosy, and melancholic diseases, and impetigo, as well as bad ulcers, and those that corrode, namely herpetic sores or scabies.
The quality of the phlebotomy is to tighten a sick person under both necks with a band; and the worker stands above the head of the sick man, and the sick man sits on a chair.
Then the vein is to be phlebotomized at a length slightly larger than the width of the phlebotomy needle. Then draw out an amount moderated or according to what you see, due to necessity for that purpose. Do the same with another vein.
Then untie the band and tighten two veins with a constrictor; so that the sick man does not choke. And release it until morning. A wound heals.
Chapter on the Phlebotomy of Veins (Algeberich). Algeberich's veins are beneficial for phlebotomy because they contribute to alcohol in the mouth, and decay of gums, as well as bad ulcers, fissures of the lips, ulcers, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
The quality of phlebotomy is that you make the sick person sit before you: and tie his neck with a bandage. Then roll back his lip, and look at the two veins: one is on the right side of the lip, and the second is on the left: and the demonstration of each is by the blackening of both. And that is true: because around them are small, dark veins. Therefore make an incision on each with a cutting incision.
But if there is doubt about you and you do not know which one it is: then direct yourself to the larger incision, and that will be more obvious.
And similarly, do the same with the two veins that are on the upper lip: and certainly there is a common custom with it: and make an incision of the two veins that are on the lower lip.
[Paragraph on Phlebotomy of Sublingual Vein After Cephalic Phlebotomy.] But of the two veins that are under the tongue, the help for phlebotomy is: because phlebotomy of the cephalic is for swellings that are in the throat, and sicknesses of the windpipe, and sicknesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is that the sick person sits between your hands facing the sun: and clean his tongue, and look below the tongue on one side for a vein, and on the other side for a vein: and the color of each declines towards blackening.
Therefore phlebotomize both: and be careful not to injure your hand while phlebotomizing them. For there are arteries beneath it, and perhaps there will be a flow of blood from these arteries.
The three veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow, are in whose phlebotomy a common custom runs in all men.
And phlebotomy of these (things) is done according to two modes. It can be done either by pricking with a broad-bladed leech (myrton): or by applying oil to the puncture for thinning: or by cutting with a sharp-edged lancet (cultellus), and this is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And among these (things) there are broad and thin forms according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the leech (myrton) should be broad, as you see. It is suitable for opening hollow veins that are full, projecting, apparent, thick and those that contain thick, cloudy blood.
And this leech (phlebotomus) is smaller in width and more delicate for thinning (extirpation).
It is suitable for the phlebotomy of fine veins that contain subtle, yellow blood.
The basilica vein (one of the three) is a help for phlebotomy (bloodletting). Because it draws blood from the ailments that are under the throat and neck, because it follows the chest and abdomen; it is suitable for the leech (phlebotomator) when he performs phlebotomy on it, to be careful, and to beware of it since below it is an artery. If (the leech) therefore errs and adds in the puncture of the leech, he will cut the artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore, the leech (phlebotomator) should not prick it with a leech: rather he should cut it with a lancet (Alnesil).
If the basilica is not apparent with a clear manifestation, then it should be sought out and exchanged for another or a branch of it should be sought: or if no branch is found, the leech (phlebotomus) can take the arm in its place. The matter is evident, and cut it with the leech Anesil, as we said.
If you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same, then it is necessary before tightening the arm, so that you touch the place, until you know the place of pulsation. Then mark the place with pitch, afterwards the arm, and cut the vein with a concave knife by the leech Alnesil, as we said. And beware that the blow does not fall into the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, while tightening the ligament, swelling at the place which you marked with pitch, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery; therefore avoid it.
If you see blood springing up at the phlebotomy, like a boy's urine, and it is subtle, red: then you know that it is from the blood of the artery. Therefore approach, and place your finger over the same space, afterwards remove your finger. If therefore blood is cut (many times it is cut), then tighten the arm and let it go; and beware the weak from moving it; let there be fear of it.
And do not move it for some days, until it heals.
If however blood is not cut, and it beats you; and if medicine is not present to you at the moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For its ends contract, and blood is cut off.
Or take the bark of a fig tree, and fold it; take half of it, and tighten it over the place of vein tying, with a ligament and wool until another day.
Then if blood is cut off, that is good. And if not [the case]: then care for the self with him to whom it preceded, the remembrance of the place from which powder-producing drainage flow is abscinding; and the cutting off of his blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the smallness of the wound's location, and the possibility of ligament from the arm.
However, the bleeding of the dark vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for this reason, since it is composed of a branch of Basilica and a branch of Cephalica, as we have said.
Furthermore, it is suitable for the bloodletter to be cautious about it, since there is a nerve beneath it. Therefore, if the bloodletter adds too much during the bleeding and finds a nerve, there results numbness, and healing becomes difficult, and perhaps he will not recover completely.
And this nerve often appears to the sense of touch. If it is concealed in some people and is subtle and does not show itself, then you must place your bleeding where you bleed her, with the incision of Alnesil, and avoid the nerve with all your might.
If the vein is between two nerves, then pierce the vein in length.
The Treatise on the Vein of the Head. But the bleeding of the vein of the head is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and contributes to eye ailments.
And it is suitable for this vein in particular, if you wish, that the bloodletter should anoint it with oil or myrtle while bleeding, since it is safer than all veins, because it is not beneath an artery, nor a nerve.
It is appropriate for you in bloodletting that you ask the barber to take only the head of an arm, and seek a softer spot; it does not harm him if no such place is found at first strike, that you should repeat on it with bloodletting several times.
Perhaps an abscess occurs in some people when they are not bled at the first strike, but it does not harm him that abscess.
Chapter on the usefulness of bloodletting and precautions to be observed. The nature and circumstances of bleeding, and those matters about which you should think for correction.
Firstly, know that bleeding is not administered unless for the preservation of health and persistence thereof, and caution against the onset of illnesses.
And bleeding should be done in one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely the cephalic, the radial (fusca), and the basilic. And bleeding should be done at the beginning of spring after fasting, during summer and autumn, and winter after eating when signs of filling appear.
Bleeding should be done on the first or third day, after three hours have passed since the previous day.
However, bleeding administered in illnesses has no determined hour; but whenever it is necessary and appropriate for that purpose, it may be done at night or day, and in any hour, and at any time.
It is not necessary to bleed children until they reach the age of fourteen. A pregnant woman should not be bled from the fourth month up to the seventh. The elderly who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
When someone wants to be bled for any reason, it is necessary that they clean their intestines with a mild enema before the bleeding if there is much retained feces in them; so that dirty, harmful fluids from the intestines do not attract veins at the time of bloodletting and harm the main organs.
The patient should not be bled when he is in a state of satiety or nausea: neither the drunkard, nor one coming out of drunkenness, until that (condition) has been removed from them. The sick man should not be with dropsy.
Care should be taken not to bleed again after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, increase in sexual activity, labor, exercise, wakefulness, fasting, and any other thing that weakens the strength of the body or the animal.
Then consider in detail about the fluids before that (bleeding), if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medications; if possible for him.
Then enter a bath, if it does not forbid him something; or exercise in some way to make the blood thinner.
And put the bleeding of his in the chest, around the third day, as we said; and strive to make him expel his chest on that day from all animal ailments: such as suffocation, anger, fear; and from all bodily ailments, such as labor, punishment, excess, and similar things.
And let him sit with the things that are in use by human custom for their aroma, scent, fragrance and similar things in quantity according to his ability.
Then let the bleeder sit on a higher place than the bleeding couch; afterwards he shall draw his arm out and rub it with his own hand twice or thrice. Then tighten the bandage with a cord and wrap it twice.
And let the bandage be moderate, because if the bandage is not equal or too tight in the binding, then it prevents the flow of blood; or if it is too loose, it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then after the ligature (stricture), it is necessary that the phlebotomist rubs his hands together simultaneously, until the veins swell, and they become apparent to the senses.
Then the phlebotomist cleanses (the instrument) for phlebotomy with a little oil, in an ancient and proper way.
Then he places his index finger of the left hand on the same vein at the place where he wishes to do phlebotomy, barely: so that the vein does not escape and the blow is cushioned (absorbed). Since the veins are like strings fleeing during phlebotomy and from them is that which is full of windiness; and when you place the phlebotomizer upon it, it contracts under the phlebotomizer, and the phlebotomist is deceived, and does not open the vein: and if he opens it, it is ligated; therefore for this reason it is necessary that the phlebotomizer be firm and attentive in all these matters.
Then he places down (the instrument) the phlebotomizer. If then a vein is opened from one side, it is good. And if not, then do it again on the other side in the same place barely or above it with haste; if the spot is not pierced through (repeatedly).
If it is pierced through or frightened by the weak, then dismiss him for a day or two; and do not tighten the ligature. Perhaps (the wound) will attract an abscess that is hot. Do not enter the bath.
Then repeat the phlebotomy, if it is loved (desired).
If the opening is small or the blood flows thinly; and be careful that the amount of blood which you wish does not escape from the blood; then repeat the phlebotomy in the same hole according to correctness, and add slightly in the operation.
Make it quickly before the location is removed, for the location to be removed is in many people during a small operation.
If you see it already removed, then do not go over it at all, for nothing exempts you from it in your presence. And place something made of oil over it: because it soothes the flow of blood. It is better in this place than the oil itself, and than other oils.
Similarly administer the ointment of oil in every phlebotomy of yours, where you let blood against the flow of blood: and they do it with Tyrian alfarach, and sageza, when one of them is placed over the place.
Blood becomes subtle and dissolves when it is thick.
If it happens in the place of phlebotomy a large abscess, for it often happens, especially to one who is not a phlebotomist except on that occasion, or it is a small opening of a vein, then hurry and place over the place a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated slightly: and tie it for an hour: because it dissolves.
It is necessary that you do this after the blood has come out from the vein itself, when it has completed its flow, or from another vein.
If something remains in the place after several days that is black or greenish, it does not harm it: and if you wish, place over it something of aloe, or myrrh dissolved; or something from the juice of mint, that is, calaminthe or similar to it.
And indeed abscesses and protrusions often occur in the phlebotomy of the Basilica.
Therefore place your hand over it, then if you find softness under your pressure on it, then that protrusion is bad. Carefully place something from what I said upon it. Perhaps blood from the artery will flow out of it.
Make an ointment for it with that which has styptics, so that it may harden the place. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
It is necessary to draw blood from every man according to the quantity of its virtue. And what appears as a boil on top of the blood.
If the blood is black, then let it come out until it turns red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it come out until it becomes more subtle; and similarly if it is sharp, let it be removed until its sharpness disappears.
It is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and needs to have blood drawn once, that the vein cutting be amplified; and let him be a vein cutter with one side; and it should be opposite for the one who is weak.
It is necessary to draw it out in veins and that the hole be tight; and it is better when administered in vein cutting that it be a cross section, not a prick.
This method of vein cutting is safe from the flow of blood and from the cut of a nerve; it is more praiseworthy and safer than vein cutting by width and length.
And whoever is accustomed to come for vein cutting with fainting, it is necessary that he eat a little bread soaked in water of grape-juice or sekanjabin if he is heated; and draw blood from him in three or four veins.
If she is of cold constitution, then let her take before vein cutting bread soaked in syrup of honey, or in syrup of aromatized honey with spices, or in fragrant aromatic syrup.
If bleeding occurs during phlebotomy (bloodletting) and it is caused by excessive blood flow, then one should take meat water and fragrant syrup of subtle strength, and use aromatics with alum, and apply linen to the chest with it; and use the rest as mentioned in the division on syncope from the chapter on evacuation.
If one wants to empty his arm and let out blood, and the phlebotomy is due to a large evacuation and its strength is weak, then he should let out the blood gradually by the amount of its strength in continuous days.
But if one wants to empty his arm and let out blood, and his body is probably: then he should do this after seven or nine hours from his first phlebotomy.
If one wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite side to which it inclines, then it should be done on the second or third day.
In a body where much blood has already become heated and sharpened, and it makes fever occur: it is necessary for the blood to be expelled from him once, and a large quantity to be drawn out; and the opening should be enlarged until syncope occurs; after you have observed all conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand on the pulse of his arm along the course of the blood, so as not for death to occur due to syncope. For it often occurs when the phlebotomist is unaware, and it falls through negligence.
And it is not necessary when you want to empty the arm and let out blood on the second day, if the opening of the vein is already closed, and the outflow of blood becomes difficult, to press upon it with violence and to stretch it quickly. That is very bad, rather let it be, until it is bled a second time.
Remove with the sharpness of the lancet that which has clotted from the blood in the vein's opening, and place something dissolved in salt water upon it. And place upon it some turban or alfaroch, or saffron, and apply gentle pressure until the blood comes out.
If it is already a vein that has been cut, then let it be, and do not cover it up, until the abscess settles down.
If there is a need to let out blood a second time and there is no excuse, then either make an incision over the same place or in another vein of the arm.
The arm's vein is bled at the place of the Fuscus and Basilicus, as they are not found and are hidden because they are composed of them.
The quality of bleeding is such that a weak hand is inserted into hot water until it turns red and the vein appears clearly manifest.
Then bind it above with a string of moderate tightness. Then bleed it again by transverse incision slowly, neither wide nor long; and let the opening be wide, and let your bleeding there on the joint of the hand.
If the outflow of blood is prevented, then dip your hand into hot water and let the blood run into the water until you meet your need.
But if it is during the days of summer, then you are excused from dipping your hand in hot water. It is indeed recommended that the course of blood be let in hot water during winter time.
This vein's bleeding is safer than all other veins because there is no pulsating vein or nerve under it.
Phlebotomy of the right hand (Salvatella) is for the afflictions of the liver.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that you tie the little finger of the hand with a ligature or your hand after inserting it into warm water until the vein becomes inflamed and it is clearly felt. Then make an incision across (it). And if you cut it completely, it will not harm him in any way.
And preserve (it), lest you cut off your hand with the phlebotomy instrument. For under it are the nerves of the fingers exposed from the flesh.
Then put your hand again into warm water and let blood flow there. For if you do not repeat it in warm water, the blood will clot in the vein opening and stop flowing.
Therefore when you extract from the blood a quantity necessary, then put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not clot quickly.
And likewise it is necessary that you do this with every constricted vein.
But the aid of this phlebotomy is from the left hand, because it is for the afflictions of the spleen; and do likewise with its phlebotomy as you did with the second equally.
And the aid of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for the afflictions that are in the lower part of the body, such as the afflictions of the womb, retention of menstruation, and weaknesses of the kidneys, and old ulcers of the hips and legs and similar afflictions.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that an afflicted person puts his foot into warm water; and he should do rubbing on it until the veins swell up, and tie above the joint of the foot with a strap. The location of the vein is near the heel, appearing towards the thumb; and many branches originate from it on the sole of the foot.
The vein therefore should be tapped in a larger branch of it, or at the heel in its cluster; because it is better and safer.
If the vein is to be tapped on the sole of the foot, then take care not to touch the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
Place your lancet for tapping the vein at an angle across it, as if you wish to cut into it; and let the one who taps the vein be called Nesil.
If the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse his foot in warm water; and let the blood run out into it until it has emptied.
If the vein is accidentally missed by the one who taps in the first instance, then let him repeat with the lancet towards the upper part, for it is a safer place, and there is no danger of harm, provided you take care to avoid the nerves, as we have said.
Similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
The location of the Sciatic vein, as we have said, is near the heel on the side of the woods.
The aid for tapping this vein is to relieve pain in the ankle when it is due to hot blood.
The quality of the tapping is that an unwell person should enter the bath and hurry; and tie his leg from the side of the ankle up to the heel with a long, fine bandage; for it will not appear unless for this reason.
When it appears, then tap the vein in whatever way your ability allows, either across or at an angle; and it is better to cut into it with a cut or to sever it with a section. The location [of it] is healthy, and it is very much hidden in many men.
The location [of it] is healthy, and it is very much hidden in many men. If you do not find [it] and it does not appear to the senses at all: then prick some branch of it, and there is one that appears on the back of the foot, turned towards the ear; and beware of nerves, and let a quantity of blood flow as much as you want.
Then loosen the ligature, and place the skin over the pricking site, and tighten the spot. Indeed, it heals quickly.
[Section on] Venesection, and the quality of its use.
[They are made from] Corners, and copper, and glass.
And venesection is done according to two modes. With scarification and the drawing of blood; and the other is venesection without scarification.
And this [form of] venesection that is without scarification, is according to two modes. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the places for venesection with scarification and drawing of blood on the body are fourteen. One of them is the venesection of Alnocrates, and it is at the end of the head; and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; and the venesections of Alhagdahim, and they are two blades of the neck from both sides simultaneously; and the venesection of the brain, and it is under the lower jaw; and the venesections of two spoons; and the venesection of Alachosos above the end of the tail; and the venesections of two kidneys, and they are in the middle of the arms; and the venesections of the legs; and the venesections of the ankles.
And venesection does not extract blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of this its power is not drawn out from them, as is the case with phlebotomy. It is not necessary to administer ventosation (ventosection) with or without fire, until the entire body has evacuated, in any ailment caused by retention.
If necessity requires ventosation due to an ailment or custom, we administer it at the beginning, end, and middle of each month, as well as at any time it may be required.
That is, because from some people there arises an excess of blood, until it requires extraction through ventosation, a pain and headache are found in the head.
And among them is one who finds retention and redness on his face, head, and neck. And among them is one who finds itchiness on his face and forehead, as well as darkness and dullness in his eyes.
And among them is one who scratches the site of his ventosation. And among them is one whose laughter multiplies. And among them is one who finds the taste of blood in his mouth: or the tongue protrudes and spits out the blood. And among them is one whose sleep multiplies. And among them is one who sees in his sleep blood and redness, as well as the dead, wounds, and similar things.
When we therefore see something from among these, especially if it is in the middle of the third month: we then prescribe ventosation to be done, after two or three hours have passed since that day.
The benefit of ventosation for the neck is that it relieves pressure in the head and that which is drained goes to the eyes. However, it must be done after the evacuation of the entire body.
And this ventosation is in place of cephalic phlebotomy (venesection).
It is not allowed to use it who is of a cold temperament, or where there is catarrh. It causes him great harm.
Therefore, it is not appropriate for the elderly to use it, and where there are cold diseases of the head.
He who becomes constant over it generates forgetfulness in him.
Therefore, you must instruct the ventilator to lower his hand with the wind for a short while towards the bottom, fearing the production of forgetfulness.
Ventilation or Alkehel is in place of phlebotomy for Fuscus, and phlebotomy for Basilica, and therefore it produces coughing, constriction of breath, shortness of breath due to the instrument, coughing, and filling (of the body).
It must be forced to ventilate Alkehel briefly, because if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the heart and the stomach.
But ventilation of alhagdahim causes accidents of pain in the head, migraines, and hemigranes (half-headaches), perforation (of a body part), and pain in the roots of the teeth: it is in place of phlebotomy for Basilica.
Therefore, you must instruct the ventilator not to press his hand during scarification, so as not to cut an artery and cause bleeding.
But ventilation under the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similar conditions which are in the mouth, and takes the place of phlebotomy elsewhere which are in the two lips.
But ventilation with spatulas causes a condition called alchafacham, which comes from compression and heat.
But ventilation of the internal parts of the two fists causes help for phlebotomy of the veins of three (types), Basilica, Fuscus and Cephalicus: because it draws blood from all those small veins which are in the flesh; and these small veins draw blood from other larger ones until the attraction reaches the three veins.
It is necessary that you advise the Scarifier not to proceed too much in scarifying: because the place is bare of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The one who is ventosed on the anus, relieves hemorrhoids of the anus, and lower ulcers.
It is necessary that you advise the one who performs ventosing, that the ventose should be large and made of air: because the place needs strong suction, and perhaps delicate ventoses may break; and it shall be scarified by a deep scarification.
Ventoses of the legs decrease with a clear reduction: because they draw blood from the whole body, and bring about old pains in the kidneys, and uterus, and bladder: they provoke menstruation, and bring forth water retention and abdominal dropsy: and they stand where phlebotomy of the two saphenous veins, and alhorcobeni.
Nevertheless, they weaken the body greatly, and cause fainting in many people.
The help of the ventose used in alhorcobeni is close to the help of the ventoses of the two legs.
The quality of the positioning of the ventose is that you place the ventose first in a void area, and apply suction moderately: and do not prolong the positioning of the ventose, but place them quickly, and remove them quickly, so that humors come to the place equally: and do not cease from repeating this and continuing until you see the place redden and swell, and redness of blood appears: then scarify, and perform suction gradually. Then consider in positioning of bodies.
For one who is among humans of tender flesh and few pores, it is necessary to scarify him once, not more: so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And command the Wind-Letter (Ventosatori) to enlarge the incision and shallow it slightly; and temper the suction in ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is thickening in the blood, then it is necessary to incise it twice. In the first instance, an opening is made for subtle blood flow and its moisture; in the second instance, during the careful examination of deep blood extraction, thick blood is extracted.
If indeed the blood is extremely fetid, then an incision should be made for the third time, following it to the end.
And finally, when we wish to extract blood slowly or a little at a time, one incision is enough for us. If we wish to extract much blood, then we should make multiple incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make a deep incision; and the end of the incision is equal to its depth.
\*\*What is that which should be administered from oils in the position of Wind-Letter, and what should be cautious in wind-dressing.\*\*
In the case where the skin is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are tight, it is necessary to anoint the wind-letter areas with open, lenitive, and resolvent oils; if it is during summertime, as is alkali oil, or oil of wormwood, or sweet almond oil, or oil from the seed of a squash.
And if it is during wintertime, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or vinegar are used; and similar to these.
If there is excessive thickening and coldness, then bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or white oil, or anise oil are used; and similar to these.
If a wind-disease is widespread in large pores, of tender flesh: then it is necessary that oil be prohibited, and it is necessary that they clean the places of the wind after the wind-disease treatment with rose water, or with cold water, or with sea water, or with cucumber water, or with purslane water: and similar to these.
For the one whose blood is much moisture, clean wind-diseased places with vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and sumac: and similar to these.
For the one who has excessive thick ones, clean wind-diseased places with old wine, or with juniper water, or with dill boil, or chamomile: and similar to these.
And it is necessary to avoid wind-disease treatment in a bath or near a bath, rather it should be administered after leaving the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not necessary that anyone sleeps after wind-disease treatment.
§ What is it that is necessary to control Wind-disease or Phlebotomata before wind-disease treatment.
And after that, it is necessary to consider first: then if the one who has wind-disease or phlebotomata is choleric and its sharpness and inflammation prevails over his blood: then it is necessary for him to receive cooling agents, such as grapes in honey; also oil of endive with vinegar and lettuce, and boiled leek and yolk; and similar to these.
And place his food as pullets, cooked mutton meat, and foods stored with vinegar: and similar to these.
And for the one whose complexion is cold, it is necessary to drink syrup from honey or almug or boiled leek seed: and drink moderately fragrant wine that is between old and new; and it is ordered to use sparingly food. Place his food with young birds, and let them warm it: and small birds, that is to say, little birds: and the young of doves shall be warmed.
It is necessary that on the day of ventositation and phlebotomy there be more drink than food: it is necessary to give in drink some people during Tyrian hours, or medicine made from musk, that is, muscatel, or alesselith before ventosation; and before or after phlebotomy, so that the main limbs are strengthened, and the blood becomes thin. It is not necessary to drink it in hot liquids.
Chapter on ventositation without scarification. Ventosations that are without scarification are those placed on the liver, spleen, podagra, stomach, navel, places of kidneys, and the ankle pit: because these members do not allow scarification upon them.
Nor does it seek through these, except the attraction of blood from one member to another; as we place ventosation on the breasts in the sickness of nasal bleeding. We make use of them to remove cold and offensive ventositation from one member by another; as we place ventosation on the stomach, and navel. For it rarefies the member, heats it up, and removes pain for that reason, because it has resolved that ventositation.
Also placed over the kidneys when there is pus or stone. For by its virtue, perhaps it opens up pus, or removes the stone from its place.
And similarly when placed over the liver and spleen for the purpose of bleeding in both.
These ventosations are administered empty with incision only. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered with warm water in the afflictions of pleurisy: and this is to be filled with a Ventose, and it should be large, hot water alone, or water in which herbs that agree have been boiled.
Form of the ventose administered with fire.
Let the width of its opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and let its depth be half a palm; and let there be on its side, in a place about halfway along it, a small hole, according to the size that the needle can enter; make it from brass or citron wood, with the edges rounded, equal, and smoothed; so as not to hurt the limb when placed upon it; and let there be in the middle of it a crossbar transverse from brass or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And now this ventose is made large, larger than we have said, but not much smaller than it, according to the afflictions and age of the one who uses it.
For the ventoses of boys and those wasted are other than the ventoses of men and those with large bodies.
The quality of placing this ventose with fire upon a limb is to light a linen cloth with fire properly, or a small candle from tallow; and place it on the middle crossbar that is in the middle of the ventose; so that the fire may be lit about half-way down the ventose, so as not to burn the body of the sick person.
Then it is placed upon a limb; and the finger should be on the hole that I said, until we hold the ventose; while we need it, let us remove the finger, and steam will come out through the hole, and the ventose will immediately break.
Then, linen cloth according to its kind, and heat it if necessary.
In pneumothorax that is administered in the case of pleurisy with water, there is no bladder or hole; it is not administered except because it is filled with water and placed only on the member.
And this is its shape.
And this pneumothorax, as it is larger, to take in more water, is better.
\ paragraph on Suspension of Sugar of Lead.
Sanguisugae are not administered in many cases, unless in those members where the position of the ventous sacs is not possible due to their small size, such as lips, gums, and similar places. Or in the naked member devoid of flesh, such as fingers, nose, and similar places.
And the quality of using them is that you come from the Sanguisuga which are in sweet, clean waters free of decay.
Then they should be placed day and night in sweet water until they are hungry, and nothing remains in their belly. Then the body is bled first with phlebotomy, and with ventosus. Then cleanse the sick member until it turns red. Then they are placed upon it.
When they are filled and fall, and there is a possibility of squeezing the place with the ventous sac, then it is more helpful for relief; and if not, then cleanse the place with vinegar. Then with much water, rub and squeeze.
If the course of the blood is prolonged after the removal of the Sanguisuga and it persists, then soak a piece of linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the perspiration disappears.
If blood is multiplied, then on it powderize zeugite crushed or gall-like substances from styptics, until the blood is cut off.
Or powders made from halved and peeled beans may be placed on the location, and left until the beans stick to the spot, for the blood is cut off.
And if it is necessary to repeat the application of Sanguisugars, when possible, they should be changed.
But if Sanguisugars are forbidden from suspension, then the location should be cleaned with fresh blood. Or insert a lancet into the locations until something comes out of the blood. Then they are placed, for when they feel something from the blood, they will stick immediately.
When you wish for them to fall, powderize something from crushed aloes, or salt, or ashes on them; and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is also frequently necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
Know ye, O sons, that foolish physicians and the common people boast about this chapter, and those who have never examined an ancient book nor read a letter from it.
And for this reason, the method is deprived of knowledgeable people in our land. And I have never encountered this method in any good way, and I was not proficient in it unless through the length of reading ancient books and my interest in understanding them, until I extracted knowledge from them.
Then I affix with experiment and study to the length of my life.
I have now described for you all that contains my knowledge from that chapter, and whatever exceeded my experience, since I abbreviated it for you, and freed it from the occupation of elongation, and abbreviated it to the end of abbreviation, and displayed it at the end of decline; and I have formed many shapes in it from the shapes of instruments used in it, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary to say at the beginning of this chapter the sum of speech and the headings, to which understanding is first required for the craftsman to his station regarding their truth; namely that you and those who are quick may know or learn this noble art from you, and others from you.
I say therefore that when fracture, dislocation, twist or fall occurs to someone, then it is necessary that you quickly go to him for bloodletting and resolving, or both at once; if not prohibited by something like weakness of strength; or he to whom this happens is a child, or old and decrepit; or the time is very hot or very cold.
Then let him be content with his food, cold vegetables, beans and heads; and prohibit wine, thick meats, and filling of foods and every food that fills the veins with blood. Until you are secure from a hot fever and do not fear effusion of matter to the limb; then let the weak return to his own regimen first, with which his accustomed practice was.
When the broken bone begins to heal, then it is necessary that the sick person be fed with nourishing food in abundance, thick, heavy, in which there is viscosity; such as food made from cooked wheat with water, rice, and heads, feet, and entrails of cattle, eggs, and fresh fish; also thick wine, and similar things. With this regimen, the healing of the fracture occurs more quickly, and better.
And know that the bones fractured in men who are in the first old age and worn out, it is not possible for them to be joined together and healed according to their nature always, because of the drying up of their limbs; they are consolidated and joined together which come from those at the end of softness, like the bones of small boys.
Nevertheless, nature connects something similar to glue around the broken bone from all sides, which has thickness, so that it adheres and tightens it until they are consolidated on both sides, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was in the beginning, until it does not prohibit anything from its operations; and for this reason it is necessary to put nourishment for the sick man, which has thickness, viscosity, and heaviness, as we said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of limbs; since a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head of the bone; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the backbone; and similarly all other limbs exist differently from one another; and I come with the reminder of every type of fracture exposed in its own chapter distinguished from others. The species of bone fracture are diversified even within themselves.
Since the fracture of it is arched, furthermore stars occur in it. (Stars here refer to protrusions or irregularities in the broken bone.) And sometimes the fracture of it occurs along the length of the bone; and there are fractures called star-shaped, that is, stars, and additions proceeding, as in a reed when it is cut with a knife to write. (Here, the analogy suggests that the fractured bone has protrusions like the fibers in a reed when it's cut.) And not proceeding; and there is a fracture with a wound and splitting at the head; and there is a small split fracture.
And every species has a skill or proper tool for its restoration according to its recollection, which is distinguished in its respective places.
And from that which the bone fracture is known, there is its crookedness, and its elevation; and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you compress it with your hand. (Here, the description implies that a fractured bone may have an irregular shape, elevated edges, be visible or palpable, and produce a sound upon compression.)
When therefore there is no apparent crookedness in its location, nor a sound when you touch the bone with movement, nor does it find a weak great pain; then there is no fracture there, indeed it may be that it is a crookedness or a small split; therefore, you should not move it with your hand and compression altogether, instead place it on top of some medicine whose recollection comes to mind, after the appropriate time; then it is tied down gently. (Here, the advice suggests that if there's no apparent crookedness, sound upon touch or strong pain in a particular area, then it may not be a fracture. In such cases, the bone should be left undisturbed and treated with suitable medicine.)
And know that when a place arches and splits into two, furthermore stars occur in it, yet all parts are removed from their comparison; then it is necessary for you to begin at your hour for its correction, aligning it before an abscess of hot pus occurs on it. (This passage suggests that if a fracture splits into two and shows star-shaped protrusions, all the parts should be aligned for correction to prevent an abscess of hot pus from forming.)
If however a boil occurs warm, then let it be left for some days until the boil subsides. Then equal it accordingly to whatever method is possible by gentleness and skill.
And know that the restoration of it, and its equalization, is easier than a bone, in which fractures occur.
Then bind it, according to when you will remember it.
If however there are fractures in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from both parts, if it is a hand or foot: or with your hand, if the part is small: or with two ropes, or with a rope and your hand.
Let your position be such that you place the member on a level surface according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the broken member are extended: then try, by any means possible, to make those additions return, and in their places: and be careful according to your strength, lest pain or injury occurs due to your operation. And try according to your strength, to apply one of two bones with its companion, according to the best forms.
It is necessary at that hour that you test and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see something abnormal there, correct it and equal it out according to the quantity of your power.
And beware of excessive extension and strong compression, as many foolish people do. For often they cause boils to occur by their operation, or contraction in a limb: as we have already seen this many times from their operations.
Then connect after the equalization and proper operation, and tightening of that limb, and peace, and calmness: and warn the weak against it. Make him take care that he does not move himself during the hours of his vigil, and during the revolutions of his sleep, and during his agitation, and during his digestion, and all his movements with utmost strength. Make him take care that there is no position of the limb which follows pain. This is because when he feels pain or injury in the position of a limb, then it is necessary to change him to another position from which he does not feel pain.
And be careful that his position is equal and straight; so that there is no twisting in the limb when it is restored.
The quality of the binding of a broken limb is as I have told.
Know that broken limbs are classified according to their smallness, size, and shape.
Those which are small, such as the arm, the finger, the wrist and similar ones, then it is necessary that there be a soft, fine wrapping of cloth around them. Those which are large, such as the thigh and leg, it is necessary that there be a wide, hard wrapping around them.
Because a broad binding connects a large limb and binds it from all sides with an equal pressure so that no spot is left uncovered.
Then after your evacuation, begin to place the appropriate ointment on it on a soft woolen cloth over the site of the fracture. Then begin to wrap the binding over the site of the fracture three or four times, according to how deserving the limb is; and tighten your hand slightly with the binding.
Then go with him to the upper part above the site of the fracture and tighten it less than your previous binding which you had bound the broken place. Then stretch yourself slightly with a gentle pulling away from the location of the fracture, and gradually soften the stiffness, until you can grasp a large amount from a healthy place.
Then take another poultice and apply it again over the fractured location with more layers. Afterwards, go down with the poultice to the lower part below the fracture. And let your work be in the stiffness of the poultice and its softening, according to what was said in the first layer of poultice application.
Then place soft materials such as wool or cloth between the poultice layers to match the curvature of the fracture, if there is a curvature; and if not, do not put anything in that area.
Then apply another layer of poultice over it. Then place evenly arranged stars (small elevations) immediately on top of these poultice layers if there is no swelling or warm abscess in that area.
But if there is swelling or an abscess there: then place on it what sits the abscess and remove the swelling; and leave it for several days. Then bind tightly the evenly arranged stars (small elevations).
Let the small elevations be made from pieces of wide reeds that have been shaved and shaped wisely; or let them be made of wood from which cribra (cobble-stones) are made, such as pine or yew, or calingi (small wooden balls); and let the width of each elevation be in this shape and this same form.
However, the elevation that is placed on the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and the length of the elevation should be according to what is allowed by the size and smallness of the limb.
Then bind tightly over the elevations with another layer of poultice, according to the first binding. Then bind above with threads properly, as we have said concerning the stricture: and it is that your stricture be over the place of the fracture more: and as it is more elongated from the fracture, the stricture is smaller.
It is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and they should be of soft linen.
Since if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the operation of foolish people putting their threads made from twisted cords of rough linen, it is a great mistake: because the stricture falls with them beyond its quality.
And again, fine threads do not suit: since you will not achieve with the stricture what you desire with them.
And it is not necessary that there be less than a finger between one astel and another.
If a sick person is injured by the extremities of the astels after the stricture in healthy places: then place under them from soft wool or camel's hair wool until nothing is injured from it.
But when there is a fracture with a wound, and it happens that the disruption occurs in the skin, I will come again with its reminder in the second chapter regarding its uniqueness.
And know that not every fractured limb needs to be bound with astels from the first day. Because a limb that is large should not have upper astels placed on it unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your safety from the onset of the hot swelling.
This is the method of plasters, which the ancients used, that are placed over a fracture and dislocation.
§ Common emplaster method abbreviated, restoring the fracture, suitable for various temperaments, especially women and children: since it is from that which heat does not conquer nor cold.
And it is to receive from the flour mill dust and it is the marrow of the flour that hangs on the walls of the mill next to the millstone movement; and make it as it is, except that you sieve it with egg white: and place its preparation not thick, nor thin. Then use it.
Another method for emplaster is for healing a fracture, and dislocation, and a twisting. Make almess, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mugath: and macerate all of them in ten parts of myrrh, and five parts each of aloes, and twenty parts of alethil: grind all of them and sift, and mix with water of alethil; or with cow's milk, if the bandage of the sick person is heated. Then use this emplaster. For it is of good composition, heals quickly broken bones and benefits many people.
Another method for emplaster also benefits a fracture and twisting. Make mugath, mess, white alteae, all of them in ten parts of myrrh, and five parts each of aloes, and six parts of acacia, twenty parts of Armenian pounded bolus: grind all of them with much grinding, sift, and make with water or cow's milk: and administer.
Another method for emplaster for joining together, and separated bones from their places: and eases the pain that happens to them, and splitting of the bone, and fracture. Take boiled wool, immerse it in vinegar and boiled oil: and place it on the spot.
And indeed, there is no virtue of healing in this emplaster, but it is good for the soothing of a hot abscess: and it expels pains properly.
Another method for emplaster that heals a broken bone. Take leaves of the deaf fig tree and wild papaver leaves: grind all of them, and make an emplaster from both.
Another short method for emplaster, administered for healing a broken bone: and when you wish the dissolution of a remaining abscess. Prepare a root of althea (Marshmallow), chamomile, flowers of violets, and a portion of the herb flour - all in equal parts: grind them all and make a paste with wine, unless the member is heated.
If it is heated, then make paste with water of coriander (Coriander) seeds or with water, and use it.
Another stronger plaster method for resolving a hard fistula when restoring a member. Prepare a root of althea (Marshmallow), flax seeds, boxwood, lentil, henna, wormwood, flowers of violets, and chamomile - all in equal parts: grind them all and make a paste with water of willow, or sweet water, or wine. Apply the whole thing according to the member's warmth and the calmness of its heat.
Hippocrates, however, did not say in his book that it should be placed on a fractured member during its restoration, unless it is made of pitch and oil; nothing else; he said it should be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety.
Galenus, however, thought that these substances with the extraction of heat should be placed on a fractured member during its restoration, such as myrrh, aloes, frankincense, and similar things from what we have mentioned.
Another plaster method that heals injuries and pain. Prepare milled (or very finely ground) figs, chickpeas, hair of man or feathers of bird, althea (Marshmallow), and salt - all in equal parts: grind them, sift them, and make a paste; then make a plaster from it.
The quantity of the bandage that should remain according to which it is necessary, then it is loosened, should be considered when there is no weak pain, itching, or moving of the fractured bone from its place; then do not loosen it for many days. If it happens to him at a place itching strongly, or distressing pain, or swelling: then hurry and dissolve (the plaster) in an hour of that (affected part), and remove the plaster from him: and take soft cloth or sea sponge, moist: and immerse it in warm water, and clean the place with it until the itching subsides, and the pain is relieved.
If it happens to him at a place itching strongly, or distressing pain, or swelling: then hurry and dissolve (the plaster) in an hour of that (affected part), and remove the plaster from him: and take soft cloth or sea sponge, moist: and immerse it in warm water, and clean the place with it until the itching subsides, and the pain is relieved. Then allow the member to rest for an hour. Then place over it soft wool soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and bind over it at night until you are secure from hot inflammation, and the swelling of the member subsides, and the pain is relieved.
Then repeatedly apply to it a narrow bandage and small plaster: and do not bind (it) with your first constriction and fine ones until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling and all the other symptoms have been completely removed: and you require plaster and bandage, then repeat this as you did in the first place equally.
If nothing of what we said happens to the member: then do not dissolve (the plaster) before three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is released for 20 days according to what appears to you from the dissolution of the member, as we said, until when a fracture adheres and coagulation of flesh on it: add also in the bandage more than your first bandage completely: and add also in the thickening of food according to what was mentioned before its recall.
If you see the place of the fracture already dry out and become thinner than necessary: then know that nutrition is prevented from reaching it. Dissolve it (the embrocation) with warm water at every place where you apply it, and let it be in all three days, and it will slightly relieve the stricture.
Through this procedure, nourishment flows to the member, and it heals quickly.
What the foolish restorers do in place of a fractured member, when it is not restored as required, and they restore it according to its curvature, is an error due to their procedure, and there is great fear: and if it were correct, the ancients would have said so in their books, and they would have operated with it.
And I have never seen any trace of theirs in this at all, and it is better that it not be done.
Chapter on the making of an incision in the head.
Types of fractures are diverse, and their shapes are many; and their causes are distinct.
For from a fracture is one that occurs by striking with a sword; and the strike removes bone completely up to the point where it reaches the siphac (a ligament beneath the skull), just as an ax does in wood, and for this reason this type of fracture is called "Axial".
Or the sword strikes some bone and cuts its surface but does not penetrate through the incision to the end; and this type of fracture is called "Kalan", that is, an Absolute Lever.
And a wound can be either of two types of fractures, large or small.
And from a fracture is one that is a crushing or rubbing; and its cause is a blow with a stone, a fall onto a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also one that penetrates, which is close to the panniculus (a layer beneath the skull), or it is on the surface of the bone; and this wound can be either of two types of fractures, large or small.
And from a fracture is one which is hidden within the bone at the subtlety of the hair; and it is a small crack, and for this reason this type of fracture is called capillary fracture.
And there is a fracture which occurs by accident or striking with a stone, and similar things that cause a layer of the bone to enter within, making a hollow place; as happens to anvils when struck, and part of them enters within.
Indeed it happens most often in the wet bones of skulls, such as those of children.
And there are all these kinds of separating fractures, and I will mention them with the whole thing in its place.
We recognize all these kinds of fractures by examination on it and investigation of them with probing tools, and removal of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
The capillary type is recognized by this, that it appears on the bone and is scraped off, and it is limited with an encaustic iron; for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider first the condition of the patient; if you see signs from his condition that are clearly indicative of fear, such as vomiting choler, extension, loss of intellect, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, discharge of the eyes, redness of them, and similar things among various conditions, it will probably not heal; and if you see signs that do not frighten you, and hope for recovery; then begin the treatment.
If a wounded man comes to you first with his wound; and this is during the days of winter, then it is necessary that you strive in bone removal before the 14th day according to all conditions.
If it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before it corrupts what is under the bone from the fat, and such accidents as I have mentioned occur.
If the fracture of a bone has already reached the fat touching the brain and it is accompanied by small pieces and traction, then it is necessary that you cut the fragmented and smoothed part, as I have told you.
And it is necessary to shave the head of the wounded and to dig into the bone according to whatever method is possible for you, and according to the shape of the wound and what is light on what is weak.
If while digging into the bone there occurs a flow of blood or a hot abscess, then apply what is necessary to it. And it is necessary to fill the place with soaked rags in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess settles, and be secure from bleeding. Then begin in the healing of the bone, and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
The first method is to cut the bone with a sharp chisel: and this is its form.
Then administer another chisel wider than the previous one: and this is its form.
Then administer yet another chisel even wider than the second.
And the second method is to have a number of chisels of different sizes among you, some wider than others, and some shorter than others: and they should be at the end of sharpness, and made of iron or steel, and use them with ease when striking the chisel so as not to strike the head and injure it.
If the bone is hard and firm, then it is necessary that you bore around its circumference before you administer Incisoria, with Terebris which are named Terebra not penetrating too deep: and they are not called so unless because themselves do not pass beyond the bone's meaty limit to what is beyond it; therefore, because the Terebrum has a rounded extremity above that which is under its head and is sharp, similar to an edge, and a small circle prevents immersion, and passing through the bone's thickness.
It is necessary for you to take a large number of Terebris from these, each one of which should correspond to the thickness of the bone, until you have all the Terebrum for that bone: whose sharp extremity's length and width should be in accordance with the thickness of that bone.
And this is the shape of three kinds of Terebrums or Trepans.
The quality of boring around the bone's circumference when it is broken, is: that you place the Terebrum on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then change the Terebrum to another place and put what is between every hole of that quantity or approximately.
Then cut with Incisoria what is between every hole of the bone: and make it as fine as possible on its edge, as we have said, until you remove the bone, either with your hand or with certain instruments which you have prepared for that purpose, such as tenaliae and delicate forceps.
And it is necessary to avoid all caution so that the Terebrum or Incisoria does not touch any part of the siphac.
When you are boring around the bone and it is separated from the siphac, if it is continuous with it and you extract it, then it is necessary that you grind and level its remaining extremity in the bone with another similar instrument like an Incisoria. It is necessary that it [the instrument] be thin and delicate more than other incisors.
If something remains from the small bones and cartilage: then take it with ease, with that which is at hand from your instruments. Then care for the wound after that with linen cloths and ointments as we said before.
And another method of operation is easy and entirely far from fear; which Galen said and praised greatly; and this is his saying. It is necessary for you first to begin to expose the bone part from the place where the fracture is more violent and more apparent; until when you have exposed that part and placed under it the extreme end of this convex incisor, which has this form.
And the convex part, the convex does not cut anything; and the sharp part of it in its two sides going in length as you see: so that the convex part is attached to the ulna, with the sharp part incident on the bone.
Then strike upon the convexor with a small hammer until you incise the whole bone with ease, as it is revolved; and be careful that no cloth slips into what happens to slip which you fear completely.
And if the physician were not more foolish than men, and less ignorant of his craft, nor sleeping, then if something remained attached to the bone from a cloth in some places, he would cut it off with the extreme end of the convex incisor and free it with ease. It is freed from it without harm and without fear.
If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the cloth and what is cut off from the bone is the face of it, and roughness and delicate cartilage remain in it: then it is necessary that you smooth down the roughness, and remove the delicate cartilage with subtle rasps which you have prepared in various quantities, so that it is possible for you to apply them more conveniently and correctly in every place according to what leads you the operation, and the fractured bone, and its figure. And it is necessary that you administer, according to your own judgment, first of all cutting the bone, more widely with those larger saws. Then use a finer one after that.
And it is necessary that you administer, according to your own judgment, first of all cutting the bone, more widely with those larger saws. Then use a finer one after that. And do not cease doing it continuously until you reach the point of administering thinner and finer [things], and subtler than all those [other things].
In each of the remaining small cracks and subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care, according to that which leads to the correction of [them].
And there is a matter which is not hidden over all, to whichever pursuit this art has been devoted, and it stands upon that which we have written and shown concerning large fractures.
If, however, a piece of cloth is detected and retained when you are removing the bone: then it is necessary that you take linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and dip it into rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another double or triple piece of cloth, and dip it into wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth: and do this as easily as possible above it, so that it is not heavy.
Then administer over it a broad bandage: and do not tighten it unless by the amount which holds the wound only: and release it with this care for one day or two days, until you are secure from hot infection. Then dissolve it and administer afterwards medicines with which excess dryness is needed: such as the roots of the garlic, and the flour of herbs, and sandalwood powder, and aristolochia, and similar [substances]: and there is that you make from these medicines a powder, which is to be sprinkled over the wound like dry ones.
And universally administer all medicine for the property of which it is for cleansing and not biting. Avoid, according to your skill, that the wound during your treatment is clean: neither be there in it dirt from ointment, nor dirtiness.
Avoid, according to your skill, that the wound during your treatment is clean: neither be there in it dirt from ointment, nor dirtiness. Do not allow pus to collect at all on it because when pus accumulates on a cerebral padding, it corrupts it and makes it rot, and after that it brings about great harm for the sick person: and already it has happened on the skull-bone, when the bone is being cleaned by him, especially when the care of it is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Then if the accidents that I have mentioned happen to the sick person, know that it is certainly dangerous.
And if blackness does not appear except from the medicine that is applied to it and the medicine has this property to make it black: then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and anoint it with these. Then place it on the skull-bone: afterwards take care of it with suitable means of healing until it is healed.
Restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except for two of its upper parts at once, or one of them: because there are two bones in it; since below it is cartilaginous, it does not break and it does not happen to it unless there is rubbing, and twisting, and curvature.
If one of its two parts is broken, then you must insert a small finger into the nostril and hold the broken part with your index finger and thumb on the outside until the nose returns to its natural shape; this should be done skillfully with ease. And take care that pain does not happen to the sick person during your treatment.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not reach that with the finger: then it is necessary that the end of the radius should be equalized, where there is a small swelling.
If the fracture occurs in two parts, then make it similar to that one: and approach with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day at a place of warm fumigation.
Then insert a piece of linen from a linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part; or insert two pieces of linen if the fracture is in two parts: and let there be a swelling of such size in the linen that it fills the nostril opening.
And some of the old restorers said to immerse the linen pieces in butter and change them every day. But I do not see this, rather it is necessary that the linen piece should be immersed in egg white, prepared with miller's flour. Then release the linen, until the bone hardens and the cartilage thickens.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the nose where the linen was, after soft cloth has been placed on top of it; and this holds the nasal fracture more strongly, so that a sick person may not be prevented from breathing.
And this is not necessary. If you wish, do it; and if you wish, do with the linen pieces.
If the nose happens to develop a wound while operating on a warm fumigation, apply nasal plasters with tar, or with pitch softened in rose oil, or a little bit of alkali.
But if no warm fumigation occurs, then it is necessary that the plasters be applied with camel's flour and incense powder mixed with egg white. Then place a soft cloth upon him (the patient), and do not tie the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are broken and fractured in a small way or crushed, then it is necessary that you cut open and extract them with suitable instruments. Then suture it (the wound), and take care of him with whatever that promotes healing, and consolidates it from suitable ointments or plasters for that purpose.
If there is a wound in the nose, then it is necessary that you take care of him with linen cloths: and administer a leaden cannula until it heals.
Chapter on Restoring the Lower Jaw when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is broken and there is no wound associated with it, then examine whether its breakage is only on the outside and it is not fractured into two and curves towards the inside: in such a case, its diagnosis is easy.
Therefore, if the breakage is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's jaw: similarly, if the breakage is in the left jaw, then insert your right index finger: and push with it the curvature of the fracture towards the outside with ease using your other hand from the inner part of the bone correctly, and with equal force on the same side.
If the broken jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer an extension from both sides according to straightness: until it is possible for them to be aligned equally.
If there has already been movement or disruption of the teeth, then tie together those that you hope will remain with a gold wire, silver wire, or silk thread. Then place a soft cloth over the broken jaw (mandible). Then place on top of him a double cloth, and place upon the cloth a well-made large pin or an equal piece of shoelather along the length of the mandible.
Then bind him above as you prepare his bandage and its application suits him until it does not break down; and instruct the sick one to rest peacefully and quietly; and place soft food for his loosening diet.
If you find that something has changed in his shape in any way: then hasten and cut him open on the third day. Then correct what has been distorted from it, and plaster him with flour of mill, with egg white or wheat flour after you have removed the purulent matter; and place a soft woolen cloth on top of the plaster.
While the aforementioned plaster remains on him and the bone arrangement does not change, leave him as he is, without cutting, until he is healed; or bind the fracture. For this fracture is often bound for three weeks.
If a hot abscess occurs in the meantime, then administer what I said many times for its reduction until the abscess is removed.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, consider. If the fractured part is separated from the bone or cartilage: then be subtle in this matter, so that you remove those fragments of cartilage with what suits you in their removal using tools.
If the wound opening is narrow: then widen it with a leech according to the quantity required by you.
Then when you remove the cartilage and there is nothing left of it, or if the wound opening is wide: and if it is not, place on top of it an appropriate plaster and let it heal until healed.
On the restoration of a fractured crossbar (Furcula).
The crossbar (Furcula) is most frequently broken from the front part near the humerus, and its fracture occurs in one of three modes.
Or it is broken into two pieces beyond which there occur protrusions; and this is easier for its restoration.
Or thus, when the protrusion occurs in the bone itself; and this is more difficult for its restoration.
Or it is broken with a wound.
And the operation in this case, when there is no wound, consists of making two assistants present; one to hold firmly the broken crossbar, and the other to stretch out the neck towards the side.
Then equalize the fracture with your fingers until its form is achieved as required; and there should be no prominence or concavity in it.
If you need more extension, then it is necessary to place under the patient's chin a sphere made of cloth or wool; and its size should be according to the quantity of your need; stretch and elevate the crossbar, and press the sphere with your hand until you equalize the fracture as required.
If you cannot pull the extremity of the crossbar to the outside because it has reached deep; then the patient should lie on his back on his neck; and place a block under his shoulder in size, and press the assistant's arm towards the bottom until the bone of the crossbar is elevated from the deep to the top; at that point, correct the fracture and equalize it with your fingers.
But if you feel a protrusion from the crossbar and it moves; then it is necessary to press down on it and extract the protrusion easily.
If it is retained in the bone, then use instruments prepared for incision of that kind, after you place under a lever the instrument which serves as a grip; and the instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It resembles a snail shell without a concavity.
And let its width be according to what you need for it due to the size of the bone and its part. But its length should also be as possible for you in surgery.
And it shall have two ends, as you see: one end shall be wide, and the other narrow.
If the fracture of the wound that you have cut when removing the splinter of bone is wide, and it is hot, then gather together two lips of the wound with stitching.
And if the fracture is small or you fear a hot abscess, then fill the wound with cloths and wool according to the size of the cut in the wound.
And if it happens that a hot abscess occurs, then pour cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine on it, and place it over it.
But the setting of bone without a wound and without an incision is, to place plaster on it made from flour milled with egg white. And put soft wool over it. Then place a sphere under its edge if needed. Then take the rotula (bloodletter), that is, a rod held by Arabs, which should be very long; and its width should be about one palm or nearly that. Then place doubled wool over the soft wool and the plaster. Then take an awl made of thin wood, whose width should be three fingers, and the same in length. Then roll her (it) in a cloth. Then roll the bandage with starch in the place of alumen that falls over the fracture and the wound. Then place alumen on the fracture as it is rolled, and roll it over its neck, and under the healthy titillicum and the weak one: and bring it back over all parts, so that you can see that the ligature holds the fracture tightly: and this is what should not be covered by you, and completely, so that the starch does not remove the splint from the fractured bone. And for this reason, it is necessary to examine the weak one every day. How often then does the bandage become soft and you see the starch already removed? Then correct it, and tighten the bandage.
Then place the pillow of the sick one on his back, and put a small cushion under the healthy titillicum for him at night, so that with it he lifts up the assistance from the side himself. Then lift the fracture of the collarbone through lifting the shoulder.
Or bind the arm to the neck of the same; and do not loosen the bandage, unless it happens in the place that occurs from itching or sores, until twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see his face towards it. And add to the ligature and release it, until it heals and hardens.
The fracture of the collarbone is tightened and strengthened to a great extent for twenty days; and sometimes it happens in fewer in some men.
Chapter on the healing of the fracture of the spatula.
Rarely does the spatula break and in a wide place of it; and they do not break from it except for its edges.
When a place is broken from it and breaks in the middle of it, and it can only be known through touch: then prepare for the fracture according to its figure. Reduce it to its natural form by all means possible of your intellect.
Then place on the place powder from a mill with albumen of egg, and soft wax, and put on top a small piece of double-fold cloth. Then place over it a broad awl from thin wood according to the size of the spatula or slightly larger.
If there is any concavity under the awl in the spatula, then equal the concavity with soft wax until the awl descends according to equality.
Then bind above it with long alum strips, with a suitable tightening, and the awl's firmness, until it is not moved from its place.
Consider the binding every day. Whenever the binding becomes soft, bind it again, and equal the awl if it is moved from its place: let it lie weak on the healthy side.
The spatula should be restored in twenty or thirty days.
When this number has been completed, then loosen the binding: and you will be safe. For it is from the bones whose fracture is not feared nor their solution.
If it proceeds from a bone splinter and pierces below the skin: then cut through it, and remove it. And do as we said for a fracture of the neck of the scapula by hot cautery, if something happens from it.
Chapter on the restoration of breast fractures.
The chest is sometimes broken in the middle, and it happens rarely. The extremities of it break and are crushed due to its accidents.
If its middle part that tends towards the lower parts breaks and a severe pain occurs along with difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and perhaps blood is vomited, and a hollow appears on the broken bone which is not concealed to the senses, The restoration of it is for the weak to lie on his back and place a poultice between his spatulas.
Then press his shoulders and bring the ribs together from both sides or flanks with hands: and grind it on an equal basis, in every possible way until it returns to the form of the bone, as is necessary.
Then place on him an emplaster and a stuffing, and place above it a star-shaped piece of thin material made from willow or sandalwood, or similar materials wrapped in cloth. Then grind it on a binding over the broken bone so that it is not displaced: and go with the bindings according to its roundness towards the back several times, and tie it with an appropriate suture.
Then consider the bindings in every hour and whenever it softens, tie it: and if necessity requires dissolution of it due to itching or corrosion that occurs at the place, or pain, or abscess, then hurry and dissolve it, and remove the poultice, and correct whatever has occurred with the method of its treatment.
Then return the poultice if you see it facing towards that: and attach a suture until it heals.
Chapter on Restoration of Ribs when they break.
Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in thick places following the back and from their extremities from the front part. It does not happen to them (the joints) by friction, unless because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it (the part) is not hidden from the sense during investigation with fingers.
And its restoration is made thus: so that it aligns the fracture with fingers according to the possible method, until it becomes equal in form, as required. Then plasters, and tie the broken bone with a bandage, if necessary.
If the fracture is oblique towards the inner parts (of the chest): then a severe pain occurs in the weak, and puncturing, such as the puncturing that occurs to one who has pleurisy; because the bone pierces the membrane, and also difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of blood frequently: and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients have been skilled in this with many skills; and among them are those who say that one should place food for the weak which generates inflammation and flatulence, so that the stomach is inflamed, and expanded, and pushed against the outside.
We, however, abhor to make a rapid cause for making a hot abscess, if it does not occur. If, however, it has already occurred, then one adds it (the hot abscess).
And some of them say: place a flatulent substance on the place, then squeeze it forcefully, and it is more like reasoning. Nevertheless, it is feared that it attracts excessive flatulence to the place, due to the disposition of weakness.
And some of them say: the place must be covered with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil; and little lice should be placed between the ribs, until it is filled (the abscess); so that the bandage is equal when one folds it according to roundness.
Then the sick person shall be treated for pleurisy with food and medicine.
If the illness presses heavily upon the sick person and causes pain, or if we pierce the skin with a lancet, causing injury, and we fear for him: then it is necessary to divide at the site, and expose the broken rib. Then we shall place upon it the instrument which we have mentioned before (the cautery called sifac), and cut through the bone with ease, and cut the same.
Then we shall bring together two lips of the wound, if it is large, with sutures: and treat the same with plasters, until it heals.
If a warm abscess should occur during the interval: then apply hot cuppings, and pour powdered almonds into warm oil, and place it on the site: and treat the sick person with that which is suitable for an abscess.
In addition, a cushion shall be placed upon the side on which he lies until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of the fracture of the Spine and Neck.
Fracture occasionally occurs in the bones of the neck, and rarely happens to them attrition; similarly, in the spondylous of the back. When this occurs to anyone and you wish to know if it will heal or not: then consider (or examine). For if you see that his hands have already become softened, stunned, and dead; and he cannot move them, extend them, or contract them; and when you press them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, nor does he feel pain in them: then you shall know that it will not heal, and in many dispositions it is mortal.
If he moves them and feels the constriction with fingers and prick (or pain) in them: then you shall know that the nucha bone is safe, and that the weak one will heal with treatment.
If this occurs in the spondylous of the back and you wish to know if it will heal or not: then consider his feet; then if you see that they have become softened, and this happens to them as it happened to the hands: then when he lies on his back, flatulence and constipation occur without will; and when he lies on his abdomen, flatulence occurs without will; and when he lies on his back again, wishing to urinate, but cannot: then you shall know that it is mortal. Do not labor in the treatment of him (i.e., do not treat him).
If it does not happen to him anything from that, the case is lighter.
And the treatment for what happens to him from that is to apply warm oil (or fat) on the affected spondylous; thus you shall place warm oil only on the rubbed spondylous, or with goose grease saturated ointment.
Place it repeatedly upon the same [wound] daily until the abscess becomes warm: then place upon the location one of the soothing and draining plasters, and bind it over with a ligament: and instruct the sick one to use quiet and tranquility. Let him not sleep on the side where he has found pain, until it is healed.
If it should occur due to the dislocation of the hip bone or something that has already separated from it: then it is necessary to sever it through the skin, and remove it. Then gather together two lips of the wound, if it is large, with suture. Then take care of him with some meaty substance, from ointments, until he is healed.
But if the last bone of the alhausos is broken and the end of the tail is: then it is necessary to insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus, and with the other hand align the broken bone as much as possible, according to what is possible, and in the second alignment.
Then place it on top of it and remove it: and take care of the wound with the treatment that preceded it, until it is healed.
Restoration of an ankle.
Chapter 11.
The bones of the ankles rarely break. If the bones break, then their fracture is not anything other than a comminution at the ends of them; they are split lengthwise and bent towards the interior; and it occurs in the sick man that there is pain in the location and puncturing; and the leg which breaks becomes numb.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until you stand over the fracture in the manner of its figure.
If the fracture is only at the ends of it, then align the broken part with that which is prepared for you from alignment, until it resembles its natural figure.
If a fracture is in length or already inclined towards the inside parts, then lay the weak one on his stomach, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When you have matched it (the fracture), place plaster on it; then place a splint made of wood or hide over it and tie a bandage above it where you fear neither displacement of the fracture nor removal of the splint.
And make the concavity of those (the bones) match with that which fills it, until the bandage fits it equally; and command the weak one to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.
If, however, it happens to him (the patient) that a hot abscess occurs: then cease from extending it and its treatment, until the hot abscess settles; and place what he sits on over it, as was before, and then return to its treatment; and tie it as necessary.
If, however, it happens to the bone that it is gnawed or crushed, extract (the foreign object).
Chapter on the Restoration of Fractures (of Adiutorius)
Assistance is that which extends from the elbow to the head of a spatula.
If it breaks, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One method is that you take a flat piece of wood of medium size in the following shape.
And tie two ligaments at both ends.
Next it is suspended from a raised place: and the sick one sits on the chair. Then he throws his broken arm upon a log until it reaches the notch of that log, where the crack of the wood is attached.
Then hang something heavy above him to stretch the patient below. Then the physician sets the fracture with his hands until it returns to its proper place.
Another method is for the sick one to lie on his back: and his hand is suspended from his neck with a rope. Then command two attendants to hold one of them above the fracture with their hands: and let another hold him below, while each one stretches his part.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then tie something under the fracture with a rope, and above it with another: and each of the two attendants stretches his part to its respective side.
If the fracture is near the shoulder joint, then a ligament must be placed under the notch and another one towards the elbow joint.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then a ligament must be placed above that place and another one on the elbow.
Then align the fracture easily without strain until it is equal according to what is required and properly applied: then bind it if no hot abscess occurs.
But if a hot abscess occurs, then leave the binding for seven days. Place a piece of linen soaked in vinegar and rose oil on him until the abscess subsides: then bind it: and the method of binding is to apply a plaster over the fracture.
Then place the inversion from new cloth upon the plaster. Then gather the arm upon the help itself, and place his open hand upon his own shoulder.
Place the cloth and bind upon the help of the arm so that the arm remains at the position of stars: if it does not forbid you by something, nor be changed by anything from a broken bone.
If you fear that something will be changed by a broken bone, then use stars: and there is one, so that you place upon the fracture itself a star which is wider and stronger than other stars. And place the width of each star at the length of a finger: and let the length of the stars be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from every side.
Then bind upon the stars the ligature which I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And there is that your ligature should be stronger over the place of the fracture. And as much as the fracture is prolonged, the ligature should be less.
If therefore you see the position of stars and ligature, as we said, at the hour when you restore the limb immediately, then do it: and if you fear a hot abscess, then release the ligature and stars until the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the ligature in all three days, so that it does not happen at the place an itch, or swelling, or food is forbidden to reach the limb, because of the position of excessive ligature. Correct therefore this whole thing, as we said.
If indeed you are confident that nothing will happen from it: then do not release the ligature, unless after three days or more.
And let the rest of the sick one be on his back and his hand upon his stomach: and place under the help a blanket full of wool equally.
Consider at every hour of the night or day, so that the shape of the broken member is not loosened, nor the ligament softened. Correct it all with your power.
Then place the food for the sick according to the order that we have commanded, so that it is a subtle food at first, until the bone begins to tighten; then it should be made to grow thicker for him.
For it is the custom of helping and healing a leg that it should be tightened for forty days; then, therefore, it should be loosened, and a bath should be administered, and it should be treated with ointments which correct it.
If the fracture is foul, scrape it; then do not loosen the ligament and the splints from it for fifty days, and until two months.
Chapter on the restoration of a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two fore-arm bones.
One of them is small; and it is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is that which is placed below the small one from the lower part.
Therefore, perhaps only the larger fore-arm bone is broken, or perhaps both are broken.
When the small fore-arm bone above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower fore-arm bone is broken, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones are broken simultaneously.
If the bone that is broken is the small fore-arm bone above, then it suits the doctor in its restoration, that he puts on an extension smaller with ease, until it equals itself.
But if the large fore-arm bone is the one that is broken: then it is necessary that a strong bandage be put on.
It is necessary that [the figure of] the hand should be placed [there] at its restoration, and [its extension] extended upon the pulley. The thumb should be higher than all the fingers, and the lower joint [of the thumb] should be higher than all the other [joints or fingers], or what is left of them: and the weak one sitting square on himself, and let the pulley be before him, or in front of him, at a height so that he does not strain himself.
Then, let the servant extend the arm from its lower part, with his hand, or with a ligament. And another servant extends it likewise from above.
Then the doctor equalizes [or adjusts] the bone until he can bring it back to its best shape possible.
If there are shards [or fragments] of bone in the fracture, then try to reduce all the fragments to their respective places by your own effort.
But if it appears that a shard of bone is separated and pierces the skin and there is no hope for its restoration, then plug it over and remove it according to the method we have mentioned earlier.
But if there is a fracture with a wound, I have already written a separate chapter about it, therefore take its treatment from that point onward.
If at the beginning of your restoration a hot abscess occurs, then take linen cloth made with beeswax mixed with rose oil and white wax, and let it be of medium thickness between thickness and subtlety: and bind the cloth over it tightly with a thin string until the abscess settles down: then remove the beeswax, and place an ointment prepared from milled flour and egg white. Then place the awls [or metal splints], and let the awl that is placed over the fracture be slightly wider and stronger.
And know that the number of awls for the arm is six in several arrangements: whether it is a fracture in one splint, or in two splints at once.
Then place your tie (ligature) over the stronger and more prominent part of the fracture, and a little farther towards the upper part of the fracture, or towards its lower part: or place a softer ligature on it, as previously remembered in the beginning of the chapter.
The bandages that cover the fracture should be soft, damp: they should not be hard or rough. And let the thread with which it is tied be of linen and medium between fine and coarse, as we have said.
Consider the limb (body part) and ligament after days (time has passed). If something happens that requires rectification, such as itching on the limb: then it is necessary to apply warm embrocation to the limb with hot water until the itch subsides, and leave the limb unbound until it subsides, then tie it again.
If the ligature has been softened and the bone removed, and similar things have happened: then correct it all with your art, and consider again.
Because if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to the excess of the ligature, then it is necessary to soften it a little, and leave it for some days until it reaches its nourishment, then tie it again.
But if nothing of what we have mentioned happens to the sick (person), then it is not necessary to loosen it, unless after twenty days, or around that time.
Then the hands of the sick one are suspended on his neck. And let his neck be straight, and keep it from unnecessary movements with your art. Make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture is restored in thirty or forty days; and it may be restored in twenty-eight days. The whole thing is according to the dispositions of humors and the dispositions of virtues.
On the restoration of broken bones in hands.
Know that the breakage of the hand and the joints of fingers happens rarely. And it does not happen to him unless he is rubbed repeatedly.
When a foot breakage occurs or by rubbing, then it is necessary that the lame man sits on a stool; and before him there should be a seat according to equality. Then place his hand on it extended.
Then the servant should spread out the broken bones, and the doctor should adjust them until they join together well with good union.
Then it is necessary that he applies plaster and wool, if there is no hot abscess occurring. Then place a splint on top according to the size of the place; and you already wound it in linen cloth.
If the breakage is in the lower part around the heel of the foot, then make a similar ball from cloth; and order the lame man to bend over it with his broken foot; then it should be wrapped with a long piece of cloth.
And the splint should be made of calfskin, with softness so that it can be applied to the body of the foot; and it should be wrapped according to what is necessary.
If the breakage is on the outside, then it is necessary that you place a splint on top and another one from below on the foot; and keep the hand open and straight. Then put a bandage, as the hand is rolled up; and extend it between the fingers with a band.
If a breakage happens to any of the joints of fingers, then if it is the thumb, adjust as necessary. Then wrap with the foot; and if there are fingers, place a straight splint under it, smaller; so that the breakage is lifted up and not moved.
If the fracture is in the remaining fingers, such as the middle, index, ear or ring finger, then it should be equalized and tied with a healthy finger that follows it; or they may all be tied according to continuity, and this is better. Place on top of it a smaller splint, as we said for the thumb.
And consider in your restoration and after its arrangement, the application of warm poultices; and apply what is necessary when something happens from it, according to its repeated narrative.
Chapter on the restoration of a hip fracture.
The hip bone is broken often and becomes apparent to the senses; because it is turned towards the inner and posterior parts.
And its restoration is made by tying a ligament above the fracture, and another ligament below the fracture. The sick one lies on his face.
Then stretch out every ligament serving to its part according to equality; and this is when the fracture is in the middle bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then let a ligament be to the side of the pelvis so that the extension falls upwards; and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then let a ligament be near the knee so that the extension falls to the lower parts.
Then the physician equates the bone with both hands of his, until he reduces it to its natural shape; and it unites the bone with a good union.
Then it is necessary that you place an emulsion and a tight bandage if there is no abscess in the member. If an abscess occurs there: then leave it for some days until the abscess settles down warm; then return to your treatment.
Stricture it accordingly. You should wrap a hard linen around the fracture; that is, bind it: and double it twice, or thrice: and let there remain an excess of it. Then wrap the leg until you reach the heel at the root of the toes.
Insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee, and let the ends of the thread come out from the upper parts of both sides. Then roll the excess on the leg and hip.
Then place stars on the hip at the site of the fracture itself, and place one star on the bone of the leg.
Then fill the voids between the leg and hip with soft cloths to make the compression equal.
Then begin with strong compressions from the middle of the fracture site with three or four wraps. And as you loosen the bandage from the fracture site, let your compression be less and softer, and gentler.
Then turn to both ends of the thread that you inserted between the hip and the leg. Tie three stars on each end of it. Then go to both ends of the thread to the bottom, until you reach the ankle of the foot. And with each end, also tie the ends of the stars on the opposite side so that the bandage does not move from its place.
Then release the compression on that side until it no longer causes the member to rot, or develop an abscess, swelling, or similar things. If something happens from there. Approach it again with the resolution of that matter, and correct entirely whatever happens from there according to what we said many times before.
But if a splinter is in the bone that pierces it: then it is necessary to remove it equally, if it is possible for you. If not, find on it and remove it; and take care of the one who preceded it until it heals.
When this hip fracture is tightly bound with splints, as mentioned in the adjuvant and arm chapter, it should be kept immobile until it has healed.
Nevertheless, in healing such a fracture, lameness does not occur for the weak. If it is healed alone, except that another leg is applied to it, then it is necessary for the one who has it, to lameness always.
And know that the hip is bound for fifty days or it is too little or too much; all of this is according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
Chapter on healing a knee-joint fracture.
Know that the knee joint rarely fractures but it often suffers from attrition.
But if it happens to be a fracture, then it is not otherwise than a crack or hole in its parts. And it occurs with an injury, and without an injury. It stands on that whole part with sensation.
Its healing is as follows: it should be made to fit together the parts that were broken with fingers until it grows and joins together according to what is possible from adjustment and ease, and construction.
Then put a plaster made from barley flour or milled flour with egg white on it; and place over it a round splint, if needed; and bind above it with a suitable splint.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have mentioned in other fractures; such as a hot abscess and similar things; so that you counter every occurrence with what suits it until it heals.
Chapter on healing a leg-fracture.
Know that the leg consists of two bones, one is large and called the Leg: and the other small and called Ankle.
And it often happens that a fracture of this kind occurs in both legs, as it does in two bones of the arm; and for this reason the repair is made equally, and the operation is one.
If both bones are broken, the leg will bend in all directions.
And if the small bone is broken, the leg bends towards the front.
If the large bone is broken, you will find it lower: and it is among those that are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the stars equally.
Nevertheless, if the fracture of the leg is a foul one, with many seething, you should have lesser and gentler extension.
In the leg indeed there is something more than in the arm during the operation: and it is that when you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation, then take two bands made of pine wood, which are used in the manufacture of solariorum placed under tables; and they are made from the blades of the palm; and choose from them those with a small thickness, and neither be too thin; and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee downwards.
Then fold over one cloth with two folds according to its length. Place one part of the leg on one side and the other part on the other side: and let it be from the knee down to the foot.
Then bind the two bands in three places at both ends and in the middle. For since compression is forbidden, the leg will bend to the right and left, and stand with good posture.
And indeed, the cradle should be made of wood in the length of the leg, and the leg should be placed in it to keep it from moving.
And indeed, it is necessary that you make this for a fracture when there is a wound with it.
Then consider the leg every day and strive to keep it free from gangrene, swelling, or any other ailments. If any of these occur, then apply to it whatever is necessary until it heals, if God wills.
On the fracture of bones in the foot and fingers.
The calcaneus bone does not usually break completely.
Fractures of the bones in the foot occur sometimes, and fractures in the fingers are rare as well; they do not usually happen to them unless they are rubbed in multiple positions.
If a fracture of the bones in the foot occurs and you see that the bones are lifting up above each other, then place the injured foot on the ground prepared as when walking.
Then stand and place your foot on the elevated bone; afterwards press or tread on it; and keep it even, until it returns to its original position.
Then apply ointment and plaster on top; place a small table under the heel of the foot with two flat heads.
Then bind it with an appropriate strap after you have wrapped it with linen cloths and whatever else is needed.
When three or four days have passed, then unbind the bandage. For you will find the bones aligned if they are fractured or dislocated. Therefore, treatment is done as you see it.
If some fingers are broken, then restore them and align them as I have told you for the restoration of fingers on the hand. Then place your finger as long as the digit, and let it be a little wider; then place under the foot this plank that I told you, and bind it with an appropriate suture.
If what is fractured consists of two or more bones, then place a plaster of the appropriate size over each digit, wrapped in linen cloth; and bind the plank below the foot; let it be standing on one head of the plank outside the abdomen of the foot to hold it firmly.
And it is appropriate for you not to forget that you should consider everything that I told you in the other fractures, which we have mentioned; and apply each case with what is appropriate.
Section on female facial fracture, clavicle bone, and male pelvic fracture.
When a woman's face is fractured, then make her sit in a square position. Then lower her to the back part of it slightly and hold her backward.
Next, let the midwife fill the woman's wound with a linen cloth until it is filled; and make the wound on her face like a sphere.
Then the woman should be shaken and her back gradually flattened. For that linen cloth will come out until it is made before the door of the wound like a sphere, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a poultice on her back. When she wants to urinate, let her remove the linen cloth easily, then cleanse; and return it in the manner by which you first inserted it; then return to the poultice first.
Let that be done for seven days or about, because the bone itself will heal.
And if you wish, take the bladder of an animal, bind it over its opening with a reed cannula, and insert the entire bladder into her wound. Then blow into the cannula with force until the bladder is inflated within the cavity, for the fracture will return.
Then fill it with a padding and let it remain for some days, as we have said, until it heals.
And when the skullcap of a man or woman breaks, administer to its restoration and apply what we have said about Ancha's bone.
Do not hide the rectum in these nearby fractures, which seldom occur, especially if one has some knowledge or experience.
Understand that my book is much, for the fracture itself indicates to you in many ways the course of the rectum and its constriction in its restoration and healing; therefore understand it.
In a man's penis when it breaks, take the goose's throat: insert the penis into it. Then place on top of it a covering made of cloth and wrap it up, let it rest for three days or around that time, and it will heal if God wills.
[Chapter Title] On the restoration of bone fractures when there is a wound.
It is appropriate for one who has a bone fracture along with a wound, especially if it is large like the hip bone or arm bone, to rush and immediately call for bloodletting; if the conditions of bloodletting are attested to you as we have said.
If the wound flows blood, then it is necessary that you rush to its cutting, spreading powder on top of it as much as possible if no other remedy is present for you.
Then begin to repair the fracture on the same day; do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
If an abscess hot, then delay the repair of it until the ninth day, until the abscess settles down. And do not approach him on the third and fourth day, because you would cause bad accidents to happen to him.
If the broken bone projects above the skin, then it is necessary to pull it back and align it with your hands easily and slightly extend it.
If the extension is not prepared and alignment by your hands, then reduce it with this instrument. And the tool is made of iron, whose length is the size of seven or eight fingers, and its width according to the size of the wound. Therefore, it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of them according to the amount needed for that in any kind of healing in all types of fractures.
And it should be round; and there should be a small thickness to avoid doubling under pressure on it during the operation hour; and its tip should be sharp, with an edge at its ends. And the surface of it should be broad from the middle to the bottom.
This is the form of it.
It is necessary in this operation that the tip of it should be sharp and rounded on top of the protruding bone; and push it with one thrust until the bone returns and aligns itself in some way.
Try to align the extremities of the fracture against each other.
If the extremities of the broken bone are delicate and do not accept the tool well, then it is necessary to cut the edge of that bone until the tool has power over it.
If you cannot pull it out as we have explained altogether, then cut it with what is suitable for him from the incisions which we mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
Then file down what remains on the bone from its roughness and small layers.
When the bone is pulled out and if it becomes weak after being pulled back and causes a violent pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do this. For by doing so, you confer great aid upon the weak, when you complete the restoration that you do to the bone.
Then immerse a linen cloth in wine steeped in black. And properly if it is during summer. And do not place on the wound any green substances or anything containing oil; so as not to cause rot and decay at the wound site.
Then administer astilas at the hour of your restoration of the bone. And let the wound heal; thus, you will cut with forceps the opening in the inflammation according to the size of the wound.
And beware with all caution, that you do not squeeze the wound when it is broken. For many times have foolish physicians done this; and they have caused death or decay or gangrene, that is, blood poisoning. And let your ligature be soft, gentle, diverse from the other fracture ligatures.
If the wound is bad or large, and you fear certain evil accidents which we have mentioned, and find pain at a suspended location: then it is not necessary to place astilas on it. And make incisions from hard cloths in the place of astilas, and tighten it with them.
When, however, it is one day or two days later, and you see that the wound begins to produce pus: then remove from above the linen cloth which you had placed on it with wine. Then apply linen and ointments according to our custom for treating wounds, such as four-ingredient ointment (tetrapharmacon) and similar ones.
And it is fitting for you, that you loosen the bandage. And examine the wound every day at morning and evening until it heals and cures.
It is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way as to allow the pus to flow out from it easily towards the lower part.
If many days pass without the wound healing or pus being expelled from it: then you will know that there is a small fracture of the bone there. Therefore, you should examine the wound with pressure. As for the number of small fractures separated, remove them and extract them. And those that are not separated and pierce the limb, causing pain, try to cut them and remove them in any way possible for you.
If there occurs a gangrene or suppuration, that is, putrefaction and corruption: then it is necessary to apply to each one of them what is suitable for its treatment, whose treatment was previously described in the corresponding chapter.
And from the discussion that I have made so far and to which you should give your full attention when a bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, such as the hip or shoulder bones, and similar large ones: do not presume to set it yourself, for frequently death occurs from this; rather let it be until it becomes putrefied.
Perhaps it falls by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then care for the wound if it seems to you: and if not, let it be.
On the treatment of a nodule on a fracture's track.
This frequently occurs as a knotting in the process of healing a fracture. Primarily, what is near the joints: it becomes ugly due to this shape of the member. And possibly prevents the member from its natural movement.
Therefore, consider if the knotting is recent: administer to it medications that have a stiffening effect, such as aloes, olibanum, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar ones.
Thus, take some or all of these: and mix them with stiffening wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar: and place them on the knotting in a plaster, and bind it well with a good bandage.
And leave the bandage, do not loosen it for many days. Then unbind it, and bind another one until the knotting is removed.
Or bind well over it a leaden plate. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from the members.
If the knotting has already turned into stone and is hardened and urgently calls for its removal: then apply a plaster from above it, and cut off the excessive projecting part: or file it with certain rasps until it is removed: and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter on treatment when the member remains subtle after that, not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored and the member remaining after it is subtle and weak, it is not done except for many reasons. One of the reasons is that there is a large amount of disintegration of the ligament and its binding not as required: either due to excess restriction of the ligaments, preventing nourishment from flowing to the member: or due to excessive embrocation at an inappropriate time: or due to a small amount of blood in the body of the weak person, and its debilitation.
The care for this is to feed the weak person, and make his body tender until blood multiplies in him. Administer a bath. And pour joy and gladness over him.
Then place pitch on the member, so that it attracts much nourishment to itself. And anoint it with embrocation and warm water until the nourishment runs, and returns to its natural shape.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored twisted.
If a limb already restored after its healing becomes twisted and the bone of the fracture protrudes or knots, and it is disfigured by that part of the limb, but the limb does not forbid its natural operation, then one should not receive the speech of that person who thinks that the limb must be broken again.
And there have been many fools among doctors and restorers who did this on our land.
And this operation is indeed to be greatly condemned, leading to death or a great fear that it might be deadly.
But if limping and knotting are recent: then it is necessary to anoint with warm water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as the leaves of elder, its root, and honeysuckle, and similar ones. And let it be made as an ointment with a softening plaster, as ditchulon properly made.
Let the mucilage of the root of the marshmallow be taken, and grind it with chicken fat or sesame oil; and let it be applied with that.
Let figs be taken and ground with pigeon dung and similar ones which are named among the medications that diminish consolidation.
And sometimes a knot is loosened with constant and gentle rubbing, which is done with moist hands. Let motion be applied to the member in every hour (of the day).
If, however, the twist has already occurred and it has become strong, and has turned into a stone, and there is necessity for its treatment with iron: then it is necessary that it be cut above it, and the continuation of the bone be loosened, and what remains superfluous from the knot or the bone with chisels be cut away: and let ease be applied to it with diligence and care.
Chapter on Dislocation.
Dislocation is the departure of any joints from its place. Why it should be prevented from moving and why it becomes deformed in appearance of the member. And causes severe pain to occur on top of the weak, and violent injuries.
When therefore a dislocation occurs, then it is necessary to hasten for its restoration; nor should it be delayed at all.
For if it is delayed, the place may recede, and possibly with it the reduction of the dislocation.
Therefore, it should not be moved nor extended in the hour of its relocation. Because many times it causes spasms and painful injuries.
However, when that happens, then it is necessary to rush for the bloodletting of the weak. Then it should be allowed to rest until the abscess has subsided.
Then broom the limb with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced easily.
And every part of the body should be treated with it, when its remembrance comes to its place.
I myself have already ordered chapters on dislocations, even according to what was previously discussed in the context of fractures, from the top part of the body downwards.
Chapter on the treatment of lower jaw dislocation.
Two mandibles are scarcely dislocated except rarely.
Dislocation of both [occurs] according to two ways. For either they are moved slightly from their places and softened slightly, or they are separated with great force. Or the dislocations are complete and integral until they are softened up to the breast, until the saliva of the sick man runs out and he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is rolled up with speech.
When the dislocation is slight, then it returns by itself in various positions with scarcity.
If the dislocation is complete and integral, then it is necessary that its reduction be administered quickly and without delay: and there should be someone to hold the head of the sick man; and the doctor should insert his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocated mandible, if the dislocation is on one side. Or two thumbs are inserted at the same time, if the dislocation is from both sides. And the remaining fingers of his hands should be outside, as he sees fit.
And command the sick man to clean his mandibles and to wash them for eating on every side. The doctor pushes the mandible and forces it back to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both mandibles are at the same time, then administer steam with hot water and oil until the reduction of both becomes easy; do not delay the reduction of both, as we have said.
When they return and come together and the sick man's mouth is closed, and they are not softened: then place on them small pieces of cloth, with wax that has been made from beeswax; and rose oil.
Then it should be tied easily with soft ligatures.
And let the sleep of the sick man be on his back: and let his head be supported between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right and to the left: neither let him try or be forced to chew something: rather, let his food be made soft, until when the pain is removed, and the jaw is loosened: then let him eat whatever he wants, and let this be administered easily.
Let him not strain on the operation of his mouth during eating and drinking, and speaking, until the jaw is loosened and healed.
If the reduction of the two jaws becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and do not return to their places: then fever often occurs, and continuous vomiting: and perhaps the sick man's abdomen bursts open, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
Therefore, when you see this: then you will know that it is a fatal event, and he who experiences this often dies within ten days.
Chapter on the reduction of dislocation of the neck and the limb of the shoulder.
The neck is not dislocated from within on the side, because of its continuity with the chest. And it is sometimes dislocated to the outside: and this can be felt.
And its restoration is that the sick man lies on his back and stretches out his arms. Then bend your hand into a fist with a strong grasp: for it will return.
Then place the plaster and pillows on top of it, and bind it tightly.
The limbs following the elbow, which are connected to it, are not usually dislocated, unless rarely. If it is dislocated on some day: then it must be reduced and set in accordance with what we have said, and as you will prepare for yourself.
Then place on it [the wound] the plaster, and the leeches, and the suture. And tell the sick person, to hold fast to tranquility and rest, until he is healed.
When this same treatment brings about the relief of the shoulder's extremity, even if it also separates from its place.
Chapter on the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder.
You should know that the humerus is not dislocated except in three ways.
One of them is when it dislocates to the palmar side towards the lower parts. The second one is when it dislocates to the chest area. And perhaps it may be dislocated towards the upper part of the humerus; and this happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated to the back side, because of the spine (of the scapula). And it is not dislocated to the front side, because of the nerves.
Mostly it is indeed dislocated and exits towards the palmar side; especially in those whose flesh is scanty. Since it goes out quickly and enters quickly (back into place).
But in those whose flesh is plentiful, it is just the opposite, namely that it goes out with difficulty and enters with difficulty (back into place).
And perhaps it happens to some people by a blow or an accident and the humerus is pushed out by a blow with something hot, and they think this because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you must try that out until you are certain of it, and then proceed with its treatment.
The dislocation is known when it is towards the palmar side; and you distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a healthy one. For you find among them an obvious difference, and in the head of the humerus you find a depression, and under the palm of the hand at touch, it seems like an egg; and an invalid cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it dislocates towards the chest or upwards; then you find a clear feeling that is not concealed.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy when it is recent or if the child is weak.
And its reduction is, that he lifts his assistant's hand upwards. Then place your thumbs under his thumb and lift the joint firmly upwards to its place; and the assistant lifts his hand, and extends it upwards. Then he puts it down below, for he quickly returns (to its position).
If it does not go back as we have said, and from the beginning to where dislocation occurs there are many days; then it is necessary that the sick one be bathed in warm water, and treated with an embrocation which softens and soothes, such as if they decoct root of althea, and fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and it (the embrocation) is administered.
Then the sick one lies down on his back; and a sphere and wool are to be placed under his thumb which is equal between softening and tightening.
Then the doctor places his heel on the sphere, and lifts the head of the arm with force, and draws the hand of the sick one downwards.
And if you wish, do so according to this method; and it is that you make a man who is longer than the sick one present, who stands from the side, and intrudes his arm under the thumb of the sick one: and lifts the thumb upwards, until the sick one is suspended in the air. And another assistant pulls the hand of the sick one downwards towards the stomach of the same. If the sick one is light: then it is necessary that something else is suspended with him to weigh him down; for the dislocation returns immediately (to its position).
And it is also reduced according to another method; and it is that a long wooden stick is formed on the ground, whose head is round-shaped like a mitten of the deadman's arm (mortarer's arm), which is not too thick nor too thin. Then, place it under the sick one after the logs of soft wood have been placed on his head; and let the sick person stand according to the length of the logs.
Then his hand is to be extended towards the lower part from one side; and his body is to be extended from the other side with force; for the joining [of bones] returns to its place quickly.
If it is difficult to reduce [the fracture] by all the means we have mentioned, then employ this remedy: you shall take a log whose length is equal to two forearms and its width is four fingers, and its thickness is that of two fingers; the end should be rounded so as to widen the entrance into the deep socket [of the joint], in this manner.
Then, soft cloths are placed over the rounded log to prevent injury to the sick log.
Then, it is to be placed under the injured joint so that his hand or arm can be extended over the log until reaching the lower part; and the log is to be bound to the help [the other log], arm, and end of the hand.
Then, place his arm on a step of the ladder [the other log] by its width; and extend his hand towards the lower part; and let the rest of the body hang suspended from the other side. For the joining [of bones] quickly enters.
When the entrance is completed in whatever manner possible; then it is necessary to place a sphere of equal size under the injured joint [the other log]. Then place a prepared plaster made from milled powder with balm and albumen of egg white over the entire shoulder as it is rotated above.
Then tighten a bandage under the injured joint; and rotate the strap over the plaster above; and connect his hand to the neck of the same [person]; let it be, without moving his hand for seven days.
It is necessary that food be sparse until the limb recovers, for it heals more quickly.
Then let it (the dressing) be larger after seven or five days, and let it be shaken with motion. If it hardens and is not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is repeatedly dislocated due to the moisture that occurs or for another reason: then it is necessary to administer cautery with three holes, according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
If this is done and the ligament is dissolved after seven days and the joint is not hardened and the emplaster and compression are not applied to it several times nor does it become hard and falls and cannot be raised towards above: then you know that the nerves which are at the head of the humerus have been cut or stretched or softened: and you know that the joint will never become fixed in its place.
For a dislocation towards the chest and breast or reduction to the rear is done with pressure and extension using hands until it returns, and then further compression and care are applied until it heals.
If pain or slowness of movement occurs after healing in the limb, then the sick person should use baths many times until that pain is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter on the treatment of the elbow joint.
You should know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and likewise returns with difficulty as well; and it is indeed dislocated in all directions, but particularly towards the front or the rear.
And you will know that this dislocation is not hidden from you; because it falls under sight and touch, whichever way it is dislocated. And when you join a dislocated elbow with the healthy one, it is made apparent to you. For indeed the joint will be concave and the arm cannot double, nor can it touch its own shoulder with it.
And it is necessary that you hasten and immediately reduce the dislocation, before a hot abscess occurs.
For if a hot abscess occurs, the reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps it will not heal at all, especially when it is towards the back. For indeed, every form of dislocation is worse and more painful; and many times death follows with it.
And the restoration of it, when it can be reduced, is that the hand should be extended with two hands; and the arm should be expanded, and the hands of the physician should be above the elbow and below it, and he himself should push the joint with the tips of his fingers or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Or if the dislocation is towards the front: then it returns in such a way that it doubles the hand with its own, until it strikes the elbow which is dislocated with the root of its palm.
But if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a strong and violent extension; and it is that two attendants extend the arm; and they should hold him also so that he is not moved during the extension.
Then the arm is turned to every side after it has been wrapped around its own hand with a double cloth or wide bandage.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he binds it with oil; so that it is from those things which aid in the lubricity of the joint with ease. Then he pushes the joint with a strong push until it returns.
After the reduction [of the fracture], it should be placed on top of it a plaster with styptics and cauterization with the white of an egg; the stricture should be tied securely. Suspend the arm from the neck of the patient, and let it rest for several days.
Then, it is to be loosened. If the joint has been fixed in its place, then unbind it from there and let it rest.
If you see that the joint is not bound well, then repeat the plaster, bind it again, and let it rest for several days until it has healed. Then, it is to be loosened again.
If there is pain after the reduction of the joint and its condition is moving: then administer a moistening in bathing, fine friction, and compression until it settles down, or put over the joint, that is, the fat of the lamb's wool. Then, bind it, and let it rest for a day and night. Then, remove it [the plaster], and immerse it [the affected part] in the bath. When it sweats, then gently friction the joint with a tempered friction. Then, repeat over it three times with the white of an egg, on its first, second, and third entry into the bath, until it becomes softened.
And if you wish, place over it dung of a cow, moistened and heated with butter, and bind it over it.
Do this often. It becomes softened, and returns to its normal condition.
Chapter on the treatment of dislocations by Albucasis.
Albucasis frequently treats a dislocation, that is, the joint between the arm and the hand.
The reduction of this dislocation is easy. In opposition to the remaining joints. It is necessary that speed be in the reduction of the dislocation at the hour when it occurs, before the location is cut open; or an abscess may occur in it, which is hot.
And the reduction of a dislocation in this is that you place Mahassem, the weak hand, upon a table, and extend the assistant's hand; and the physician places his palm upon the prominent joint, and pushes it until it returns.
Nevertheless, it should be considered if the palm has already retreated to the belly of the hand; then let the weak part of the hand be placed upon a table during extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then let its position be intrinsically upon the table, that is, the inner part of the hand should be placed upon the table, so that the physician falls upon the prominent joint.
If it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then tie it with a plaster letting an abscess form; leave it alone, do not touch it again.
For if it cannot be borne, nor can you make the reduction of it after the days have passed, yet the joint remains according to its twist; and nothing harms the weak except that it is softened by the hand, and nothing can be tied; then you will know that the nerves have been severed or rubbed.
It is not clever in this, except to tie it with a cautery near its loss. And perhaps that does not benefit it at all.
When Almahassem does not return, then place a plaster upon him as I have said. Then tie it, and let it be for five days; afterwards it is loosened and let go, and the hand is exercised.
If it is deprived of movement, and something heavy happens to it; then soften it with warm water and rub it occasionally until it becomes soft.
On the treatment of dislocations of the fingers.
When a finger is dislocated in any direction or towards the back of the palm or the palm's inside, then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
Then hold the head of the finger and turn it towards the direction of the dislocation and let it be for two days.
Then suspend it (the finger) and extend it until it becomes straight on the same day.
When it is night, bind it as described (in the text) and do not cease to loosen it during the day; exercise it with movement, and bind it at night.
Do this for several days until it becomes tight (healed).
And do the same if it is dislocated towards the palm of the hand; bind it to that part and perform your first operation on it until it heals.
And do the same if it is dislocated in other parts.
On the treatment of dislocations of the vertebrae of the back.
When anyone suffers from a complete dislocation of the vertebrae of the back or neck, or many vertebrae are displaced from their places, there is no cure for it, because death approaches the weak.
And the sign of this is that the sickness departs from him without his will, nor can he hold it; sometimes some of his limbs become soft, or two legs or two arms of his own, or one of them; or a vertebra is displaced from its place.
Often it happens that it (the dislocation) moves and is often removed to the four directions.
That which is moved towards the back is called gibbosity.
The cure for this (disease) is that you consider it if it occurs from childhood: then there is no treatment in it, and there is no healing at all from it.
But in that which occurs due to an accident, or blow, or similar cases, the ancient ones have already explained the modes of treatment in a long discourse. It yields least return when it is profitable (or: when it prospers).
I have already abridged from that which excuses itself little by much due to my proximity to its intention; and in my exposition of it, and the construction of its instrument, I formed it differently than they showed it and explained it.
Therefore, I say that in a hunchback which occurs from the front part, there is no talent, and healing is not from it.
And similarly in that which happens on both sides as well.
And it is not cured from them (the humpbacks) except that which occurs on the back properly, as I am about to say; and it must be stretched out, the weak one over his face on a platform equal nearly to the wall; and it must be spread beneath him wet linen so that his chest is not injured.
Then a straight piece of wood is placed fixed in a basin on the ground at the end of the platform, around his head; and another piece of wood about his feet at the end of the other platform; and let someone hold the piece of wood, and it shall not be fastened to the basin. And the second person holds the other.
Then bend over the head of the weak one, and under his chin tie a soft but firm bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the piece of wood which is by his head; and tie him there.
Then tighten another bandage over his ankles, and above his knees, and at the fetters (or: shackles) of his feet. Then gather all the ligaments and tie them on another piece of wood that is near his feet.
Then let every servant extend the ligament to the piece of wood, and neither of the woods should be removed from their places where they are fixed; however, they should not be tightly bound, as we said.
The physician shall place his hands on the pelvis with force until he returns; or he may place it on a table. Then he connects his feet to the table until he returns.
If he does not return by this treatment, then take a table whose length is about three arms (elbows). And carve a hole in the wall which we have said is near the sick one, for the end of the table to enter. Then place the middle part of the table on the pelvis. The physician shall then place his feet on the other end (of the table). And the physician binds it tightly until the pelvis is dislocated and returns to its place.
Then, if you wish, work with the lathe which revolves with your hand; and there is, so that you may mark on the ground at the head of the sick one two pieces of wood, whose length is an arm each; and at his head, on the same side, two pieces of wood.
And the length between every piece of wood is a palm; and now a hole has been made in every place where the lathe runs; and each piece of wood must be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move at all.
A round piece of wood is inserted; and the lathe, in which the ligament revolves, has two holes on the two pieces of wood.
And at the end of it (the lathe) is a hole where the piece of wood is fixed, whose length is a palm with what revolves; and there are similar holes on the two other pieces of wood as well.
Then tie the ligaments which you have tied in the chest of the sick one at the bandage that is at his head; and tie the ligaments which you have tied in his legs at the bandage that is at his feet.
Then let the attendant be at every bandage, who twists his hand with the linen, by which the bandage is twisted; and the physician presses on the spondyle, as we have said.
This is the form of the bandage that follows.
Then after the spondyle returns and the place is pressed, then it is necessary that you put an ointment of dry plaster with egg white. Then apply a poultice (stuppa). Then put above the ointment a star-shaped patch from wood, whose width is three fingers, or about that. And its length should be such as to contain the hollow of the back, and on the healthy part of the spondyle.
Then it is tied with the ligament that I have mentioned. And the sick one shall eat delicate food until he gets better.
If anything remains elevated in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that medicines which soften and soothe be administered, with the administration of the tablet that I have mentioned for a long time. And now the lead sheet (lamina plumbi) is administered to him.
And sometimes there remains an elevation at the last spondyle of the back; and it is thought to be a dislocation, and that bone which has now protruded. Therefore, it is not necessary for this medicine to be assumed without caution; for perhaps it will cause death.
Chapter on the cure of a dislocated ankle.
You know that the joints of the ankle and shoulder do not occur except in dislocation; nor does it occur to them what occurs to the other joints due to slight displacement and hollowing.
And indeed, the joint of the Ancle is dislocated in four parts. It is because it is dislocated to the anterior and to the posterior.
Furthermore, it is mostly dislocated internally: it is less dislocated to the anterior and to the posterior.
And the treatment for the internal dislocation is: because when you join the weak leg with a healthy one, it is longer: and its knee is more protruding than that of a healthy person, and the weak cannot double his foot near the groin: and there is a place following the groin which is pressed with a hot poultice, for this reason, because the head of the hip has already reached there.
And the sign of an external dislocation is that its symptoms are opposite to these symptoms (internal dislocation).
And the sign of an anterior dislocation is that it stretches out the healthy leg to a certain extent: but it does not double without pain in the knee: and if he tries to walk, he cannot move forward over it: and his urine is retained, and his groin is pressed, and while walking, his foot is stepped on at the calcaneum.
And the sign of a posterior dislocation is that it does not stretch out the knee nor can it double before doubling the groin: and its leg is even shorter than the other: and his groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place (of the wound).
However, the reduction of this dislocation is to consider at that time if the dislocation is old, which has already become chronic with the one who has it. Then, if you administer the reduction and it remains according to its own position: then there is no cure at all (in that case). Therefore, do not presume too deeply upon him (the patient).
In that case where dislocation is recent, and it belongs to one of the four types of dislocations: then hasten to do this, that you press the joint, and extend it towards inside and outside, and move it right and left: perhaps it returns, and does not need other care.
If it does not return by this means, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong helper and he extends the leg from its lower part: either with his hands, or with a rope which is tied above the knee: and another helper extends the hand thus that he introduces his hands under the fingers. Then bind it gently with a rope around the root of the hip and hold the other end of the rope.
And let the extension be either from the front of the groin to the breastbone, or from the back to the spine.
And let the extension of all (the limbs) be one, until the weak one with his body is lifted off the ground and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is a common type among the four types.
If therefore the dislocation returns as we said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary in every case to do what I will say about its treatment.
In the reduction of its own kind (of dislocation), when it is towards the inside, it is necessary that the weak one lies on his healthy side. Then put the rope around the root of the hip where it is between the head of the hip and the place that is under the groin. Then extend the rope from the lower part of the groin to the upper part of the body, to the breastbone.
Then let another strong helper take his arms and make a narrow place in the large part of the weak hip and extend it with a strong extension towards the outside. Now, indeed, it returns to its place.
And this is one of the simpler species of cure, by which this member is reduced.
If, however, it is excised above you and does not obey you to enter with this species of cure entirely: then it is necessary that two weak feet be tied together with a strong ligament, soft, on both heels and on both knees: and let the length of each one be four fingers' width apart from its origin: and let the leg be weakly extended by more than twice the length of two fingers.
Then, the weak one is suspended above the head of a post, which is in the house: and let its length from the ground be two forearms.
Then command a strong youth to guard the head of the hip: and suspend another with the weak one: and push another youth, guarding the hip with strength, for it returns to its place quickly with union.
In its reduction, however, when there is a dislocation to the outside, it is necessary that the weak one lie on a platform, as we said in the one with humpback. And bind a ligament over its leg, the weak one's own, and over its chest.
Then, two posts are placed, one at his feet, and another at his head. Then a post is placed in the middle of the platform, fixed well: over which are wrapped wet cloths, so as not to harm the weak one: and let the post be between his hips, so that it is not drawn downwards during extension.
Then, let every servant go to his place, and the doctor equalizes the reduction with his hand.
If it, therefore, obeys for reversal, it will be good.
And if not, place it on the table and press it equally, as we said in humpback. The sick one should lie on his healthy side.
If the dislocation is towards the front, then it is necessary to extend the sick person's leg quickly; and according to this same account on a stool; and let the doctor place the palm of his right hand on the sick person's hip. Then bend him with one hand, and while bending place him extended to below towards the knee part.
If the dislocation is towards the back: then it is not necessary to extend the sick one below; and he should be raised on the ground: instead he should be placed on a hard surface, as it is also necessary if his shoulder is dislocated towards the outside, according to what we said about his lying on two sides: and it is on his face, and the ligaments are extended; according to what we said recently.
It is necessary to administer compression with a board also on the place from which it goes out joining, when reduction is completed according to what is necessary.
And the sign of its reduction is not hidden from you; and it is that you extend two legs of the sick one; and when you see them equal, and the sick one tightens his leg, and opens himself without hesitation; then you know that the limb has returned, according to what is necessary: then join the hips, and place an ointment, and tie with a bandage, that is, a roller; so that the shoulder does not move to any part; and let the sick one remain quiet for three days or four.
Then loosen the ligament, the ointment, and compare the leg with the other; then if you see them equal in position, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed; therefore release the sick one for walking.
If you see something softening: then return, and apply the ointment, and bind it according to your first tightening; and leave it also for three days.
Then dissolve it and make him slow in walking on both sides for a few days until he recovers well.
On Dislocations of the Knee.
The leg gets dislocated in three ways. It gets dislocated to the outside, to the inside, and to below (or behind), namely, to the back.
And it is not dislocated to the front.
And a sign of this dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his leg to his hip. But if it does not adhere to the hip: then you know that the leg is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the modes of this dislocation is that you make the patient sit upright, so that he can now extend his leg if he can over it, and let his back touch his face; and place his foot between your feet.
Then let the patient's leg adhere to your palms, and straighten them out over the leg. Then apply with your palm both sides of the leg forcefully. And another servant extends his foot, until the leg returns to its place.
And a sign of restoration is that the leg adheres with the hip gently, not forcefully.
Then apply plasters to it and let the patient's leg adhere to the hip. Then bind them together with a bandage for three or four days. Then unbind them.
And the patient should not walk for some days until he is healed.
But if the reduction is refused by him, then administer a strong extension with bindings, whose method of application has been previously mentioned in the treatment of the ankle, until it returns.
Section on the treatment of calcaneal dislocation.
The calcaneus is sometimes removed by a small removal, and sometimes dislocated according to its completeness. And the dislocation of it [the calcaneus] occurs either towards the internal parts or towards the external parts.
And the sign of its [calcaneus's] dislocation is that you see the calcaneus swollen, proceeding towards the part to which it is dislocated.
The cure of its [calcaneus's] removal is easy return: and it is to stretch it with ease by hands, and equalize it until it returns.
In the treatment of it [calcaneus] when dislocated according to its completeness, it is necessary that you make the sick man sit upright: and the strong servant should hold him tightly from behind the middle part of his back.
Then hold it [the foot] with your right hand from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of its foot, in the place of the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with your left hand take hold of it from both sides.
Then extend [the foot] with the left, and push the heel of the foot with the right turned towards the calf without effort.
Do this twice, as we have said.
Then push the heel of the foot towards the calf with your third effort, and you pull on the ankle.
If it returns in one or two efforts according to this method, and you see the foot equalized, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation on him, because it will return by itself.
If the return of it [calcaneus] is prevented by him [the patient], when we have said this, then make the sick man lie on his back on the ground, and fix a peg in the ground firmly, so that he falls between his thighs: and you should already have wrapped him in cloth, so as not to harm the sick man.
Then let the servant take his hip: afterwards let another servant extend the foot, either with his hands, or with a strap that binds over the neck of the foot. Let every servant extend himself against the stretching device set up for him: let a peg be standing between the hips of the sick man to keep him from being drawn downwards towards the stretching device.
Then the physician sets the dislocation with his hands, and another servant holds the sound leg downwards. For a dislocation returns quickly.
When the dislocation has returned and is declared to you as healed, then place ointment and wool, and bind it tightly with bands, and bind the foot with a strap to the sound leg.
And you must be careful or fear the nerves that are above the heel bone at the back, so that the strap is not too tight and injures them.
Then dismiss him for two or three days. If the strap becomes soft, bind it; then loosen it on the third or fourth day; and prevent the sick man from walking for forty days. But if he attempts to walk before that period, there is no security except that the dislocation may burst open again and be spoiled, and not receive treatment afterwards.
If he has a hot abscess, then it is necessary that you administer to him the sedative mentioned earlier in another part of our treatment, and embrocation until it is removed.
Chapter on Dislocations of the Fingers of the Foot, and Treatment.
It is necessary that it be adjusted which has been dislocated with slight extension without difficulty; this indeed is easy rather than difficult.
But if the dislocation is in certain knuckles of the foot, then it is necessary that the sick man sit with his foot on a level place or table; and he stands as if walking.
Then you stand, and place your foot upon that which projects from those joints. Then you press it with your foot with force until it returns and you see that it is now even, and no projection appears at the place.
Then put under the sole of his foot a flat board which can hold the whole foot, having two feet. Then bind it with a bandage fitting well for three days. Then unbind it and let it rest from walking for many days, until bound and secured from any recurrence of the reduction.
[Paragraph] On types of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When something happens to it (i.e., the fracture or dislocation), and you attempt its treatment and restoration, death often occurs repeatedly; therefore, one should not presume to undertake such a cure unless he is wise in long practice, merciful, pious, slow, not bold, nor presumptuous. Moreover, he should use only medicines that calm the pain with warm applications, and he should leave the weak one to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for healing from destruction with mildness of disease, and where there is something that suggests hope. Therefore, attempt the reduction of it immediately at the beginning, before a hot abscess occurs.
If the limb therefore returns as we wish, then administer a regime that calms the abscess; and care for the wound with whatever is suitable to it from dry ointments.
If the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and separate sequestra occur in the bone, then attempt to remove them; and do in this what was said for simple diseases at the places where they were found.
And be careful according to your strength and guard yourself from entering into the path of fear; according to what my previous teaching has taught you.
That is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more healthy for your body among them in your time.
