After I completed this book for you, Sons [of], which is the last one in the science of medicine with its completion, and after I reached the end in it, through its explanations and its declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of operation, that is, surgery with hands.
Since operation with hands is laid low in our region and during our time, it has been entirely absent: perhaps the science of it has perished, and its trace has been lost: and nothing remains from it except small descriptions in old books, which have been changed by hand; and error and hesitation occurred until its intentions were closed off, and the force of it was weakened: It seemed to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise according to the way of its explanation, and its abbreviation; and that I should provide with the forms of the instruments of Cautery, and the rest of the tools of work: when done by adding to its declarations, and through the necessity of it.
The reason why no good craftsman with his hands can be found in this time is that the art of medicine is long, and its author must exercise himself before that in the science of anatomy which Galen narrated, so that he knows the aid of limbs, and their shapes, and their connection, and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, and their number, and their exits, and the arteries pulsating and quiet ones, and their locations.
And for this reason, Hippocrates said that name with name is much, and with work it is little, especially in the art of hands.
We have already spoken about him at the beginning of this book.
Since he who is not knowing what we have said about anatomy, cannot avoid falling into error, in which people are killed: just as I have seen many of those who are formed from this science and boast about it without knowledge, and without experience.
I have seen a foolish surgeon cut out a scrofulous apostema on a woman's neck and cut some arteries in the neck: consequently the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead in his hands.
And I have seen another surgeon who presumptuously attempted to extract a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large.
Therefore he came to him, and extracted it with a piece of bladder.
Wherefore the man died on the third day.
And indeed I was already called to extract it; and I saw from the size of the stone, and the condition of the sick man, that he would die.
And I have seen another surgeon who was receiving straw from some Duke of our land on account of medicine; and a black eunuch was with him, who was with him, and he sustained a fracture in his leg near the heel; and the surgeon rushed with his ignorance, and bound up the fracture over the wound with pulleys, and strong bindings, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he cured him according to his own neglect.
Later he sent him away for some days and ordered him not to loosen the binding; and he remained so until an apostema formed on his leg, and his own foot, and it came to ruin.
Therefore I was called to him; and I hastened to loosen the binding; and peace came, and he was freed from his pains.
The corruption was already confirmed in the member; and I could not restrain it.
Stop, the corruption has ceased to roam through the member until it has perished.
I saw another doctor who pierced a malignant apostema; and after days, the ulceration was until the evil of it with its lord was manifested.
Because when it is a pure cancer from black bile, then it is not necessary to approach it with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can endure, so that the whole of it may be removed.
And because of this, O Sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation with salvation associated; and the operation with danger in many dispositions. And I have already aroused myself in every place of this book, where the operation comes, in which there is fear and dread.
Therefore it is necessary for you to be careful of that, and separate it yourself: so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and to disgrace.
Receive then the measure with care and protection, and take care of your weak ones with ease and firmness, and use the better way leading to grace of God to health and praiseworthy success: and dismiss terrible sicknesses that are difficult to heal; and remove from you what makes you afraid, so that hesitation in faith and your comfort may enter upon you. For it remains more to your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to the measures of yours.
Galenus has already said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat the evil sickness; lest you be called an evil doctor.
Chapter one.
On section and perforation, phlebotomy and blistering, wounds, and the extraction of arrows and similar items; and the entire subject is arranged according to the forms of instruments. (paragraph break)
Chapter three.
On restoration, and dislocation, and treatment of twisting, and similar items; arranged from head to foot, and the forms of instruments.
To God alone be the glory. (in Latin: Soli Deo Gloria)
The Book of Surgery by Albucasis.
Part one.
(paragraph break) On the benefits and harm of cautery; under which constitutions it is suitable, and at what time; and whether with iron or gold.
Chapter one.
However, before I speak of the operation with it, it is first necessary to say the nature of its benefits and harm; and under which constitution it should be administered.
Therefore, the discourse on the nature of the benefit and harm of cautery is lengthy, subtle, full of knowledge, and secret wisdom.
And many wise men have spoken of it and disagreed on it; and I myself find enough from their discussions, fearing lengthiness.
Therefore, cautery applies generally to all constitutions, whether with matter or without; except for two constitutions, which are a hot constitution without matter and a dry constitution without matter.
However, in a hot and dry constitution with matter, they disagreed.
Some have said that Cautery is beneficial for it.
And others said the opposite, namely that Cautery is not suitable for the disease which is due to heat and dryness, because nature of fire is heat: it is inappropriate to heal from a hot and dry disease with heat and dryness.
And he said who says the opposite, that by Cautery is beneficial in every hot and dry disease which happens in human bodies, because when you compare a man's body and his humors, to the composition of fire, you find a man's body cold.
And I myself say by his words: because it has been proved to me many times.
Nevertheless, it is not necessary for him to come upon that, unless he who has already been proven and trained in the last chapter on Cautery, and knows the differences of men's complexions, and the dispositions of diseases within themselves, and their causes, and the characteristics of them, and the duration of their time.
As for other complexions, there is no fear over you: and especially in cold and moist diseases. Indeed, all doctors agree on these: and they have not disagreed on the benefit with Cautery for them.
And know sons (pupils), that by secret healing with Cautery and fire, and the goodness of it on Cautery with medicine burning, because fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member which is cauterized: and it does not harm another joint connected with it, unless by a slight damage.
But the action of burning medicine reaches to that which is extended from the members: and perhaps it may cause difficult healing in the member, and perhaps it may kill.
Fire, on account of its subtlety and goodness, does not act except when in excess.
It has become known to us through experiment, due to the length of servitude and study with art, and due to its position concerning truth: and because of that I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And know, sons, that they themselves differ concerning the time when a cautery is to be made and consider a better time as truth permits.
And I say that a cautery is suitable at all times: for this reason, the harm resulting from time is submerged in the benefit that is attracted with the cautery.
And especially if a cautery is for pains from necessary pains, strong, urgent ones that do not tolerate delay: for this reason it is feared that from them may occur a malice that is greater than the little harm that passes through because of time.
And may that not enter your minds, sons, the idea that is not held except by the common people and foolish physicians, that to an illness cured by cautery there is always a return: and they put it as a consequence, but things are not as they think: for this reason cauterization is not, unless in place of medicine which changes the humor and removes humidities which are the causes of the pain.
Nevertheless, a cautery is superfluous over medicine due to the speed of its health, and the virtue of its operation, and the violence of its dominion: and it is possible that illness may return at some hour of time according to the constitution of the sick person, and the location of his illness, and the power of his illness: and that in the body it arises from an accumulation of superfluities in it: and that it reaches him in its acquisition from foods and similar things as causes, unless illness occurs for which cauterization is administered. Subtle sickness in a member of few superfluities and moistures, as cautery for a tooth, because of pain, and similar to it, is possible that the pain will not return in it.
That happens in few cases.
However, the common saying that cautery is the last medicine is correct in its literal meaning; not in reference to what they intend by it, because they believe that there is no cure given with medication, nor with anything after the fall of the cautery.
But the fact is just the opposite, and their intention that cautery is the last medicine, is not so, except when we administer modes of cure in some sicknesses, and they do not give those medications; then we apply cautery at the end, and it cures; then it comes about that cautery is the last medicine, but not according to the understanding of the common people and many physicians.
The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron; and they did not say this unless due to the equality of gold and the refinement of its substance; and they said that it does not cause a place for cautery blisters. But that is not absolutely true; because I have already proved it and found that the same does not cause this in some bodies without others.
And cautery itself is good, and better than with iron, as they said.
However, when you make the cautery in fire from gold, it is not made clear to you, when it is heated according to the amount that you wish, due to the redness of gold; and when it moves towards the same coldness, and if you add heat over it, it melts in the fire, and turns into layers.
Therefore the artisan falls into trouble from this; and because of this, cautery with iron is done among us more quickly and closer to the procedure, due to its straightness for the operation.
I have already arranged this Chapter for cautery, according to the chapters: and I have ordered it from head to foot: that whatever they seek in it, may be found by them. On the method of cauterizing the Head at the Coronal Suture.
Chapter II.
Here, the cauterization is applied to the dominion of moisture and coldness over the brain: these two are causes of soda, and the flow of multiple humors from the head to the eyes and ears, and the multitude of sleep, and toothache, and throat pain; and universally all sickness that happens due to coldness, such as paralysis, soda, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ones from these sicknesses.
The method of cauterization is to instruct the sick person: that his head should be evacuated first with a solution of medicine cleansing it for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, and his age, and his custom.
Then instruct him to make his head warm with a towel.
Then make him sit between your hands in a square position, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Whenever therefore your middle finger arrives, mark that spot with something unburnt. Then heat the cautery in oil: whose form is this. Then put it on the marked spot with something unburnt, pressing down gradually with your hand, and you turn it.
Then remove your hand quickly, and look at the place.
If you see that a piece of bone or quantity of coal has been burned from the skull, then remove your hand.
And if not, put your hand back with the iron itself, or with something else from it if it cools down; until the bones that I told you are seen.
Then take something from salt, and dissolve it in water, and immerse the cloth in it, and place it on the spot; and leave it for three days.
Then place a wet cloth on it (the wound) and let it remain until the burn is consumed by fire. Then treat it with a four-ingredient ointment, until it heals.
It is said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it discharges pus; therefore, it is better and more beneficial.
Some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone; and hold the cautery until something deep in the bone is burnt.
Then grind off the burnt part of the bone afterwards, then treat it.
Others say that when the cautery is reached to the end, it should be pressed onto the bone so that it falls off like a curette shape, or an instrument which women place in the vagina with a small amount of alphabet: and they think that vapors of the head escape from this place, and the wound should be kept open for a long time.
Then treat it until it solidifies.
To me, these two types of cautery seem not to be at all useful except in certain people according to the path of fear.
And let it be, for me it is better with his own health.
Indeed the head is weakened by the dissolution of its natural continuity, as we have witnessed in other limbs; and especially when the head of a sick person is naturally weak, the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use it: therefore work with it for safety.
Chapter on cauterizing the head in pain throughout the entire head.
Head (III).
When there is a chronic pain throughout the entire head and it lasts in the sick, using herbs, cooking, head shaving, oils, and plasters.
And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, as I said, and does not receive anything from those (others): then consider.
If the head of the sick person is strong by nature and not weak, and it finds intense cold: then cauterize with another cautery under it slightly.
Then cauterize it on all the horns of his head with a cautery, so that the skin is not penetrated, and the amount of bone exposed as I said is removed.
And cauterize it with one cautery on the occiput of his head, in the place called 'vas': and it is a place where the ventous (a type of abscess) is placed: and loosen your mouth (apply suction) there, and do not expose bone.
For the sick person experiences intense pain from that (the swelling), and different from the pain of all other cauterizations of the head.
And I say that this Cautery is to be used in its place: and it must be a cautery with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the occiput more subtly with a cautery with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
And this is its shape.
Chapter on the way of cauterization for hemicania, both with hot medicine and with iron.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occurs in part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is treated with cleansing medicines on the head, and the rest of the treatment is administered, as I said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve completely: then cauterization in that case is according to two methods: either cauterization with hot medicine burning, or with iron. The cautery with hot medicine burning is: that you take one tooth of the allium (onion) and grind it into a powder, and cut off the ends from both sides.
Then make an incision at the site of pain in time with a wide lancet, until there is a place under the skin where the tooth can be captured.
Then insert it into the same spot under the skin until it is hidden; then press upon it with a small piece of lint and bind it for fifteen hours, and then let it be dissolved, and remove the onion, and leave the wound open for two or three days: afterwards place a piece of butter-soaked cloth over it until a pus forms: then care for it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to perform this with certain burning medicines, which I have written about in the twelfth treatise on Middle Eastern Medicines.
Cauterization of it with iron is performed in this way.
The form of the Iron Cauterization is as follows:
It is called a Claw-shaped iron. The shape of its head resembles that of a nail, with a roughness on it and a small projection in the middle.
Then place it on the location and hold your hand steady; and you should slowly rotate the iron with speed, so that the amount to be burnt is of the thickness of the skin, as half its size.
And remove your hand so that the artery below is not burned and there is no bleeding.
Then soak the cloth in brine water, and place it over the location and leave it for three days; then place the cloth with butter: afterwards care for it with an ointment until it is healed. If you wish, cauterize this half of the head with the second part of the scalpel-shaped cautery.
And be careful not to make an incision on the artery in this half of the head, except when necessary.
Method of performing cauterization for old-age headache.
Head (chapter).
When you treat headache and what we have said in the previous treatment, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment does not help: and you see from the disease that what we said about cautery with medicine or cautery with fire is not sufficient for him, then it is necessary to heat the cauterizing iron until it turns white, after marking the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger or similar: and place your hand instead, and squeeze it tightly until you cut the artery, and reach the bone. However, it is necessary for you to be careful not to burn the jaw that moves during chewing, which is located on the side or nerve that moves it, so as to avoid a spasm.
And be careful of the caution and the cauterizing iron from the flow of blood from the artery that was cut.
Indeed, there is fear in the cutting of it, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing, and is not diligent, or experienced: and he first leaves the operation with it.
And I will come back with the reminder of the management of the flow of blood from the artery according to its own method, and in its place in this book.
If you see from the disease that this cautery is not sufficient for him, and you see a weak body bearing the cautery in the middle of the head as we have said, then treat the wound until it heals.
And if you want to administer the cautery as we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery with a cautery having two knives.
Indeed, cauterization is better for this and more helpful. On the method of cauterizing an ear pain.
In capite primum de modo cauterizandi in dolore Aurium. When pain in the ear occurs due to coldness and is treated with solutions, and the remainder of the treatment as we said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then cautery by fire; and that which is called the puncture, whose shape is this.
Then, the puncture with it after its burning around the entire ear as it is rotated; or around either side, if the pain is on both sides.
And extend the cautery from the root of the ear somewhat, after marking places with wax; and let the quantity of the cautery be ten punctures in each ear, and as such.
Then, care for the locations until they heal.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in Strangulation.
Chapter VII.
Strangulation that is treated with cauterization, is not other than those that occur from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of diseases. And also avoid cauterization of a species that occurs due to dryness and spasm of a nerve.
When treating this species of strangulation with hyssop, purges, gargarisms, and your treatment does not improve, then it is necessary to cauterize the sick person with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the second slightly below his earlobe, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the weak side.
Because softening does not occur, unless in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize yourself with a cautery along the edge of the upper extremity of the ear, slightly below the horn of the head; and another on the earlobe; whose length should be according to the length of the thumb.
And place your hand with the cautery until the thickness of half the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species from a knife, whose shape preceding is not too subtle, as you see; and it must be that the knife in it should be of little excess in thickness. Then take care of the location, with it until it is healed.
Section on the mode of cauterization in ancient apoplexy.
Chapter VIII.
When the apoplexy becomes ancient, and your care of it with what we said does not help, and the sick person does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries over all his skull's horns, and a cautery in the middle of the head, as we said, and a cautery on the back of the head, according to what preceded; and the mode of cauterization should be according to what preceded.
Also, it is cauterized with a cautery over the mouth of the stomach; and this is more final.
Then it is taken care of, with what preceded.
Section on the mode of cauterization in oblivion.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in a drink there are first large quantities of hysop, and cleansing pills for the brain.
Then shave completely the head of the sick one, and place on his head an ointment made from myrrh described in the book of ointments; place it on him several times. That is the method of cauterization; make it according to the same order as I have said there. If he is cured by that, it is good.
If not: then make three cauterizations in the back of his head, which shall descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye; place a thickness of a finger between each cauterization.
Then care for the cauterization, with what has gone before.
If you wish an addition, and the sick one can bear it: then make a cauterization in the middle.
What if you wish an addition: then cauterize him above two horns.
Then care for it until he is cured; let the cauterization be anointed according to the shape that has been mentioned.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in paralysis and softening.
Chapter X.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleaning of the head with hyson, and with what I have said.
Then scrape the head of the sick person: afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over its posterior part, and three times over the vertebrae of the neck.
If, however, you need more softening of the body for illness with those [things], and the sick person is weak and the illness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and the last one with a cautery until most of his skin burns off, and then remove your hand.
Then take care of him until he is well: and so cauterize with olive oil.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
Chapter XI.
A cauterization should not be performed on an epileptic, unless his epilepsy is due to phlegm. Therefore, it is necessary to clean the brain of his first with hot irons, and with the rest of the treatment as we said in division: when the patient is weak or endures well in taking medications.
If he is a child who does not endure medications, then gargarisma (a medicine) is administered, and cleansing chewing substances for the brain are given, before that for many days with good food.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of the head as it was before, and with another cautery on his occiput (the back of the head) and over all the horns of his head.
If the patient is strong and endures, then cauterize him with cauteries as I said in the presence of paralysis, and softening of the body on vertebrae (spinal bones) of the neck and back, and let the cautery be olive oil according to the method that was before. If the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery as follows:
Chapter on the method of cauterization in Melancholy.
Chapter 12.
When the cause of melancholy are corrupted humors and gross phlegm, then cauterize him with cauteries as we said in the presence of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of declivities to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moistened, then give him in drink what cleans his brain as before said in division: then shave the head of the patient, and make afterwards a decent tortellum (a small, round piece of cloth) made from linen, like a circle.
Then place it on the middle of the head: and the patient sitting squared should be held from all sides.
Then present the ointment. It is more suitable from old sheep's butter.
And heat it over fire with a measured warmth that the finger can bear when it is inserted into it.
Then evacuate it into the middle of its head in a circle, and let it go until it cools down.
Do this to the sick person once a week with the rest of his good regimen until he is cured.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making small punctures in it many times, provided that you keep your hand with the cautery; let it be smelling.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place on it a cloth soaked in sheep's butter or chicken fat.
Method of Cauterization when descending to the eye in water.
Chapter 13.
When you are informed of the beginning of water in the eye by the signs I mentioned in division, then begin and let the sick person drink with him, while washing his head.
And keep him away from all moistnesses, and make him sit in a bath, for some days in fasting.
Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize himself in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him on two temples with two cauteries, if there is no discharge of water from both eyes at once: or from one side, if there is no discharge of water from one eye: and cut with the cautery all veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in width as wide as the temples: and avoid bleeding.
If you see something from him, then cut him immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them off, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck, under two bones, with two cauteries at the end of their production.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in tears (anciently).
Chapter XIV.
When the tears of the eyes are chronic and continuous, being above veins and arteries that are manifestly outside the head, it is verified that this is from excesses of cold, phlegmatic humors: then cauterize with the same cautery as I have described in the discharge of water, cauterize in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck under two bones.
And if it requires addition, then cauterize him carefully on all sides of the eye, at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in nose stink.
Chapter XV.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and it does not improve with the medicine: then hurry, and give infirmocochia for three nights: then shave his head, and cauterize him with the same cautery anointed with oil.
Then cauterize it with a two-pronged cautery, over two eyebrows just under the hairline.
And keep away from the artery to avoid cutting it.
And this is the form of the claw-shaped cautery.
Section on the method of cauterization for softening an eyelid.
Chapter XVI.
When the eyelid becomes soft due to illness or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, using this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows with two cauteries in every part; and let them extend from the two temples; and let the length of all the cautery be according to the length of the eyebrows; and do not place your hand with the cautery at its end, but rather according to the quantity that is being heated for the third eyelash.
And this is the form of the cautery in accordance with this lunar method.
[Chapter title] On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn inward and poke out the eye. Chapter XVII.
The cautery is in one of two ways: either a cautery with fire, or a cautery with a burning medicine.
In the cautery with fire, order the patient to let go of his hairs beforehand if he is one who trims them, until they extend and are evened out. If the hairs poke him at their base: then hold his eyes with a plaster so that they do not move until they grow out.
When they grow out and are evened out, then place the head of the patient in your lap; afterwards mark his eyelids with wax using a sign shaped like a myrtle leaf; let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
Then place a moistened pot on cheesecloth or slippery elm bark over the eye.
Then heat the cautery, whose form is as follows:
Then cauterize over the shape that you have marked multiple times, until the surface of the skin is burned as if it were the shape of a myrtle leaf in its entirety.
The sign of the health of your work is: if you see the eyelid of the eye already contract and hairs rise at the spot of the eye.
Lift your hand then, and let it go for three days.
Then place a cow dung with butter upon it until the ulcer is healed.
Then care for it with an ointment until it is healed.
If any of the hairs return after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft: then apply cautery again to that place, as you did at first.
If however the hairs are below (the spot): then cauterize it until they rise to their own place; and let it be so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing with a burning medicine in the same case.
Chapter XVIII.
It is to be commanded that the sick person let go of their hairs until they grow out and become equal (to each other).
Make it from cloth into the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and uncooked lime each a pound ounce or so, then grind them together with good grinding, and make it quickly so that it does not cool.
Then take the paste from what you made onto the cloth that you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put it on the eyelid of one or both eyes.
And place under the eye cow dung soaked in egg white; let the head of the sick person be on your lap.
Place your index finger on the medicine and press it a little.
And you will move it as often as the sick person feels the bite of the medicine, because its bite is like fire.
While it continues to feel that bite which it has found, then let the medicine go and move it with your finger.
When therefore the ulceration ceases, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid rising as if it is raised by contraction with fire or incision, that is good: and if not, then apply medicine on the place where the medicine does not adhere or blacken, and repeat the treatment until your operation is equalized and the eye contracts.
Then place butter on top of it (the burned area), until the skin of the burn is removed.
Then treat it with diaphinicon ointment or another, until it heals.
And it is necessary for you during the operation that you keep the last precaution, lest anything from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes soft after days and something fights from hairs in the eye, then apply medicine on that place which becomes soft from the eyelid, as you did at first.
Then treat it, until it heals.
And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
And know that human eyes vary in size and quantity.
Therefore according to this, your consideration should be: and do not hide the path of rightness which has concern for this art.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in the lacrimal fistula.
Chapter XIX.
When you treat the fistula, if your treatment does not benefit as we said in the classification of diseases, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Order the sick person to place his head on your lap and hold his head with a servant between his hands so that it is not moved or shaken with his head.
Then put warm butter (infused butter) in the white of the eye or in the slime of the egg on his eye: then apply cautery iron whose shape is this:
The cavity should be shaped like the form of a goose-quill pen's handle from one end, as is used for cautery; and if you wish it to penetrate to the other end, and if you wish it to extend upward in this manner.
However, this cavity is better suited for your task.
Then place upon it the cautery, which has been heated very well.
And hold your hand slightly on it near the cautery, from the eye to the nose part, so that your hand does not wander or shake weakly; and place the cautery upon the fat of the eye and destroy it.
If you therefore reach at the beginning of your cautery to the bone, it will be good.
And if not: then place the cautery again once, or twice, as you need it; and leave it for three days.
Then place the wound with butter, and care for it with an ointment of turpentine, until it heals. If more than forty days pass and it does not heal: then place on it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and shave it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for fistulas, which some of the first said.
Focus on the location of the fistula, and puncture it; then place a fine cannula into the opening, that is, a fine needle, whose form this is.
Pour into it an amount of a drachma of melted lead, and hold your hand with the cannula well grasped, and let it not shake weakly in any way, so that the melted lead does not run or reach the eye.
And it is necessary that you place on the eye of the sick a cloth soaked in egg white, or in water.
For lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful healing process.
If the fistula heals along with what has been said from the cautery, and with treatment, it is good.
And if it does not heal, then it is necessary to open the nostril opening and guide the fistula to the course of the nose, according to where it will return to its own place.
On the method of cauterizing in fissures of the lips.
Chapter 20.
Many splits occur in the Lip, which are called Pilus, and particularly in the lips of children.
When therefore you treat these splits, as we have said in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then with a small cautery tool, shape it according to this form.
And let its concavity be according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Then take care of it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter on Cauterizing a Mouth Fistula.
Chapter XXI.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and bursts: afterwards it becomes old, and the pus runs, and a fistula forms: then treat it, and treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery according to its size, so that it can catch in the fistula.
Then insert the heated cautery into the hole of the fistula and hold your hand until the iron heated reaches its depth and end: do this once or twice.
Then take care of it after that, as we have said in the treatment, until it is cured.
If therefore the pus separates and heals, it will be good.
And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place, and remove the rotten bone according to where it comes out at its head.
Chapter on Cauterizing the Softened Gums and Teeth.
Chapter XXII.
When the gums become soft due to moisture, and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine, but it does not help: then put the head of the sick one on your lap.
Then place the cautery tool, whose shape will come later, on the tooth and insert the hot cauterium quickly into it. Hold your hand for a short time until the weak feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And remove (the cautery tool) your hand; then repeat the cauterization several times as desired.
Then let the weak one fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out.
The tooth, when moved, becomes firm; the gums softened are tightened and the moisture corrupted is dried.
Chapter XXIII.
When the pain of a tooth is due to coldness or there is coldness itself, or worms, and healing with medicines does not help; then cauterization is done in two ways: either with butter-cauterization or with fire-cauterization.
Buttered cauterization is when you take cow butter and boil it in an iron pot or a copper one.
Then take a cloth, and fold it over the end of the wound.
Then immerse it in melted butter and apply it quickly to the painful tooth, hold it until it cools, then repeat this process several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if desired, immerse wool or cloth in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth. Place hot iron upon it until the heat reaches the depth of the hollow of the tooth.
Cauterization with fire is to be done with an iron or brass pipe (cannula). There should be something bulky in the body so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the weak bone.
Then, with cauterization by fire, bring the shape as it comes; place it on that tooth and hold your hand until the cauterization cools.
Repeat this several times because pain is removed either on the same day or on another day.
In the application of cauterization, it is necessary that the weak bone fills with good butter and holds it for an hour; then spit it out.
This is the form of the cauterization.
Cauterize with whatever end you wish, according to what is possible; this is the form of the cannula.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for abscesses.
Chapter XXIV (24).
When the abscesses are due to phlegm and cold moistness, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you desire a rapid digestion of them; then use cauterization with a concave heated iron whose shape is as follows:
Having two open ends, so that smoke may exit at the cautery from one of them: and place it (the cautery) on top of the ulcer once, and again if needed, until it reaches the depth of the ulcer.
If the ulcer is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the ulcer.
Then let it be for three days, and place a wet cloth soaked in butter on top of it until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment until the form of the canal is healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in laryngitis and constriction of coughing.
Chapter 25.
When moisture prevails over the larynx of the lung, and especially when it is accompanied by cold, then it is necessary that a sick person is evacuated first with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it (the larynx) in the neck at the root of the throat in a depressed place: and be careful not to reach the throat with the cautery, nor into the skin, unless something of that kind is necessary.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck near the last vertebra of that vertebra's end: and let the cautery be similar to the one used before.
Then care for it with what was used before until it is healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in diseases of the lung and cough.
Chapter 26.
When cough and disease of the lung are from cold moisture, and the sick person does not have fever, phthisis, or chronic disease: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the clavicle in depressed, gentle, open places.
And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two breasts: and let the cautery be in the shape of a cannula as previously described.
And if your cauterization is to be by piercing with a cautery called Punctum, whose shape was previously described in the treatment of ear pain; and there should be punctures spaced about thirty apart or so.
Then care for it with what was previously mentioned until it heals. And now let the cautery have three branches, in this shape.
Because the cauterization is to be applied when you use a single cautery in place of three.
Title: Method of Cauterizing in Titillico, for Dislocation of the Arm.
Chapter XXVII.
When the arm is dislocated due to aid assistance and does not heal within an hour of its return from dislocation, until it becomes accustomed to this act; then dislocate it slightly, as we have already testified this, at that time, it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first.
Then the patient lies down on his back or on his healthy side.
Then peel off the skin that is inside Titillico towards the upper part with your left hand's fingers; and if the dislocation occurs towards the inside.
Then take a cautery with two forks. Its shape is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates it on the other side, and the figure of the cauterization comes with four cauteries.
And when the cauterization is made with a cautery having three prongs, then the figure of the cauterization is that of six cauteries: and there are prongs according to the subtlety of the skin tested.
And this is the form of a cautery having three prongs.
And sometimes one is added to this method, so there are eight cauteries.
Then place upon the cautery stretched rods with salt.
Then make the sick person quiet so that a limb is not moved at any time until it recovers.
And if a dislocation is towards the upper part, and it rarely happens, then cauterize the same on the shoulder with a curved cautery, or with many cauteries poking.
For union strengthens, and moisture is removed; and the sick person recovers.
[Paragraph] On the method of cauterizing the stomach.
Chapter XXVIII.
When coldness and many humidities occur in the stomach until it separates itself from its composition and produces many catarrhs on it, and continues with unproductive methods of treatment: then the sick person must lie down on his back, and extend his legs, and hands.
Then cauterize with three cauteries, with a cautery under the size of one finger on the chest with a curved cautery, and two cauteries below from both sides of one cautery, until the figure of the cauteries comes to a triangle.
And stretch between them so they do not join together when pus forms. And the depth of the cautery shall be the size of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And the figure of the cauteries shall be in this shape without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape: and let the cautery that is made for this cauterization be one in the shape of a circle according to this shape.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking it for those who are afraid of the cautery, and it is to be marked on the stomach with signs according to the quantity that you wish with encaustic wax; then cauterize it with the same cautery as the puncture; then care for it with the cure that preceded until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing the epigastric vein (Epigastric artery).
Chapter XXIX.
When pain occurs in the liver due to coldness and dampness, or from thick wind that does not leave by its natural discharge, and the patient is treated with what was said but it does not improve in him; then the sick person must lie on his back on his neck, and mark with encaustic wax three cauteries according to this shape, and the same quantity below in the epigastric area, where the arm reaches; and let there be a space between each cautery according to the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be according to the length of the straight body, and do not press your hand with the cautery too much.
And let the quantity to be burned from the thickness of the skin be not added to half of it; and let the sick person stand on his feet.
If he is not standing, then let him be lying down, who has already extended his legs and lifted his arms. This is the shape of the cautery.
And you yourself can cauterize these cauteries with a surgical cautery when subtlety and wisdom are present in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too far in the cauterization, and the thickness of the skin is burned, for the body is burned entirely, and it reaches to the intestines; since the skin there is delicate, know this.
Method for Cauterizing Liver Abscesses.
De modo cauterizandi apostemata super hepatis.
When there is an eruption (abscess), and you wish to know if it is in the liver's flesh or its covering: then if it is in the liver's flesh, a weak pain and heaviness without sharpness occurs: and if it is in the liver's covering, with pain there is intense sharpness: and you see that the treatment of it has tired the doctors.
Therefore, let the sick one lean on his neck (shoulder).
Then make a figure of the abscess's place with hot iron (encaustrum): then heat the cautery that is similar to a rod (cauterium).
And this is its shape.
And cauterize it with one cautery until the entire skin is burned and it reaches the pus, until all the pus comes out: then treat it with cure of abscesses, until it is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this cautery method unless one's dedication extends to the art of medicine, and whose hands are afflicted by these diseases at times through experience: then let him dare on such an operation.
But it is better for him to be dismissed by me.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in pleurisy.
Chapter XXXI (31).
The ancients said that the cautery with the roots of Aristolochia (a plant) should be applied to a cold pleurisy according to this method.
And it is to receive from the dry roots of Aristolochia (plant) a longer root, which can be found there, and let it be as thick as a finger.
Then immerse it in oil: and ignite it.
Then cauterize it with one cautery at the point between the joining of the clavicle (furcula) and neck, and with two small cauteries under the chin a little below the jawbone.
And with two cauteries also in that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly towards the back; and with one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another on top of the stomach.
And with three cauteries from the back: one in that which is between the two floating ribs; and with two cauteries from both sides of the chest, below one that is between the two floating ribs.
And it is not necessary to press your hand with the cautery, rather it should be on the skin that is noticeably smelling. And some of the ancients have said that there are people who use a cautery similar to an iron rod and heat it up, then push it inside where the ribs are, until they reach the apostema with it, so that pus comes out; as we said in the treatment for Epatis abscess.
But in this perforation with the cautery there is fear that either the weak person dies immediately, or a fistula occurs at the site, which is not healed.
ยง On the method of cauterizing the Spleen Head, Chapter XXXII.
When you are treating the sickness of the spleen, as we said in the treatment of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then cautery on it is to be used according to three methods, which are all correct.
One of them is that you make three or four cauteries in a row along the length of the spleen in the form of the cauteries of the liver (which was described earlier).
And the thickness between each cautery should be the size of a finger or more or less.
And the method of cauterization should be equal to that which was said in the cauterization of the liver.
And do not press your hand with the cautery; and the sick person should lie on his back.
Another method for cauterization is: hold two rods of fire, which we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the humerus; and peel off the skin that is directly above the spleen, where the invalid's elbow arrives; and let your elevation of the skin be according to the width of the body, so that the rods fall along the length of the body.
Then introduce two rods of fire very deeply, until they penetrate the skin from the other side; then remove the cauterization; thus there will be four cauterizations. And if you wish to cauterize with a cauterization having three rods.
Then care for the cauterization after you have released it to emit pus for many days; for it is more effective than what has come before in treatment.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Hydropsy.
Chapter XXXIII.
A cauterization does not fall in Hydropsy, unless it is properly applied.
When you treat Hydropsy with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division, and the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauterizations around the navel, and one over the stomach, and another over the liver, and another over the spleen, and two behind the back between the loins, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach; and let the quantity of the depth of the cauterization be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open cauterization, so that it emits pus for a long time.
And do not evacuate the invalid from treatment after the cauterization with it; for it is necessary that two intentions are applied to him; and healing will hasten towards him with the help of God.
The form of the cauterization with which the abdomen is cauterized should be clavilis; according to its previous form; and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive oil, according to its previous form.
On the manner of cauterizing Feet and Legs. De modo cauterizandi Pedes, crura et membra inferioria.
When they are punctured in Hydropico and filled with citrus water: it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the Foot in the nocrati, which is between auricularem and anularem: and lift your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then lift your hand: and do not return it at all.
The citrus water will run out, and let the cautery be in this shape.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be with the tip of a scalpel-like cautery: and let the cautery be along the length of the leg, one below the knee, and another lower than that, about half the length of the leg: and over the whole hip, two cauteries: and leave the open cautery without long treatment: so that some water runs out: then treat it with what I have said.
On the method of cauterizing in the solution of the Belly. Chapter 35.
When the solution of the belly is from cold and moisture, until it weakens the powers retained and digestive, which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is treated with methods of treatment, and it does not heal: and you see a person suffering, who can tolerate an excessive cautery due to strong powers, then cauterize it with a large cautery on its own stomach, as was done in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle claw cautery: and with a large cautery over alcatin above the alhossos, or with two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moisture, and a person suffering from it, then cauterize it with a cautery on the backbone, and a cautery over the entire pelvis: and perhaps you may add two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach.
The progressing treatment whose help is not in error.
On the method of cauterizing Hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids or one in the anus, and they are made of thick, cold, or corrupt fluids, and they are treated as previously mentioned, then the cure is not effective: then cauterize three cauteries on the lower part of the loin slightly triangular under the almeidate, and a cautery beneath the navel about two fingers.
If you think that the person's stomach is chilled and food is not digested, and you observe his face turning pale, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, as previously mentioned: also cauterize on Epar (possibly the liver), and another on the Spleen of the same person, with a cautery claw: leave the open cautery for some time: then care for him until he is healed.
Chapter on the manner of cauterizing Althelul after their removal.
Chapter 37.
When you remove althelul (a type of tumor or swelling), then heat the cautery which resembles a rod.
Then insert the heated cautery into the removed althelul: and with your last hand, bring it to the opening of the vein from which blood flows; do this once or twice. If therefore there are many althelul (tumors), then cauterize each one with a cautery as previously mentioned.
Then care for them, with the treatment suggested by their ointments, until they heal.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on his alcatin (possibly the abdomen), it is more effective for his benefit.
Chapter on the manner of cauterizing a Fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When the sick person does not obey the incision and surgery as we have described in its place, and is frightened by it, perhaps he will heal with a cautery.
If a fistula occurs and it becomes hardened, pus runs out of it, and its moist parts are corrupted.
Therefore, as is proper, you should test it with a thin probe.
Then recognize the depth of its size with a probe.
Then heat up a cautery similar to a rod.
Then insert yourself, heated (cautery), into the fistula and observe how deep you have gone with a claw. And repeatedly apply the cautery to it until all corrupted bodies are burned up, either once, or twice, or three times, according to the necessity of your case.
And be careful not to burn the nerve or a major vein if it is there; or if the fistula leads to the bladder or the intestine, then you must avoid these places altogether.
And do not perform this unless when the fistula is in a fleshy place; and be aware that it does not penetrate.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
If, however, the place is covered and matter is cut away from it, and remains for a long time; then you will know that it is healed completely.
And if no matter is cut away from it, then you will know that it is penetrating, or that there is a rotten bone inside of it, or something similar; whose memory will come back to its place.
\* Method for cauterizing the Kidney.\*
Chapter XXXIX.\*
When there is pain in the kidneys due to cold or excessive wind, and it weakens the body of a sick person as a result, then you should cauterize it on top of the flanks over both kidneys with a cautery over the entire kidney with a cautery similar to a claw, whose memory has been mentioned earlier.
And perhaps we cauterize it (the part) in the second instance in almeidatum (almond).
Because three lined ones are coming.
Therefore, they will be more useful in healing.
On the method of cauterizing a bladder.
Chapter XL. When weakness and softening of the bladder occur due to cold and humidity, until the weak person is unable to retain urine, then cauterize it in the lower part of the scrotum above the bladder, where the hairs of the beard begin, with a cautery on the right side of the scrotum and another one on its left. The length of this cauterization should be equal to the size of the knuckle of the little finger. Cauterize it with a lower back cautery or with two cauteries if necessary; the size of the second cautery should follow the first one.
Method of cauterizing the Womb. De modo cauterizandi Matricem.
When coldness and moistures occur in the Matrix (Womb), and it is prevented from becoming pregnant by this, and its menstrua are corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs near their arrival, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and a cautery on top of a lump below the back, or with two cauteries: and let the cautery be claw-shaped.
In the manner of cauterizing Anus in dislocation.
Chapter XLII.
When the humors of the mucosa flow towards the anus and cause its expulsion from its place; and the sign of this is that the leg is extended over the other, when they are compared together: and a location of dislocation is found empty therein.
Therefore, it is necessary to apply a weakened cautery over the anus of itself with a similar circular cauterion: after you mark the location around the anus with encaustum, as is revolved: and so that the anus falls into the middle of the circle.
And let the cautery be of such a shape as that which preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
If this cautery is not present for you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large oil-soaked cauterion: and let the depth be made according to the thickness of the skin in its entirety.
Then take care of it until it heals.
Chapter on the manner of cauterizing in sciatica. Chapter XLIII.
When pain occurs in the ankle bone and the cause is coldness and moisture, and the patient is ill with it as we said in division, and the treatment does not help, and it deteriorates: then it is necessary that you release the patient from thick humors with fetid pills or with artificial pills, or similar ones.
Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization is according to two methods: either cauterization with medicines that come forth, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with fire is according to many modes.
One of them is that you cauterize on the ankle bone itself with three triangular cauteries in this shape.
And make a good or bad depth for them.
And let the space that is between every cautery be of the size of a finger's thickness; and let the cautery be olive-oil dipped.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is made in the middle on top of the ankle bone itself.
Why are there four cauteries?
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle whose shape preceded in the cauterization of the dislocated ankle, one should be such that the entire ankle is contained within the circle.
Burn the thickness of the skin altogether.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica when the pain is attached to the ankle itself and does not extend to the hip and leg.
But if it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, in the place where the patient indicates, in which there is pain, and your cautery four fingers deep into the woody part: let the cautery be a knife-shaped one. And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the sick person indicates that the pain extends up to the toes of the foot, then cauterize it there where he indicates with a cautery, three, or four, or more, if necessary.
And if he indicates that the pain is turned towards the shin, then cauterize it there with a single surgical knife-cautery.
And be careful with all your cauterizations that you do not burn the nerve or the main artery by doing so, nor attract bad harm to the sick person through this, or cause a contraction.
I myself have already seen one and another of those who cauterized above the heel, and burned in the cauterization, and the leg became swollen until the swelling reached the foot, and it was perforated completely, and the entire foot was destroyed: then there followed a rupture of the stomach, and death afterwards.
If the pain is in two parts at the same time, then cauterize each one according to this method.
And some wise men have said in cauterizing the anus, whose cautery method this is.
Make a similar instrument of iron, whose diameter is the half of a palm: and place it at its opening according to its size, or less slightly: and within this instrument there should be a third instrument.
And let the space be which is between all the instruments according to the size of a knuckle: and let the instruments be open from two parts: and let their height be like a knuckle, or two knuckles: and make handles for them from iron properly fitted in the instruments.
And this is its form.
Then it is heated in the fire until it glows and emits sparks: then it should be placed on the pillow of the sick person's anus, lying on the healthy side.
Cauterize him with three round cauteries at once.
Then let him rest for three days.
Afterwards, pack it with butter and leave the open wound for many days.
Then treat him with an ointment until he is healed.
Says Albucasis to his sons, we have little experience with this kind of cautery due to its frightening appearance; and therefore, few await it.
Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauterizations for him who endures it, and it finds its place in his case.
The cautery with forceful medicines is such that you should make two bands containing a perforated armillary sphere which descends from the hinge of his door made of copper or iron, the length being equal to the wall; and in their height there should be two nodes, or as if they were themselves.
And let there be the space between the two of this size equal to the thickness of a finger, and be open below and above; and let it enclose each other according to this shape.
Then place it on an amphora of oil, with the sick person lying weakly on the sound side.
And press your hand hard on the amphora of oil.
Then pour water between two circles which has been heated slightly with fire and hold it for the length of an hour; let the sick person bear its biting and burning, since he feels the biting like fire, until the biting stops.
Then clean your hand with an instrument and wash the oil from the amphora with sweet water; then let it rest for three days.
And place butter over it until the blackness of burning is removed; and let it run for some days, and pus will flow from it.
The remedy is at the end.
Then, treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain spreads to the hip or leg, make a cupping glass with water, as you did with the ankle, equally.
And this is the method of hot water: I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Take an equal portion of both alkali and unburnt lime; grind each one, and put them in a new pot whose lower part is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that should enter the radius; and put another pot made of clay under it; throw over the alkali and lime from sweet water, so that they are submerged by a finger's depth; afterwards, compress them with your hand; then leave the pot, until the acid water descends to the lower part of the clay pot.
Then mix that water with another lime and throw it over it; boil until it is renewed.
For it will then be very strong for the sharpness required in many medical operations, and in cauterizing other parts of the body.
Because it performs the operation of fire itself.
And among the medicines for cauterizing ankles are also such as tesisie, honey from the cardamom seed, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed.
And Galenus himself has related a cure by an ancient man for the pain in the ankle and sciatic vein, which he highly praised.
And he said that it did not require any other treatment and that it was cured with a single application, until he related that perhaps the man himself entered the bath and came out already healed. And it is to be taken from fresh seitaragus: and if no green one is found, take a dry one, recent: and grind much with some fat, and place on the sore, or leg, or in the hip: and tie it, and leave for the quantity of three hours, or until the patient feels sufficient heat.
Then insert it into a bath.
When his body becomes warm, immerse him in the sun.
For the pain departs, and he is healed.
And know that no one should use cautery with these medications unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that goat's droppings, when they are cauterized on the sciatic vein, bring about a second kind of cautery.
Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it over the deep place that is between the little toe and the heel, and closer to the heel.
Then take dry goat's droppings, and heat it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished.
Then do it again.
Do not stop doing it until sensation reaches the sore and the pain ceases.
This method of cautery is called "Vaccinum" cautery.
Chapter on the Cauterization of Back Pain.
Chapter XLIV.
When there is back pain due to various causes, such as an accident, blow, excessive evacuation, and similar conditions, caused by the infusion of cold and moist matter: cauterization does not apply except in this one case, which is made from the infusion of cold and moist matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the sick one, with fetid pills and similar ones, three lines should be made on the back where there is pain, each line second to the width of a nail, after signs have been marked with encaustic along every line with five cauteries, or more according to the amount that comes from the sick one's tolerance, and cauterization should be done with cauteriopuncture.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries along with a medial nail cautery, according to this form.
Section on the method of cauterization for a hump-like growth.
Chapter 45.
This affliction often occurs in young children.
And the sign of its onset in children is that it occurs on him during constriction at the breath-taking moment during elevation, and you find in the last vertebrae of the back and their nodes which have already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When you see that and wish to do it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in this shape.
And the cautery should encompass all parts of the vertebrae equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebrae with a pointed cautery, take two lines or three; and let the points be close to each other.
Then care for the place until it is healed as we said.
And beware not to administer cautery in a hump-like growth that occurs in a muscle spasm.
Section on the method of cauterization for gout and joint pain. Chapter 46.
When joint pains are caused by cold humors that flow to any part of the body, then when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary among physicians to call it gout properly.
When therefore gout is treated due to a cold cause and pains do not subside, then cautery removes them.
And it is to cauterize him after evacuation at the joints of the feet, with many cauteries; and let the cautery be called Oliuare.
This is its form.
And if it is necessary to prick on the sole of the foot, then do so with a cautery point.
If the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it on all knees with three or four cauteries from every side, with this same cautery called Clavili. If you need more of this cautery, then cauterize it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be about as thick as the skin.
If the pains ascend to the knees and back: then administer what was said regarding cautery in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then prick at the joints of the fingers, as two lines revolve.
If a pain remains in the fingers, then prick them, on every knuckle and on the back of the hand.
If pains ascend after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both from every side.
And do not evacuate a weak person due to good care or intake of medicine.
For if the regimen becomes good and phlegm evacuated, it will be healed with the help of God using this cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in ruptures.
Chapter LXVII.
If a rupture occurs in the groins and the intestine or bladder descends towards the testicle, which is beginning, then it is necessary that you order a weak person to abstain from food on his day.
And it should be used from the softening agents, so that the feces may descend from his own belly.
Then let him sit on your hands upon his back: and command him to hold his breath, until it comes out, or appears pus, or intestines.
Then bring him back with your fingers, and mark with pitch under the incision on his neck, with the sign whose end is similar to half of a circle above the body.
Then heat the cautery with this shape until it becomes white, and throw sparks.
Then return the intestine, or pus into its cavity.
Then let the servant place his hand on the place so that the intestine does not come out: and you have already opened between the legs of the sick man, and put a reed under him, and another servant is on his legs, and another one on his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on top of the mark, with your hand holding the cautery straight.
Hold him until you follow the bone with it: or take another turn with it if you are not able to reach the bone with it in the first place.
And be careful to observe the exit of the intestine during your cauterization hour, lest you burn him and it comes upon him either death or great harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is of no avail.
It is necessary that the cautery for children should be subtle, according to their measure.
Then take care with the remaining ointments until he is healed.
Let the sick man lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
It is necessary that you place his nourishment for the duration of his treatment, which softens his stomach, so that the intestine does not come out in defecation or vomiting.
Then, when he wishes to operate forty days later, then administer a properly made ligature and hold it for another forty days.
For when using this regimen, then it is cured with complete healing.
When ruptures happen in the remaining abdomen and are beginning, and it desires not to add them, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautionery according to its size: and let what is being cauterized be as the third of its.
Then cure it itself, with what I said: and let not more be added.
And indeed some of the first have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautionery in this manner.
After it is signed with an enkaustrum, and a line is placed which is across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery chisel.
But the first cautionery is easier and better. Chapter on the method of cauterizing for pain due to rupture or blow.
Chapter XLVIII.
When pain occurs in certain members due to a blow or injury; and it lasts for a long time, and it does not help with medication; then it is necessary to be cauterized with the cautionery of the puncture point.
And let the cautionery be of all members according to its size, and its smallness, and its weakness, and its power, and the location of torsion, and pain from it.
If it is cured with the first cautionery, it is good.
If not: then repeat the cautery upon it.
Because by the custom of such pains it is to exchange one member for another which is nearer to it.
Therefore you must pursue them with the cautery until the sick one is healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Leprosy.
Chapter XLIX.
Leprosy is sometimes benefited by cautery, with great benefit.
And particularly the type of leprosy caused by corruption of phlegm and melancholy: when considering to burn it.
If the leprosy is beginning and you have treated it as described in the division and it does not improve nor stabilize: and if you fear that corruption will affect the entire constitution of the patient: then burn him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, known as the fontanelle; second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; two above the two horns (of the forehead); and one behind on the nuchal bone.
And finally, with your hand (holding the cautery), press it gently onto the bone until it makes a small impression on the cheekbone and the cortex is dislocated: to alleviate the expiration of thick vapors from it; and burn also the spleen with the cautery, according to what has preceded.
If the leprosy is already widespread over the patient and it is apparent: then you must burn with these cauteries, which we have mentioned in the head; and one cautery on the tip of the nose; two cauteries on the cheeks; two cauteries on the spine of the neck; six on the spine of the back; one large one on the heel at the achilles tendon and one on the sacrum; two on the ankles: namely one on each ankle; two on the elbows, two on the wrists, two on the forearms, and two on the soft parts of the chest; and burn it over every joint, from the joints of the fingers of his hands to those of his feet; and burn it over every heel of his feet, and the soles of his hands.
Beware of burning the nerves that are above the last toe of the heel. And sometimes [the cautery] is burned upon the neck of the chin, and another [upon] the stomach, and another [upon] the epigastric region.
And know that, the more you increase the cautery, it is more helpful, and more contributing.
And know that, the sick [person] does not find pain in cautery, as the healthy ones do: therefore, because his body is already numb.
It is necessary that the cauteries be of various sizes and shapes according to the limbs and joints: according to which they precede in types of tools.
Book L.
When a member [body part] is numbed and treated with medications, oils, plasters, but does not heal, then cauterize the numbed member with cauteries, according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery go somewhat deep into the thickness of the skin.
Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
Sometimes a cauterization is done for something related to numbness that happens in the hand and foot, in the joints of the back near the nerve exits that move that member; and the numbness is removed.
But do not presume to do it, unless he who does it is wise in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves moving the body.
Chapter on Cauterization in Albucasis.
Chapter LXI. (61st chapter)
When Albaras is putrefied [decayed] and does not gain anything from medicine; then cauterize on it with a deep cautery somewhat, according to the thickness of the skin until the white part is removed and its color is changed.
Then treat it with a mixture of grain of wheat and lentils with rose oil, leaves of arnoglossa, blood of a pigeon and frog; each should be equal part: mix all these together, soak them on cloth, and apply to the place until it heals.
Chapter on Cauterization for Cancer.
Chapter LXII (62nd chapter)
When cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it; then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it, as it revolves.
The wise ones said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
I do not see it so; because I fear that it may burn [cause blisters]; and I have already seen this many times. It is more correct to cauterize around it with a circle, as we have said; or with many cauteries. On the method of cauterizing in Adubelati.
Chapter LIII.
When someone has Adubelati and it is delayed in maturation, either due to excess causing it, or due to the weakness of old age, when it is decrepitus pauci sanguinis, or due to time and the desire to hasten in the maturation of Adubelati, then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by puncturing.
Then let it go.
For itself it will hasten with the maturation.
If you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then heat the cautery, of which this is its shape:
Place it in the middle of the Adubelati, until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery that follows be weak, so that the course of the purgatives may be alleviated.
Then care for it until it heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing a corroding disease. Chapter LIV.
A corrosive is not anything but a corruption that walks in a member and consumes it, like fire consumes dry wood.
If you see a corrosion in a place where a cautery with fire can be applied, then apply the cautery with much fire, small and large clamps according to what is suitable for the location where the corrosion is present.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you have eradicated the entire corruption and nothing remains beneath it. Then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized areas powdered sulfur with oil until all scabs and corruption have been eradicated.
Then care for it with ointments that generate flesh.
If you see that after three days flesh is born in a healthy way without corruption, it is good.
And if not: then reapply the cautery on what remains of the corrupted locations.
A corrosion is at times treated with an acidic medicine.
It arises in the location of the cautery.
However, a cautery with fire is more rapid in its assistance; and I myself have already said that the cauterization of it with acidic medicine is in the division; take it therefore there when you need it.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing claws and warts. Chapter LV.
This illness frequently occurs in the lower parts of feet; it is a thick, filtered affliction that harms the foot. The cautery is indeed in them according to two modes: the cautery with fire, and the cautery with hot water.
As for the one with fire, it should be made similar to a concave cautery like that of a vulture's feather. It shall be made of iron, according to its size so that it contains a nail from all sides. It should be delicate at the edges.
Then place the hot one on the nail. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the nail, until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail, and let it be for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply ointment made with wild honey and salt crushed together on it, and let the ointment remain upon it at night. It will be uprooted from its roots.
Then take care of the place with a healing ointment for it to heal.
If they have not been converted and keep occurring on the surface of the body, particularly in hands and feet, then administer cautery with hot water. It is to be noted that you should take a cannula made of copper, iron, or from a vulture's feather, and place it on the nail or althea.
Then pour a little hot water into the cannula. Hold your hand and turn it with some pressure, so that the edge of the cannula is pressed on the root of the nail, and let the hot water find its way to the depth, to the root of the nail. The weak should wait for a short while under the scalding effect of the hot water.
Then let it be, as the nail will be uprooted along with its roots.
Treat them one by one, until you have dealt with all of them on the body.
Then care for them after they have been excised, with that which generates flesh from ointments.
On the Method of Cauterization in a Tremor (seizure).
Chapter LVI.
When trembling occurs in a nerve due to cold or quartan fever or something else: then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the dorsal vertebrae, and between every vertebra with a cautery, and in its chest with a cautery, and over its stomach with a cautery.
The trembling quiets with the cautery of oil, and hastens the health of the cold sickness. Chapter on the method of cauterization by Albucasis.
Chapter LVII.
At times, Albucasis expels foul things from the body, that is, pustules, which are made from corrupt matter.
Therefore, it is necessary first, when they appear, that they be cauterized on top of every pustule with a fine cautery and myrtle wood, the end of which is set alight with fire.
Or with the root of long arista root.
Or with a convex cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized, at the beginning of their expulsion following this method: and they do not increase: and the superfluous part is broken off making them, and it heals from them.
Nevertheless, it should be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in the flow of blood from an artery in a wound.
Chapter LVIII. Often there is a flow of blood from an artery which has been cut near a wound, which happens externally, or at the incision of apostemata, or cauterization of a limb, and similar things: and it is difficult to separate it.
When this happens to someone, then you should promptly go with your hand to the opening of the artery and place your index finger over it: and press on it hard, until the blood is held under your finger, and nothing comes out of it. Then place in fire small oil-burning cauteries many in number; and blow over them until they become extremely hot.
Then take one (of the hot cauteries), either small or large, according to the wound and the location where the artery is severed, and place the cautery upon the vein; then remove your finger quickly: hold the cautery until the blood is cut off.
If the blood is forced out along with your finger from the opening of the artery, and you extinguish the cautery, then take another one quickly, from those that are prepared in the fire. Therefore do not stop doing it with one after the other until the blood is cut off.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, and let no other harm come upon the patient. And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to cut it (the artery); especially because the artery is large, unless with one of the four methods.
Or with a cautery, as we have said.
Or with extraction, when it is not extracted (the blood). For when it is pulled out (the blood), the extremities contract and the blood is cut off.
For when it is pulled out (the blood), the extremities contract and the blood is cut off. Or it can be tied with a strong thread.
Or they may be placed upon it (the wound) medicines of which it is the property to cut off blood, and tightened with a bandage suitable for constriction.
Whoever administers the amputation with a ligature and tightening with a bandage or by placing on it things that burn (or similar), does not benefit him truly, except rarely.
If that happens to someone and the doctor is not present or there is no medicine: then begin with the positioning of the index finger over the opening of the vein, as we have said, and tighten it very much until the blood is compressed by the upper part of the wound, and on the artery.
Do not remove the finger, apply cold water strongly on it, always until the blood freezes and swells, then cut it off. Meanwhile, consider what it needs from cautery or medicine.
Part of the First Part Ends.
Book of Surgery by Albucasis, Part II. Chapter on incision, perforation, and phlebotomy in wounds and similar cases.
We have already said in the first chapter that every sickness in which it is appropriate to burn with fire using cautery and medicine, as well as its occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries. And there I placed chapters from the neck down to the feet.
I will proceed in this chapter in the same way, to relieve the one who is seeking the sought-after thing. And before I begin that, you sons should know what is in this chapter from the fear of what was in the first chapter about cautery.
And therefore, it is necessary that there be greater caution because in the operation that is in this chapter, evacuation often occurs with blood, which holds life when the vein is opened, or an incision over a boil, or an opening of discharge, or treatment of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or an incision on a stone, and similar things: from all of which trembling, fear, and death occurs in many.
And I warn you that the danger should not fall on you, for sometimes it falls on people like you with the weaknesses of this art.
For there are those who get angry with their sickness and death is easy for him because of his fierce nature, which he finds due to the weakness of his sickness and the length of his evil-doing.
And when the sickness is from fear, it signifies death.
And he who gives his trumpet to thee and tells thee with it that he is well, hoping for health, and his sickness is fatal. Therefore, you should not agree to him who comes to you whose manner is such.
Let your caution be more violent than your greed and your avarice.
And do not presume upon anything from it unless after a certain knowledge, which verifies at your place the praiseworthy outcome of its arrival.
And use for the cure of all your sick ones, prognostication and indication concerning that to which it is fittingly suitable for health.
For in it there is help to you in the obtaining of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, His understanding, and may He not take away from you guidance and inspiration; for it is in His hand.
And I myself have arranged this chapter by dividing it into sections according to what preceded in the chapter on Cautery, from the neck down to the feet; so that you may be relieved of that which you seek from him and that for which you are in need.
Chapter on treating the water that collects in children's heads.
Chapter I.
Know that this weakness often occurs in children at birth or when the midwife tightens the child's head without caution.
It also sometimes happens due to unknown causes which are not known.
And indeed, I have not seen this ailment in anyone but children; and to everyone whom I have seen from among them death soon followed; therefore it seemed good to me to abandon the operation in that case.
And indeed, I have seen a child whose head was filled with water and his head swelled every day until he could not sit on himself due to the size of his head; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture can accumulate between skin and bone or under the bone on the cheekbone (sifac).
If the moisture is between skin and bone, and there is a small abscess, then it is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head, a split about two fingers wide; and the length of the split should be like that of two knuckles, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the form of trepanation (spatulum).
If the moisture has increased significantly and the abscess is larger, then make two splits in this manner (the same way).
If the moisture is under the bone and there is a sign that you see the skull open widely from all sides; and water sinks when you press it with your hand towards the inside, and this does not hide from you; then make three splits in the middle of the head in this way (the same way).
And after making the incision, remove all the moisture.
Then pour wine and oil over it for five days (as a dressing).
Then loosen the tie, care for the wound with dressings and ointments.
Do not release to bind the head with equality.
Feed the sick man with dry food of little moisture until he recovers his limb and is healed.
Another method of incision is to consider where the size of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
Because it sometimes is more, either in the head, or the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore ascend with the incision where the abscess appears and is filled with water, and cut it as much as you are able.
And observe, do not incise an artery, and let blood flow out, and the sick person dies from this flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Incision of the Arteries which are after the ears.
Chapter II.
When catarrhs occur to the eyes or the chest, and it does not ameliorate with treatment of medications, then the final cure is in this, an incision of these two arteries.
Therefore when you want to incise them, let the sick person shave his head.
Then scrape the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear.
Then let the sick person bind his neck with any cloth of his.
Then consider where the vein pulses.
And the places of both are places which are depressed behind the ears and are rarely hidden except in certain people.
Then mark with pitch on both sides: and cut one with a lancet on each side, the incision reaching the bone: and let it be made across the width of the head.
And if you want, insert a lancet under the artery and cut it from above with the incision.
Let the length of the incision be as long as two fingers joined together.
When a vein is cut, blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which jumps to the inside frequently.
If an artery does not appear to sight, then it is necessary that measurements be taken from the ear of three fingers' space.
Then mark with wax and bind until the bone.
And that which must be taken out from blood is 6 ounces, and perhaps you take more or less from it. Entirely it should be cut according to the quantity which appears to you due to the force of weakness and the filling of that artery.
Then consider for the wound.
If there remains to the bone anything from a tendon, then cut that so that a hot abscess does not occur; then bind the wound with linen strips.
Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter on the extraction of arteries located in the temples.
Chapter III.
When an old-time headache or acute catarrh occurs due to acid humidity and heat in the shoulders of the temples, or an old-style sodium, severe, and similar conditions; it is treated with methods of healing medicine but does not help; then we have been accustomed to extracting the arteries from the temples, or cauterizing them as we have said.
And the method of operation for extracting them is as follows: shave the weak hairs on the temples and direct attention to the appearing artery in the temple.
It is indeed shown to you by its pulse and it is rarely hidden except in a few people, or severe cold.
If it is hidden from you, then the weak person should bind his head with any cloth of his; then rub the place with a rough cloth.
If a boil occurs in a place with hot water, wait until it appears to you clearly. Then take the lancet that I have prepared beforehand. Then scrape the skin with it easily until you reach the artery.
Then insert the hook into it and pull it out towards the upper part until you remove it from the skin, and let it come out from all sides of the layers beneath it.
If the artery is delicate: then roll it with the tip of the hook.
Then cut that part according to the size where its ends extend and contract, so that there is no bleeding.
For if it is not cut, and if it is not separated, the blood will not rise deeply. Then empty six ounces of blood until the third (line).
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to tie it in two places with thick thread, silk or cord, or a strong cord, so that rot and decay do not approach it before the wound heals, and there is no bleeding.
Then cut off any excess that is between the two ties.
Do this during that hour or another hour. And if you wish, burn it with the cautery up to the bone, with a knife-shaped cautery, until its ends are cut and the operation is stable at that place.
And it is a better procedure unless the person has a fever, or is afflicted with coldness.
Because the cautery is made from those things that help to stop wetness.
Therefore it is better to use a remedy.
And after the extraction of the arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with heated clay and well-made poultices should be placed on top of it.
After solving it shall be treated with dry medicines which cause growth of flesh, and with liniments until healed.
If during the operation bleeding occurs from an artery, then hasten to cut it with a cautery or fill the place with wax; and tie your hand until the bleeding stops.
If nothing of these is present to you, then place your finger on it until the blood freezes.
Wrap the place with water of strong cold, until the sharpness subsides, and bind it as necessary.
And from this it is lighter and easier to extract the artery, that is, to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades; let the sharpness of the two blades be similar to a garnet (almandine).
However, they are much less sharp than two knives.
Because if they are as sharp as two knives, each of them requires cold; and they do not cut the flesh quickly.
Since they have a certain roughness, warmth of fire must be maintained in them, and the flesh is cut quickly; therefore this is better than any other work, easier, and more convenient.
And let the space between the two blades be the thickness of a finger, after you mark two places with hot iron; and place both very hot until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between its extremities is removed.
For they do not solidify completely with this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Chapter on the treatment of sharp persistent lacrimal passages from the eyes.
Chapter IV.
When the tears are persistent and there is a course of them from the veins that are on the outside of the skull of the head; and if nothing of medicine for treatment is added to them with medicines, and you see the face of the patient already turning red, and there is a sensation of walking as in ant-like motion on the forehead; and the eyes are exhausted, moist, so that the hair has been corroded by corrosion; and the eyelids have become warm from the acuity of the tears: then the ancients needed this operation for their treatment, and they called this treatment, "The Knife".
And it is to command the sick one to shave the hairs that are on his forehead.
Then make three equal incisions in the forehead: and let the length of each incision be about two fingers, and one should be in the middle of the forehead, and the second slightly below the movement of the arms, and the third on the opposite side: and beware not to cut the arteries which are on both sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the whole length of the incision be three fingers apart: and prepare a piece of sponge or dry cloth, with which you will absorb blood.
Then insert the handle of two sharp points, immediately following is its form.
From the first incision, which is near the temple, until the second incision: and scrape with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, together with what is above the eye. Then do likewise from the middle incision to the second incision.
Then remove the handle, and insert another tool named a sharp scalpel, blunt on one side, not sharp on the other side, into the first incision again.
And this is its form.
And place its sharp side facing the attached flesh and skin, and its blunt side facing the bone: and push it until it reaches the middle incision: and remove with it all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision stops at what appears on the skin.
Then do likewise in the middle incision until the other incision.
And when blood flows to an equal amount, squeeze the sites from the clotted blood. Then place linen cloths from old boiling on all incisions, and put on top of them soaked woolen wads in wine, oil or vinegar.
Observe so that no hot abscess occurs.
On the third day, loosen the ligature and administer much infusion with warm water.
Then care for it with basilicon ointment, and the remedies for wounds until it heals.
On the care of acute tears (eyewash) and catarrhs of the eyes from internal parts of the head.
Head V.
When anyone has acute, sharp, persistent catarrhs; and you see their eyes weakened, small, and their appearance already debilitated; and ulcerated eyelids, and hairs falling out from them, and there is acute pain deep within the head, causing discomfort and sneezing: then take, from these conditions, what those materials (catarrhs) do not come unless from many veins.
A better treatment for them is this.
And it should be ordered for the sick to shave their forehead.
Then make one incision in the middle of the forehead, or slightly to one side by width, from the left temple to the right temple; and let the incision be to the bone; and withdraw your hand from the temples which move during chewing; until the bone is exposed; and you will dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the crack between the two lips of the incision with a heated iron or with linens made of flax.
Then bind it from above with bandages; and moisten the bandages with wine and oil so that no hot abscess occurs.
And when you release it and see that the hot abscess is about to diminish; then it is necessary for you to scrape the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then care for it with dry dressing which makes flesh grow; as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of pitch; and prepare plaster from them and administer it for the growth of flesh in these wounds.
[Title: On the care of an ear wound] [Chapter VI] Everything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone, or something similar to a stone like iron and glass: or it is from a plant such as chickpea and bean: or it is fluid like water, vinegar, and things similar: or it is some animal.
When a stone falls into the ear, or one of those not added (items) that do not grow in the ear, expose only the ear: if you see a stone then, pour something out of violated oil or sinamon thereon.
Then administer the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with a powdered mixture, and plug the nostrils at the onset of sneezing, after you place fragments of cloth or wool around the ear and stretch the ear upward.
For many times it goes out with this care.
If it does not go out, then administer the extraction of it with Geista (Pizigaroli subtle), which is this form.
If it goes out with Geista, that is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle blind hook few times. If it does not go out through that, then make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole many times, and plug what is around the tube with wax softened with oil so that the air goes only through the tube: then draw it out with your strong force. For many times it goes out with what we have said.
If it does not go out in this way: then take from helkalimbat or vinegar (i.e., gluten prepared as birds are caught), a small amount of it; and place it at the end of the radius after you have placed a suitable plate over it; then insert it into the ear hole with ease, after you have removed the ear from moisture.
If it does not come out with all that I have described, then hurry to cut before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
The method of incision is that a lancet should first be applied to the sick person in the head region, and blood drawn out according to its power.
Then make the sick person sit between your hands and turn his ear upward, and make a small incision at the base of the ear in its fatty part at the lower side, until you reach the stone: then remove it together with it, as far as is possible for you with your instruments.
Then, make the incision from your side quickly and carefully until it heals.
If what falls into the ear is one of the grains that grow and swell, then administer its removal.
But if it does not come out for you, then take a fine, delicate probe of this shape.
And administer with it the removal of that species of grain which falls into the ear, and do not do this when you think that the grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you put many pieces on it: then remove them with tweezers or with a fine probe or with suction, as we have said, since its removal can be alleviated.
But the water which enters the ear should be used by the sick person to sneeze and cough at first: and already his ear is full with some heated old one: and it lies on top of it where the water is.
If it comes out through that (water), it is good.
And if not (the water comes out), then take many stones of the size of a finger, soft, smooth and heat them slightly, and let the sick person insert one of them into his ear canal: let him salivate on one foot from that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone in the ear.
Therefore, it should not cease to do that with stone and stone until all water comes out.
And now the water comes out in such a way that you take one from parchment or reed, and insert its end into the ear; and light the other end with fire until it burns much of it.
Then take another reed and do that several times until all the water comes out; and draw it out with a tube according to what was mentioned above in the stone.
In the case of an animal entering it (the body), if it is small such as a flea and similar to it, treat it as I said in the section on division.
But if it is of a large body, which appears to the sense: then administer its extraction with tweezers and hooks; and its removal is easier for all who hold it in the ear.
In the case of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what I said in the section on division and in the treatment of distillations, and your care does not help: then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun.
If therefore something appears there from worms, then draw it out with tweezers or fine hooks.
If therefore nothing appears there, then take a tube with this shape, narrow below and wide above; and insert its fine end into the ear according to the size that the sick one can bear; then draw it out gently with strong suction.
Do that repeatedly until all worms come out.
If they do not obey you to exit, then surround the ear with a tube filled with poppy seeds as I said in the stone.
If they do not come out with what I said, then administer the distillations which the ancients have been experienced in killing worms; and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your outflow be oil and medicine into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here.
As you see, make it from silver or bronze, narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, with a small hole at the bottom.
Therefore, let what is pressed inside the concavity of the tube be made of bronze.
And if you wish, take the radium and insert it at the end of it with a proper closure; then pour oil, or juice, or whatever medicine you wish among these into the tube; let it be in the ear; then insert the radium with its cover on top, and squeeze it with moderate pressure until the oil is pressed into the concavity of the auditory canal, and the sick person feels it inside; and whatever is poured into the ear should already be heated slightly with fire; and beware that nothing which distills into it is very cold; for medicines do not tolerate this.
[Title] On the treatment of an aural impaction (blockage) of the ear.
[Chapter] Chapter VII.
Sometimes some infants are born without their ears being pierced from the wombs of their mothers.
It also happens that an impaction occurs in some people's ears as a result of a wound or flesh born there.
This impaction sometimes occurs deep within the ear canal, which is not visible to the eye; and sometimes it occurs near the outer ear canal, which can be seen.
Therefore, that which occurs deep within the ear and is not visible to the eye is difficult to treat in many cases.
And in that which can be seen, it is necessary to place the sick person's ear on the sun and look into it; then if you see an impaction, open it with a fine probe whose shape is as follows: its tip should have a small depression in which there should be a slight indentation, and the rest of the probe should be made of soft wood on both sides so as not to harm the ear.
If therefore an ulcer arises from the flesh in the ear's meat: then hold it with a delicate hook and cut it with ease of great violence, until all the flesh is removed.
If then an ulcer is in the depth of the ear: then take a delicate probe and make it warm slightly with fire; afterwards send it into the ear's meat.
If then you find an ulcer with it, that the patient is weak and has hearing difficulties, try to open it gently; and beware not to wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place linen in the ear according to the size of the hole you have closed with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure about the healing of the wound.
Or take linen, dip it in rose water, powdered with sieved asafoetida, and use it.
If you see the ear already suppurating: then it is necessary to remove the linen, and allow it with another piece of linen that you have wrapped in a cerate made with rose oil, until the warm suppuration settles; afterwards care for it until it heals.
If there should be bleeding: then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear; and use the remaining treatment, which removes the described bleeding in the chapter on distillations.
Chapter on the care of Althaea for eyelids.
Chapter VIII. Those Althaeas that occur on the eyelids of the eyes are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore hold them with forceps or with a hook, and cut them off with a knife from their roots.
Then apply powdered asafoetida.
If blood flows out from them, then cauterize them with a fine lentil-shaped cautery.
To cauterize them is better after the incision.
For often they recur when something remains from their roots.
And when cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not recur.
Section on the care of grains on the eyelids.
Section IX.
Often something happens in the eyelids resembling sand in its firmness and hardness, and for this reason it is called grain; and it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper eyelid, and the lower one.
Therefore, the operation on them is to examine if it is grain coming out from the eyelid that appears, and move it to every part; its nature is easy.
Find therefore a fissure above it in width.
Then scrape it from every part with ease, until it comes out.
Then hang it up with a hook and cut it off itself.
But if its removal is not prepared for you unless after you penetrate the eyelid with a small cut, then it hurts in some way when this is not done.
If the fissure is large: then gather it together with a suture; and care for it until it heals up.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it.
For unguent restores it and fills it up.
And if the grain is inclined towards the inner part of the ear and turns its surface inside, then turn the eyelid; hang the grain with a hook and press it from every side, as well as cutting it off.
If the eyelid is stretched out through an incision, this will not hurt in any way.
Then clean the eye after the incision of the grain with salted water; and care for the place with it so that it may fill up until it heals up when weakened.
Chapter on the treatment of eyes.
Chapter X.
The Axeirnat is a drop that is generated in the upper eyelid; it mainly occurs in children; and it burdens their eyes, and they get cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot see the light of the sun, for this reason, because tears flow towards them, and for this you see them lying on their faces constantly, and they sleep on them, and their eyelids are always wet under the eyebrows, which has already been swollen; and the appearance of Axeirnat is evident to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the Axeirnat among them.
The method of his operation is that the sick places his head in your bosom.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a swathing within it, and make out of this linen cloth a circle according to the quantity that contains Axirnath on all sides.
Then place him upon it and press with your fingers from all sides, so that Axirnath may be gathered together in the center of the circle.
Then find in its midst moisture with a spatula-like instrument making incisions along the length, and let there be no fissure greater than that which is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary that you find the whole skin until you reach Axirnath, for in many cases, Axirnath proceeds out of a fissure in the shape of a white fat knot.
Therefore take it with a cloth, which you have moistened between your fingers to the outside, and you rotate your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and beware that you do not add to the fissure so as not to reach the eye with the spatula, and thus injure it.
If, however, Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, you should add a little to the fissure with ease until it appears.
Then take it out, as I have said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the place, and press it with small stones.
And among men there are those who grind salt and put it into the depression of the fissure, so that what remains of that moisture may be dissolved.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs in the place, then take care of it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
On the modes of Ataxmir of the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft and causes it to weep excessively as it should not.
Of the operation called Ataxmir of the Eye, when the palpebral conjunctiva has been detached from its margins, in order to separate any adhesions that may have formed between the bulb and the upper or lower eyelid, as well as for the sake of examination.
When hairs grow on the eyelids beyond the normal course under natural hairs, and they turn grey: then they harm the eye, and cause the occurrence of symptoms such as constant tears, softening of the eyelids, and opacity, until it causes the destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmir indeed cures the eyes according to four modes. Or by cautery with fire.
Or with a sharp medicine, as was stated in the chapter on cautery.
Or Ataxmir cures by incision and stitching.
Or with reeds, as I shall say.
You must place the head of the sick in your lap.
Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is turned, it is good.
And if it does not: insert the awl into it where there is a thread from below the eyelid, and let the awl penetrate with the thread on top, and be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a spoon.
Then find on the inside part of the eyelid under the added hairs with a blunt spoon coming from the larger tear duct up to the smaller tear duct.
Then draw out the thread, and place a small ball of wool or cloth under the eyelid; then mark the eyelid with hot wax in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it must be made in accordance with the size and elevation of the eyelid, because it is diversified in humans.
From these it is that which requires cutting according to the size of the eyelid, in accordance with the softening of the eyelid. Then, when you find the spur on two lines that you have marked, begin from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal, and let there be one fissure near the natural hairs, such as a tumor of the radius.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape it entirely. Then bring the two lips together with suture, with a sharp needle and fine woolen thread: and clean the blood, and make adhere what overflows from the threads on top of the eyebrows, if you wish to do so; and if not, do not cure.
Then release the suture and the threads for three or four days; afterward, take care of it. And if you wish, leave the wound without suture, and take care of it as it dries and contracts.
For the eyelid is raised at the sealing of the wound and the joining of it; but this will be better in the future.
This method of healing was taught by the ancients, Ataxmis.
However, there is concern for the patient in it, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is also in Ataxmis: and it is to mark on the eyelid a figure like that of a myrtle leaf, as we have said.
Then raise the eyelid with three separated or connected hooks according to the following shape, then cut what overflows with small scissors according to this shape with equal incisions.
If it is not possible for you to hold the hook and it does not fit; then take a point with thread, and insert it in the center of the figure: and insert another thread near the greater lacrimal, and another thread near the lesser lacrimal: and bring the threads together equally between your fingers.
Then loosen your hand with an equal lever: and loosen the skin over which is marked the tumor, as we have told.
Then gather together two lips of the wound with a stitch: and care for it until it heals.
If however a boil should occur in your incision or wound: bind that boil with lint and similar materials, from ointments that soothe.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn over.
On the care of Ataxir with dogs.
And it is, that you turn the eyelid, and cut the cleft that is inside, as I have told.
Then make two dogs or two thin logs of appropriate length as the length of the eyelid and narrower than the width of the palpebra; and now you have cut at both ends of each side where you hold the threads.
Then bind each one on top of the excess from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the two dogs on both sides with a strong binding, and let it be for several days. The skin bound will die, and darken, and rot until it falls off by itself.
If it slows down, then cut it with scissors.
Then care for it until it heals.
When it has hardened, remove the eyelid and do not pluck the hairs.
And this is the form of two dogs which you will make according to this shape and size in length and width.
On plucking out painful hairs from the eye with a needle.
Chapter XII.
The operation is to take a thin needle and insert a silk thread into it gently. Then bind the ends of the threads together with a very fine knot; and the length of the threads should be one palm's breadth.
Then take another thin thread called Alinshat and place it under the first one for a short distance and knot the ends if you wish.
Then let the weak person place his head in your lap and bring it near to the sun so that the operation may be seen; since the operation is delicate or small.
Then introduce the probe sharpened (or pointed) into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you draw out the natural hair from above.
Then pull the hair out up to the probe (or pointed instrument): introduce the probe into the hair follicle; if there is one or two or three hairs, do not introduce more than that.
Then pull your hand with it (the probe) until the hair comes out with the probe along with the natural hair from the eyelid.
If the probe is pulled out and no hair comes out with it: pull the probe downwards, using the thread you have tied to it, until the probe comes out through the upper opening, and you see it in the sight of the eye: then pull the probe, and the thread; extract both, and close the eye; leave it closed for two or three days so that the hair adheres to its place, and new flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then attach a long one from the natural hairs and pull them together; or leave it (the short hair) until it grows longer, and then pull it.
Chapter on the care of the eyelash that occurs in the upper eyelid.
Chapter 13.
When this condition (eyelash problem) occurs in the eye, it is called "Leporina".
And this eyelash condition may be either natural or accidental.
Therefore, the accidental eyelash condition occurs from the congealing of a wound, a cut, a cauterization, and similar conditions.
And the method of treatment for this condition is to uncover that congealed area and separate its edges, place a clean piece of linen cloth between them, tie it in place until it heals.
It is not appropriate to use in the treatment of this condition substances that dry and constrict, as doing so will make it worse; instead, use substances that soften, such as fenugreek; embrocation with water, in which althea has been boiled, and linseed; and unguento dyaquilon, which has been softened with some oil; and apply the linen cloth dipped in this, and treat it with it.
Thy treasure of cure is, that thou strive with all thy skill, so that it not become consolidated, according to the form which was first.
This operation indeed, which we said, is nothing but a correction of Alzahraci, so that the form of the place does not return as it was entirely. On the treatment of Alzahraci that is done on the lower eyelid, and it is a swelling or contraction upward to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This which is below, is what is truly called Alzahraci.
And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one occurs from a wound, or a crack, or cautery, and suchlike.
And the procedure in this is, that you take a needle, with which there is a double thread, and you dye it in flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh with the needle towards the upper part, and cut it with a broad spatula.
If then the form of the eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take a cautery, and place it in the crack, and turn the eyelid with it; and break two cracks on the inner side of the eyelid, and let their ends be from the two angles of the incision, until they converge and form an angle: until when gathered together, the shape becomes this shape, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh to the extent of its sharp lower side, from what follows the eyelid.
Then gather the separated parts; or gather it with a thread of wool.
Then care for them with what we said, regarding softening medications, and linen, until they heal.
And if Alxatrati occurs from a fissure, either by suture or cautery: then it is necessary to open the fissure flat under the eyelashes, as was previously described.
Then separate with linen between two lips, as we said.
The summary of the treatment for Alxatrati, whether it is above or below, is to carry out the operation on it according to the preparation method for Alxatrati.
For it is of many diverse shapes: and the skillful craftsman prepares his skill with whatever method is possible for him, until he makes it return to its natural shape or nearly so, and the sick person himself, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in various dispositions.
Chapter on the adherence of the eyelid with conjunctiva, or cornea.
Chapter XV.
Whenever this consolidation occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the whites of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, it is necessary that you insert the tip of a rod under the eyelid and lift it up; or stretch it with a spatula; then cut the adherence with a fine spatula, not with the sharpness of a spatula's cuts, but rather bluntly; so that the sick person is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is removed, and does not harm the eye with its sharpness; and your incision should be like scraping off the adherence easily, until when the eyelid returns to its natural shape, and the adherence heals completely.
Then pour salt water into the eye, and rinse it with water; or distill it onto him from sifon made of sieve cloth soaked with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a linen strip: and place upon the eye wool soaked in egg white: and after the third day use it or with salves, until it heals.
On the incision of a nail and swelling of the flesh of tears.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the nail is according to two modes. Or it is horny: and it is similar to the hoof, hard and delicate.
Or it is not horny, similar to frozen white moisture, which when it touches the iron or you try to catch it with a nail, it breaks off and does not stick to the nail.
And both types do not begin unless from the greater tear, until it gradually spreads, until it covers the vision, and prevents light, and movement of the eye.
And the method of operating on it is: that you place the weak head of yours into your bosom.
Then open his eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand.
Then gather the nail with a nail of twofold length and extend it to above.
Then take a needle and insert it into the nail with hair from horses, oxen or sheep; and let it be thread, and double the end of the needle slightly, and fasten it in the middle of the nail; and pierce it with the needle and tie the nail with the thread, and extend it to above; and remove the scab from the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you are holding it with hair up to its root.
Then cut the rest at the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or with small forks; and let out the natural flesh of the tear duct, so that there is no continuous flow of tears from the incision.
And sometimes a nail is extended with an uncion (a thin, curved surgical instrument) alone; or with a lancet, as we have said.
Then it is scraped with a soft curette of this form.
And be careful that the curette does not touch the corn's skin, and a fracture does not occur there, and the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, throw into the eye something of crushed salt or made from zinc, and leave it until another day.
Then take care of it as necessary, until it heals. If the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert a needle into it or the uncion does not fit, then this type of nail is often treated with medicine and heals as I have said in the division.
If you want to cut it (the nail), then open the eye of the patient and take a thin, soft, weakly sharpened curette in this shape.
And scrape the nail superficially with subtlety.
If you see that it is becoming rarefied and crushed, and the scraper presses on it, then distill from your hour into the eye, made of zinc, or red sulphur, or crushed salt; and close the eye until another day.
Then repeat this operation until the whole thing is removed.
Unless it is a warm abscess in your eye; then leave the nail and treat the abscess until it heals. Then repeat this operation with scraping until it heals.
However, if the growth of flesh from the tear duct is harmful to the eye to a great extent, it should be suspended with an uncion and cut out that part of it; and do not make the incision too deep, so as not to damage the tear ducts.
Then apply the milk or red colloidum, or that made from zinc, until it heals. On an Alguardenic incision and the flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
There sometimes arises in the eyes of men a red flesh composed or placed upon it that covers the pupil, approaches, or contracts over the eyelids and perhaps turns the eyelids toward the outside, resembling the balustrade rose.
And the treatment for it is also that the weak one puts his head in your armpit.
Then open his eyes and gather that flesh in its entirety with suitable forceps, and hold it with a single fork or tweezers.
Then make an incision in the flesh first, until it is entirely separated by the scalpel.
And be careful not to injure the eye during operation; and let your incision be such as that which we described in the operation of the nail, or with small forceps like those used for excision of the appendix, according to what its form will be after this chapter.
When your incision is completed and the Alguardenic is removed, then fill the eye with brine or sprinkle a red powder and similar substances on it from corrosive medicines; and place warm cloth over the outside of the eye with egg white to protect it from hot contagion.
If there remains something of the Alguardenic and warm blood prevails and you fear a hot abscess, then release the eye and treat it with what cures an abscess.
Then repeat the procedure until it heals.
And do the same with the added flesh that sometimes occurs in the eye of this kind.
It is necessary that every weak eye of an alien, whether from a natural or accidental way, be operated upon with iron, and thou shalt not introduce thy hand into any of these operations, until thou seest that the member is able to bear such operation.
Collection of the Sebaceous Exudate from the Eye.
Chapter XVIII. Sebaceous vessels that weave over the eye and hinder vision are called sebels; they weaken the eye with the passage of days.
Therefore, you must first determine if the eye in which there is sebels, is strong and there is no other illness besides sebels; then collect the sebals of that eye.
And it should be prescribed to the weak one, that he place his head in your lap.
Then suspend those vessels with a single or double hook, according to your discretion; and let the hook be subtle doubled, in this shape, or there may be two hooks graded within one body, in this shape.
Then collect those vessels with fine forceps with fineness and remove the blood hour after hour until you see the vessels being removed from the eye and dissolved; beware that you do not injure the eye with the tips of the forceps.
Let your operation be at noon in the presence of the sun, and be firm in your operation very much; so that you do not cut except those vessels.
And when you have finished, then pour into the eye either green or red; so that it may consume with its own sharpness what remains from the sebals.
If it is not possible for you to collect it all in that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with what alleviates eye pain; and leave it for some days until the pain subsides; and it should be purified with warm poultice; then repeat over it in the same manner until it heals.
And this is the shape of the forceps.
On reducing the Aphthae to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
The physician named Arissethe treats a fistula, which he cures with cautionery or with a burning medicine, according to the account that precedes it.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it; unless to find above the abscess at its birth, and to draw out all the moisture that is in it and the pus, until the bone appears.
When the bone appears and you see in it decay or blackness, then file it with this tool, whose shape is as follows:
The named part is Asperi of the head.
Make it of iron and let its head be round like an azir [a type of drill], and let it be marked with the engraving of a file, or the subtle marking of aliskilfer, and place it over the corrupted bone. Then turn it between your fingers and press your hand slightly, so that you may know if the corruption is now scraped away; and do this several times.
Then turn it between your fingers and press your hand slightly, so that you may know if the corruption is now scraped away; and do this several times. Then restore the place with astringent medicines.
If the place is consolidated and flesh grows there and the flow of pus ceases, and it remains for forty days without renewal, without ulceration, and no incident occurs in it; then you will know that it has been healed.
And if not, then there is no skill to be found except to reduce the fistula to the opening of the nose, according to this form:
It is to be peeled off from the second bone with iron or medicine that is sharp, and when the bone has been exposed, then take the trepan [a surgical instrument] in this form: its end should be iron, triangular; and the wood of it should be a pyramid extended to the end, as you can see.
Then place it on the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct; and stretch your hand slightly from the eye.
Then turn the trepan with your hand until it enters the bone and feels weak: by this you will know that air is escaping from it when you hold your hand over his nose.
Therefore, then restore the place with astringent medicines as I taught you.
When flesh grows and the place hardens: then the substance that was flowing outward returns to the nose; therefore, it is easier for that to be upon the weak one.
On the reduction of protrusion of the Eye. De resecnditone cataractae oculi.
When the Eye protrudes completely and no harm or reduction occurs during sight: then it is necessary to loosen the patient; afterwards, let the phlebotomist bleed him; subsequently, place warm fumigations on his neck without incision, but with suction.
Subsequently, place a poultice made of acacia, aloe, frankincense, and colophony over the Eye.
Subsequently, tighten the Eye upwards onto a plaster with many small stones.
And the method of the small stones is as follows: Take soft cloths in large quantities and fold each one over four; make many of them; then place one on top of another according to the quantity required by the Eye; subsequently, tighten them with a hard cloth strap firmly.
Repeat the warm fumigations with suction without incision.
Subsequently, remove the warm fumigations, and leave the eye tightened during the day and night.
If the binding softens again, then it is necessary to tighten it strongly; subsequently, remove the binding after a day and night, as previously stated.
If you see that the Eye has returned to its original state, that is good; if not, repeat the poultice, the small stones, the strapping, and the warm fumigations until it heals.
Chapter on the incision of the eyelid.
Chapter XXI.
When a rupture occurs in the eyelid, then it protrudes and extends beyond the eyelashes like a grain of sand, and disfigures human form due to this, and there is a desire to cut it; then the operation is done as I described: namely, insert an awl into the root of the eyelash from below to its upper part.
Subsequently, insert another awl into which there is a double thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate; subsequently, release the first awl according to its position.
Then cut a place for the double thread and tie it around the vein with a needle; and tighten it strongly.
Then extract the needle, and place linen soaked in oil on the conjunctiva of the eye; and wait until the thread falls with the vein.
Then care for the eye with that which strengthens it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the vein is tied all around with a circle made of cloth until the eye protrudes greatly.
Then pierce with a fine spatula which reaches deep into the eye, and let the moisture of the conjunctiva run out, and let the eye sink down and enter immediately; then tie it until it is healed.
[Chapter title: Treatment of Alcomant]
Chapter XXII.
This disease called Alcomant is nothing other than pus that collects in the eye, resembling flowing water and it is not [this pus itself].
The method of operation in it is, that you make the sick person sit on a prepared seat, or straight.
Then take the head of it with your two hands and move it, until you see pus approaching towards the lower parts of your eyes.
Then shape it and do not let it fall down, and clean the eye: and let the sick person see as he used to see; and if it does not go downwards, know that it is water.
If it is not prepared for the discharge of pus as we said, then let the sick person sit between your hands. Then take a pointed instrument and pierce it slightly on the cornual continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea at the crown, until pus comes out.
When it comes out, then pour hot water into the eye in which you have mixed honey; or hot water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey; afterwards clean with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
Chapter on the treatment of water that falls into the eye or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have already said the type of water in division and what suits for piercing by declaring and explaining it, then take that very same one according to health.
Then it is necessary that you let the sick person sit between your hands, facing towards the light, near the sun; and tie the healthy eye; and press the affected eye very hard; afterwards close the eyelid of the affected eye with your right hand if the water is in the left eye; or with your left hand if it is in the right eye.
Then take your right hand (almad) if the affected eye is in the left; or take your left hand if it is in the right.
Then place the end of almad near the crown by the thickness of a radial limbus on the white part of the eye that is visible as the smaller lacrimal sac; then press almad with force; and you turn with it, until it penetrates into the white part of the eye; and feel that almad has already reached an empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey be great for deep places, the measurement of the space that is from the pupil until the end of the blackness; and it is the eyelid's circumference.
You will see that within the pupil's vision of the eye, due to the brightness of the cornea membrane.
Then place a large one up to the place where there is water.
Then press it down once after another.
If therefore water comes out immediately, then the sick person sees it right away over what opens his sight immediately, and a large one in his own eye.
Then remain quiet for a while.
If water comes out again then put it down again, except that the large one goes out.
When it is blocked and does not come up then pull the large one out easily; and you rotate your hand slowly. Then dissolve something from salt in clear water, and wash the eye with it inside.
Then put outside the whole wool or flax soaked in rose oil and white egg white, and tie it to a healthy eye.
We and those of our time place on him crushed cumin with egg white.
If the large one does not obey you for entry into the eye because of its hardness, since it is from a man whose eye is very hard; then it is necessary that you receive a tool called "Alberid", whose form is this:
Therefore drill with it only the joint itself, and do not go all the way with your hand into the opening; and there is no other purpose except to make a subtle way to the large place.
Then introduce the large one, as we said before.
For the completion of your work, prepare a well-made bed for the sick person, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark house; and let him be prohibited from all movements, coughs; and put food before him that soothes his nature; and do not move his head to the right or left at all.
And let the ligature be according to its own arrangement until the third day. Then untie that in the dark house and test its sight; make it see things.
Then return the ligature until the seventh day.
And it is not appropriate that it be done during the hour of cure or immediately after the incision; rather, let someone else do it, because water rises quickly with a strong gaze.
If, however, there is a hot abscess: then it is necessary to loosen the eye before the seventh day; and correct it with what calms the abscess, until it is calm; then without its sight, place it on his oral cavity to regulate his sight for some days, while he remains in that dark house.
Then leave the house gradually and convert himself in his bed.
And know that in the zaltea (operating room) the student is not excused from seeing often; then he will dare for the operation.
And indeed a certain one of those from Alayrach has come to us who said that in Alayrach a magdan (stone) was perforated through which water rises up.
Therefore I have not seen anyone in your land who has done that; nor have I read it in any of the old books. It is possible that it is new.
And these are the shapes and species from stone for standing on those who do not know them.
Make them of bronze; and let their ends have the same subtle triangular shape with an acute point.
Stone shapes (forms).
Chapter on the care of newborn flesh in the nose.
Chapter XXIII.
Sometimes various fleshes are born in the nose, among which there is something resembling a scorpion of many feet; and from it is cancerous flesh, stone-like, dark colored; and from it is the soft flesh, not dark colored.
Therefore, for the soft and non-deceptive flesh, not cancerous, it is necessary that you make the sick person sit facing the sun with his nose opposite, and open his nostrils, and throw the hook into those fleshes; then draw them outwards, and cut what you have caught from them with a subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the entire flesh has been removed.
If something remains from it, whose excision is not possible; then shave it off with one of the subtle instruments easily, until nothing remains from it.
If blood dominates over you or a hot boil happens; then oppose it with what is necessary; or if it is from malignant boils, then rush to cauterize him, until the blood is cut off and all the fleshes are removed.
Then pour vinegar, water, or wine into the nose after the incision.
If the nose opens and moisture comes out up to the palate, then you know that he is already well.
If moisture does not penetrate as required, then you know that within it there is a born flesh in the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary to introduce a linen thread with a certain thickness and many knots; and place between each knot the amount of a finger or less; and let the sick person insert one end of the filament into his nose with a spoon or as possible for him after he has made it similar to a syringe; and draw out the smell, until it reaches the cavity, and comes out on his throat.
And indeed many times do boys in schools make something similar to that of Attotus; and it is an easy thing for him who desires it.
Then place two ends of the thread, one which comes out above the nose, and the other which remains within the nose.
Then the flesh is cut with a scissors having knots on the thread. Make that, until you know that the flesh is already with the knots of the thread.
Then draw out the thread; and place within the nose linen that you have soaked in Egyptian ointment; do this for three days or more, until the ointment completely corrodes what remains of the flesh.
Then place at the end of the procedure within the nose a tube made of lead, for some days, until it heals.
If it requires treatment to dry it out, use that (the ointment).
For the purging of the head (snuff), when olive oil and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it from silver or brass; that it be similar in size to a small lamp, open like a snail shell; and its passage likewise.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the snail-shell instrument for purging the head should be full, pierced; having a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when heating oil or whatever you wish from distilled juices and fluid substances within it.
And this is the form of the instrument. Chapter on the cure for Thelul (nasal polyp).
Chapter 25.
Often in the end of the nose arises a Thelul (nasal polyp), and it grows and becomes larger with days until it becomes a foul sight.
And therefore it is necessary to cut it at the beginning of its appearance, and root out all of it.
Then place upon the location, either a cautery, or a medication burning in its stead.
If the incision is slow to appear when enlarged, then consider if it is hard and blackish, with few senses: then do not touch it with iron; because it is a cancerous ulcer.
For often I have seen that when someone cut an abscess, there was great evil that befell him who had it.
And if the abscess is soft when touched and not blackish, and you see that an incision can be made in it entirely, then evacuate the weak, and cut it without fear or trembling: and care for the place with it as it drains and constricts, until it heals.
Chapter on the suture of the nose, lip, and ear.
Chapter 26.
Know that when there is a break in the continuity of one of these cartilages, an operation will bring little benefit to it, unless in certain men.
Therefore, when something happens to anyone from one of them (cartilages), consider whether it is a recent wound with its own blood: and then apply the two wounds together with suture; then care for it until it heals.
And if the continuity of the lips is already separated and each part has become healthy: then it is necessary to remove all layers from the visible skin until it bleeds.
Then join the two lips with suture, tighten them, and sprinkle over the blood of the dragon (alcohol) and crushed aloes: and place on top of powders a fragment of plaster called diafinicon, and some other more consolidated plaster: and leave it bound for two or three days.
Then dissolve it (the plaster), and change the medicine; and leave it until the threads are cut off by themselves. Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
The method of suturing is that you gather the solution of continuity, or with hooks, as we told you in the suture of the abdomen; or gather the solution with thread, as I taught you.
On the Extraction of Lip Nodules.
Chapter XXVII. Many people indeed suffer from hard ulcers similar to the seeds of a plant in the inner parts of their lips; and some of these are smaller, while others are larger.
Therefore, it is necessary that you turn the lip and pierce over every nodule of it, and hang it with a hook, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision with lime until the blood is shed off.
Then it is washed with vinegar and treated with it on the place where there is stiffness until the wounds heal.
On the Incision of Born Flesh Above the Gingiva.
Chapter XXVIII. Multitiples times grows-on flesh on gum, which ancients called abscess.
Therefore it is necessary that you hang-it with a hook; or hold-it with forceps, and cut-it near the root, and let-it run pus (or blood).
Then place-on top of the place powdered zogia or other healing powders, dried.
If that flesh returns after treatment, for it often does return, then cut-it again and cauterize it; for it will not return after cauterization.
Chapter on the shaping of teeth with iron.
Chapter XXIX.
When accumulations gather on the surfaces of teeth from both the interior and exterior parts, and between gums (hard layers), rough, rotten, and sometimes turn yellowish or green, until corruption reaches the gum, and teeth become foul because of it.
Therefore it is necessary that you make the sick person sit between your hands and his head in your lap, and file-down the molars and teeth, where the hard layers appear to you, until nothing remains of them; and similarly do for blackening, yellowing, greening, and others, until they are clean.
If that which is in them is removed from the beginning of filing, good; and if not, then repeat the filing on them on another day, second, and third, until finally the effort reaches what you wish for in it.
And know that the tooth requires filing instruments of various forms and shapes; according to which it is prepared for your operation; because the filing instrument with which you file the tooth from below is different from the filing instrument with which you file between teeth, according to other shapes.
And these shapes of filing instruments should be prepared by you, which you see.
On the extraction of tooth pain.
Caput signifies Chapter or Title. So this is the title of the chapter which translates to "Chapter XXX" in English. The Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis likely has many chapters, and this one is the thirty-third. In Latin, 'XXX' stands for 30, hence the translation as Chapter Thirty.
It is necessary that you extract the tooth from its pain with all your skill and not delay in doing so.
For indeed, there is no remedy for it when the tooth is extracted: because its substance is lofty: unless there is an excuse for not extracting it, then when one who is sick must have the painful tooth extracted, it should be firmly set, and you should be certain that the tooth causing pain has been removed.
Often pain deceives the sick man and he believes that it is in the tooth and extracts it himself: then the pain does not subside until the sick tooth is extracted.
We have indeed seen that from the operation of phlebotomists.
When you are certain that the tooth causing pain is indeed present, then it is necessary to make an incision around the tooth with a lancet, which contains something of virtue, until the gum is loosened from all sides: then move it with your fingers or with delicate forceps first gently, until you dislodge it.
Then place large forceps in that location and grasp the head of the sick tooth between your knees: what you have now firmly grasped, so that it does not move: then pull out the tooth in a straight line, so that you do not break it.
If it still does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If the tooth is perforated or rotten, then it is necessary to fill that hole with a cloth and bind it with the tip of a thin radius so that it does not break during your compression on top of it with forceps.
It is necessary that you thoroughly make incisions around the gums from every part much.
Maintain your strength so that you do not break it (the tooth), and a part of it remains, and returns over the sickness from that evil which is greater in pain at first.
Be careful not to do what ignorant phlebotomists do in haste and their audacity regarding its (tooth) extraction, beyond what we have mentioned.
For many times they cause great diseases to come upon men, whose difficult it is for them to break, and all of its roots remain, or some of them; or that they extract it with certain jaw bones, as we have often testified this. Then, after the extraction of it (tooth), it is rubbed with wine, or with vinegar and salt. If there is bleeding from the places (for many times this happens), then rub something from ashes, and fill the place with it; and if not, cauterize it with fire if ashes are not available for you.
The form of delicate forceps by which the tooth is moved should be long at the ends, short at the handle, thick, so that they do not split when pressed against the tooth; like the handles of large forceps, until when you squeeze with them, they do not open themselves, nor do they split: short at the end, and made of iron or well-made files, with pointed ends; and on their ends there should be teeth, some of which enter into certain ones, and constrict by a proper constriction, strongly.
And sometimes the ends are like the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia and they have strong constriction.
Chapter on the Extraction of Teeth and the Removal of Fractured Jaw Bones.
Head, Chapter XXXI.
If [the tooth] remains during extraction and it breaks, then it is necessary to place on the place a hot poultice with butter for one day, or two days, until the place becomes soft: then introduce into it algum, or forceps; whose extremities are similar to the mouth of the bird called ciconia.
The form of these forceps is as follows:
Extremities of them are made like a chisel inwards, or scissors-like.
If these forceps do not obey you when exiting, then it is necessary that you be cautious on the root, uncover the entire flesh, and insert an instrument called a small plancca, whose form is as follows:
Let the end be short and slightly thick; and let it not be saturated so that it does not break.
If the root exits through this, it is good; and if not, help with these other instruments whose forms are as follows:
The first form is triangular in end, where there is some thickness.
The form of the fine triangular end.
Also helped by this instrument with two limbs, whose form is as follows: And also with other instruments and tools that preceded in the ratio of teeth.
Also help with this instrument that resembles a large hook, whose form is as follows, triangular and twisted end, where there is some thickness, so that it does not break; and let it not be saturated.
And know that there are many instruments of teeth; and similarly the rest of the instruments are not counted, and the skillful artist, subtle in his art, finds for himself an instrument according to what the operation and illness itself signify.
Because among illnesses there are those for which no ancient instrument has been said, due to the diversity of their forms.
If the bone is broken from the jaw, or from other bones of the face, or it putrefies; then to examine on top of it in its place with that which suits it from the instruments and forceps that I said for extracting roots, and help with gesti whose form is as follows:
Place something of some thickness gradually within it [the wound], so that the bone may be held or tied and not escape and move away, until the bone emerges; and restore the place with suitable medications for that purpose.
If however there is a small rottenness in the bone, then scrape it off from its rottenness, and treat it until it heals.
On locking protruding teeth on others [teeth].
Chapter XXXII.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, it becomes a foul formation; and especially when it happens in women and girls, namely those who menstruate.
For if a tooth has been born after another tooth and it does not fit or can be locked without grinding [the tooth], then extract it; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it off with this tool, which has the following shape:
The instrument resembles a small beak and is made from sharp-tipped iron.
And let your incision be one that you make over many days, and due to the hardness of the tooth, so that another tooth is not disturbed.
If it projects out for sharpening: then file it with the file whose shape is this.
Let it be entirely made of iron, and its handle small but with many pointed knobs, like a file used to sharpen teeth: with this you can grind the tooth gradually over many days with ease, so that another tooth is not disturbed, and it falls out; then smooth it with some files.
If it is a tooth from which a part breaks off and hurts the tongue: then it must be filed down until the roughness of that fracture is removed, and it is made smooth; and it shall not hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
Chapter on filing teeth with gold files.
Chapter XXXIII.
When there is a shock and commotion to the front teeth due to striking or falling, and the sick person cannot clench on what they eat to prevent it from falling down: and you have treated them with medicines that stop bleeding, but the treatment was of no avail: then, in their case, it is appropriate to clench them with a gold thread. Because silver turns green and becomes putrid after days, but gold never changes.
And make the thread fine and thick according to its quantity that it can pass between the Teeth.
And the type of knot is such that you take the thread and insert it between two healthy teeth; then you weave with both ends of the thread between the moved teeth, whether one or more, until you reach the end with the needle to the healthy tooth of the other side.
Then repeat the weaving up to the part from which you started; and hold your hand with finesse and wisdom until it is completely secure; and let your binding that binds the thread be near the roots of the teeth so it does not go out.
Then cut the excess parts of the thread with scissors; and gather both ends together and twist them; and hide these beneath a healthy tooth and a moved tooth so as not to hurt the tongue; then release it in such a way that it remains tight.
If it is loosened or cut, bind them with another thread, and it will remain so for the entire time.
And this is the shape of teeth and the pattern of knotting of two healthy teeth and two moved teeth, as you see.
And sometimes a tooth or two return to their places after a fall and are held as we have said, and remain so; and this does not happen unless the skilled craftsman is both cunning and experienced.
And sometimes one of the bones of a cow is made like a tooth and placed in its place, where it is secured and bound as we have said; and it remains and serves for a long time.
Regarding the incision of a ligament which occurs under the tongue, and prevents speech.
"De incisione ligamenti quod accidit sub lingua, et inhibet locutionem.
If there is something hard and knotted, and it is from the healing of a wound: then thrust in the hook, and cut through it crosswise, until you reach the ligament, and the knot is released.
If there is blood flow, then place crushed alum over the place. But if the blood overpowers you, then cauterize the place with a purging cautery that is suitable for it: afterwards take care of him with the rest of the treatment until he is healed. Chapter on the removal of ranula that occurs under the tongue.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes under the tongue there occurs an aposteme resembling a small frog that prevents the tongue from performing its natural function, and it may grow so much as to fill the bone.
If you see it black or dark, hard and insensate to the sick person, then do not touch it because it is cancer.
If it is cut to white matter, where there is moisture, then throw in the hook, and cut it with a thin chisel, and release it from all sides.
If blood veins over you during your operation hour, then place a soft rag upon it until the blood is cut off; then return to your operation until you extract it with its entirety.
Then clean it with vinegar and salt, and care for it with suitable treatment until it heals.
Section on the treatment of two Molar Abscesses.
Chapter XXXVI.
Then either pierce it yourself or it will burst on its own.
If it is white in color, round and its root is subtle: then it should be cut.
The operation on it is to consider before the operation if the aposteme has been quiet for a long time and completes its heat or if it decreases slightly: then let the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should be in your lap; open his mouth and let him take a servant between his hands, and press his tongue down with an instrument, whose form is as follows. Let it be made of silver or copper, which is delicate like a knife.
When you press his tongue with it and the aposteme is revealed to you and falls on top of it: then take a hook, and pierce it into the amygdale, and remove it as far as possible from within, taking with it something from the linens.
Then cut it with an instrument of the following form.
It is similar to forks; however, its ends should be curved so that the opening of each of them is directed towards the other's sharp point: ensure that it is made of steel or ivory impregnated with alcohol.
If this tool is not present, then cut it with a spatula, whose form is as follows.
The instrument should be sharp on one side, not on the other.
And after you cut one almond, cut the other in the same way as this cutting.
Then, after the cutting, let the sick person gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If there occurs a bleeding in him, let him gargle with water in which the rinds of pomegranates have been boiled; or leaves of myrtle, and similar ones from other plants, until the bleeding stops: then take care of him until he is cured.
And sometimes boils appear in the throat besides the two almonds.
Cut them, therefore, as I said in cutting the two almonds, equally.
I myself, moreover, have been healed of a woman who had a boil that was born in her throat, which drew to the swelling, few senses, which almost closed her throat: and the woman breathed through a narrow mouth, and already she had forbidden her food, and drink of water; and it had already come near to death, if it had remained one day, or two days.
The boil had risen only so far that it expelled two branches, until they came out through the two nostrils.
I therefore hastened and tied one of them with a hook.
Then I pulled it out, and a large piece was drawn out with it.
Then I cut it off where it was seized from the nostril.
Then I did to it what came out of the other nostril.
Then I opened his mouth, and pressed his tongue; and afterwards I tied a hook to the boil; then I cut off a part of it, and no more came out but a little blood: therefore the throat of the woman was freed, and she immediately began to drink water, then she received food.
I did not stop cutting from that ulcer for a long time; and the ulcer succeeded in the place which I was cutting, until it was extended too much and with that (it) [the extension].
I have prepared (myself) and burned an ulcer at the throat.
Therefore I stood still for a while: then I walked away from it, and I did not know what God had done with that (situation) after me.
Chapter on the incision of an ulcer of the windpipe.
Chapter 37.
When catarrh goes down to the windpipe and becomes an ulcer that is long, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, it is then called uva.
When it is cured along with what was said earlier in the division, but the cure does not work; and you see that the ulcer has become warm and subtle, then it is necessary to cut (it).
And if there is a round gathering from it which is not long, and it is bloody or of dark or black color, and there is no sensation in it, then it is necessary to make an incision on it.
For there is fear over the weak (one) in it.
Therefore, when you see it according to the way that I said from whiteness and its length, you should make the weak one sit facing the sun; and press his tongue with the tool whose story was told earlier; then attach a hook in the windpipe and pull it down; and cut it with one of two tools that I said for the incision of two amygdalas.
And it is necessary not to cut from it unless that which is added exceeds its natural limit without further addition.
For if you cut more from it, you injure the voice and speech.
Then after the incision use what was said for the incision of two amygdalas; and cure it until it is healed.
If the patient is afraid of incision, then it is necessary to use art in the cauterization of him without fear and dread.
The method of cauterization is not otherwise than with sharp water: it is to place the head of the sick one in your bosom.
Then press his tongue with the instrument that I mentioned.
Then take water that I told you in the chapter on cauterization and make a not-extinguished lime from it, and do not make it thick or thin, but fill the hollow of this instrument with it whose shape is as follows: (the text does not provide an image, so no translation provided for this part)
Let the end where the medicine is placed be concave, like the concavity of a cochlea's ray.
Place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer itself: let the sick one lie down on his side so that the saliva comes out from his mouth through the internal medicine, and let nothing descend from it to his throat, and hurt him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine.
And you apply it to the ulcer for a quantity of half an hour until you see it become darkened and the biting of the medicine subsided.
And if you want to take the curette, and wrap it around the end of the ray, and pour the ointment with the medicine over it, and insert the ray with the ointment-covered curette on top until the ointment adheres to the ulcer. Do this repeatedly until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the ulcer.
Then release it: for it burns and falls after three or four days.
If you need to repeat the medicine, do so: and after cauterization, wash around the ulcer with ointment soaked in butter, and clean it with what is in the surrounding area of the ulcer: and rinse it with cold water.
And it shall be treated externally with leeches, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
This kind of treatment is healthier than surgery and further from fear.
And sometimes a vein is also cured with something more subtle than cautery and incision; it is cured with fumigation, in this manner.
Take calaminthe, hyssop, oregano, rut, sage, chamomile, and absinthium, and similar herbs from the plants; mix them all together, or some of them in a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, boil them; let the pot be well coated with clay; and let there be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which an instrument concave in this manner is placed.
Make it from silver or bronze; insert the end into the mouth of the sick person, so that the vapor reaches the vein through the pipe, until the vein is filled with a large amount.
Then repeat this many times, until it burns up.
And beware not to do this treatment at the beginning of the abscesses growth.
For most often pus is added to an abscess; and it should not be done unless at the descent of the heat from the abscess.
If this instrument is not available to you, then take a pipe and prepare the bark of an ox's horn at its end, so that the bone of the sick person is not burned; since the ox's horn bark prevents the vapor from burning the bone; and this is from good treatment with safety.
Chapter on the removal of thorns and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Often a bone or fish spine adheres to the throat.
Therefore it is necessary to extract whatever appears from among them that strikes the sight, after pressing the tongue with an instrument under the sun, and when it is shown to you that it is in the throat.
And what is not apparent to you and hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make [the patient] vomit before the food is digested in the stomach.
Perhaps it will come out attached things through vomiting.
Either the sick person should swallow a piece of nutmeg, or the root of lettuce, or a dry breadcrumb: or he should take a piece of dried sea-sponge, soft: and bind it, then he should swallow it.
When it has reached the place where there are spines or bone, and it is drawn out, then it comes out. If it does not come out as we have said: then use an instrument made of lead in this shape.
Let it be thicker than the radius a little, and at its end let there be a notch, which he introduces into his throat with ease: and he should have his head raised upwards.
And let him beware of touching his epiglottis, so that he does not have a cough, and drive with it the bone or spine, or the doctor introduces it himself with his hand.
But what the sick person introduces is better: because of his knowledge of the place where the thing is attached: and he pushes downwards, or pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all of it according to its quantity which is prepared for him, until it comes out.
Chapter on the extraction of a leech.
Chapter XL.
When the leech is treated with what I said in the division of the cure with medicines, and it does not heal, then consider at the throat of the sick person before the sun or near the sun after you press his tongue with the tool which I told you.
If your sight falls on the leech, pull it out with a small hook or with fine forceps carefully.
If it is not possible with them (the instruments): then receive a concave cannula, and insert it into the throat of the sick one up to near the throat; then insert into the concavity of the cannula hot iron with fire.
Do this repeatedly: let the sick person abstain from water all day.
Then let him take a pot full of cold water, and open his mouth in it; and wash his bone with it, and do not swallow anything from it; and move the water one hour after another with his hand.
A leech falls off immediately when it feels water.
If it does not come out with what we said, then fumigate the sick one with bedbugs, or with asa with the instrument I spoke about for fumigating the throat.
Do this repeatedly, because it will fall off by itself.
The method of fumigation is as follows: take a pot in which there are living plums with fire; and the pot should be covered with a lid, through a hole in which the end of the instrument is placed.
Then throw the fumigation and let the sick one put his mouth on the end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not come out, until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech.
A leech falls off immediately.
If it does not fall off, then repeatedly apply fumigation.
Let the sick person endure thirst, eat salt and other things, and do not drink water. Therefore it is necessary for this treatment to be carried out.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat when it falls upon it.
It resembles forceps, as you can see; except that it has this concavity which is inserted into the throat.
The end of it is similar to the beak of a bird named ciconia (stork), which has roughness like that of a file. When it grasps something, it does not let go of it completely.
On the opening of abscesses, and their cutting, and care in general.
Chapter XL (40).
The species of abscesses are many, various, according to their remembrance, namely one and one in this book; and they are different in piercing them and cutting them from two ways.
One of them is by the species of abscess itself and that which it encompasses due to moisture.
And the second method is due to places where it happens from the body.
Since an abscess happening in the head is different from an abscess happening in the anus; and an abscess happening in a fleshly place is different from an abscess happening in joints; and each of them has its own judgment according to the operation.
And from abscesses there are those that should not be pierced unless after the ripening of pus in them and its completion; and from these there are those that should be pierced while they are raw and do not ripen according to the completion.
As abscesses which are near joints.
Since when an abscess happens near a joint and it is prolonged until it putrefies what is around it, the ligaments or the nerves of that joint are possibly corrupted; which is the cause of the closer contraction of that member.
Or it is an abscess near the main member; since if you delay the piercing of it until it ripens, it will harm either that or through the main member.
Or it is near the anus, pierce it while it is immature; and do not pierce a raw abscess, not completed digestion, unless it is near the anus so that it does not putrefy deep within, extend to the interior of the anus, and become a fistula or remain incomplete and will not heal. It is necessary that you know the hour of perforation of the boil abscess, which has become mature according to the completion; and it is at the sedation of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and pulsation, and acuity of the boil abscess head: and the remaining signs. And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower part of the boil abscess, and more pronounced protrusion; and the perforation should be going in length of the body, if boils are on hands and feet, and places arms, shoulders, necks, tendons, nerves, arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
In those which reflect, go with the perforation according to that member.
When the boil abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better to let the perforation of it be, until its digestion has become firm, as we said according to the completion.
Because if you perforate it before that, the course of the virus from it is prolonged, and there are many filths and dirtiness, and perhaps its edges harden and its depth.
And some boils abscesses are perforated according to the breadth of the body because of necessity; or according to that which requires a member.
And it is necessary that you administer small perforations in small boils abscesses, and large perforations in large boils abscesses; or many cuts according to the similarity of the size of the boils abscesses.
And there are some boils abscesses in which the skin should be concaved; and it should be cut when it has become like cloth, and made into a point, that it is already dead: as what happens to many, where it breaks out, and to buboes.
And among them are those which are cut by a section having three angles.
And from them is that one which is cut as the figure of the myrtle leaf.
Like an inguinal abscess.
And among them are those where a round section and crescent-shaped section are administered, and similar ones from sections.
But that which has no head, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary to pierce it with a superficial puncture, or only through a shallow one.
And it is necessary when the abscess is large and already contains much pus, to pierce it so that it does not burst out and extract all of the pus at once; rather, extract a part of it from it.
Then open the abscess until another day.
Then extract something from the pus again.
Do this repeatedly according to degrees until it comes out; particularly if the patient is weak in strength, or a woman pregnant, or a small child, or an old man decrepitus: for the animal spirit is many times dissolved with the exit of pus; and perhaps the sick person will die, and you will not perceive.
Therefore beware of this chapter with great caution.
And after your puncture, where you pierce the abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound; and observe.
If therefore the wound of the abscess is small, or the section is flat, then administer a bandage made of linen, or an old cotton cloth.
And if the abscess is large, and there are many openings from the puncture, it is necessary then to insert a bandage into every opening until they meet each other.
And if you have cut off a piece of skin from the abscess, or hollowed out its circumference; then it is necessary to fill it with old cotton cloth, or as when the cloth is being sewn, or shorn of linen wool without moisture; and tighten it for three days.
Then cut it open and care for that as needed with an ointment until it heals.
If bleeding occurs during your operation hour, then administer cold water and vinegar. After being soaked in them, place a cloth over the bleeding site repeatedly.
If the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer a regimen, treatment, and powders as I have described in several places of this book, and from division.
If it is winter time and the place of the excision involves many nerves: then it is necessary to pour hot powders with wine and oil onto the locations.
And if it is summer and the locations are fleshy: then it is necessary to place the powders soaked in water, oil or wine and oil, and keep everything cold.
Until the third day, as we said, it is necessary to dissolve the boil, cleanse it, and administer treatment suitable for its healing until it heals.
Therefore, this is what is universally necessary in the knowledge of boil treatments.
However, according to the method of classification, I have already discussed every type of boil individually regarding how to treat it in detail.
Chapter on the cutting of boils that occur on the skin of the head.
Chapter XL (40).
Small ulcers occur on the skin of the head, and they are of the types of knots, which are contained by the pouches that are like them; as if they themselves were sucked out like chicken galls.
And their types are many.
From these (ulcers) some are fat; and from these some contain a moisture resembling mud; and from these some contain a moisture resembling ointments and poultices; and from these similar ones, and from these there are hard stones.
And in the cutting (of all) and their extraction, there is no fear, if it does not make a counteraction of an artery during its cutting.
And the operation in their cutting is to test it with an instrument, whose shape comes after this, which is called Introversum, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains moisture, then cut it with a section along its length with a superficial section in this shape (Intromissum).
And begin with the section from line b to line g. For when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off the cyst (kistin) that contains this moisture, and do not leave anything inside it.
For it often returns if something remains from it. Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with it and let it be until another day.
For it corrodes what remains from the cyst. Then repeat over the wound with the second Egyptian ointment, and the third, and if necessary, as many times as you need until you are confident that nothing remains from the cyst, then care for the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If the ulcer contains a fat knot: then cut it with this shape (Intromissum), having the form of a cross; and thrust needles between the folds of the section, and scrape it off from every side; and try your skill in extracting the pouch that contains it.
If an artery opposes you, then do what I shall tell you afterward.
And similarly, in a laceration (wound), if it is caused by a stone, treat it with cutting and the same cure as we have said before. Cutting over a stone abscess (lump) is easier because there is little blood or moisture present.
Sometimes there are such abscesses (lumps) on the head in some people where there is no moisture within.
Or, make a perforation in them always from the lower part of them to let the flow of pus run downward.
Then, care for these with whatever suits them from our treatment.
Chapter on the cutting of galls (warts) on the neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses (lumps) often occur on the neck and under the collarbones and groins; and sometimes they occur elsewhere in the body.
On those that occur on the neck, there is one type and many; they are formed counter to each other; and every gall (wart) on them is within its own covering, like a knot or an abscess on the head as we have said.
The kinds of these galls (warts) are many.
Some of them are hard and stony; some contain moisture; some are malevolent and do not obey the treatment.
In that which you see of good arrangement in touch, whose evident is close to the skin color, and moves to all parts, and is not attached with the nerves of the neck, nor with vein, nor with artery, nor is it deep: it is necessary to separate it by a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body along the line b, to the line g. And scrape it off from every part: and spread apart two layers of skin with a scalpel, or with many scalpels if needed, as we said regarding the cysts of the head, and draw it out gradually.
And beware not to cut vein, or nerve.
Let the instrument not be very sharp: so that it does not harm you with the incision, or disturb the sick person, and cut what is not necessary.
If however you cut vein, or artery, then it prohibits you from the operation, then place in the wound zege tritum, or some powders that dissolve blood, and tie the wound, and leave it, until the sharpness of the cyst subsides, and the wound softens: or it begins to rot.
For blood is separated by the skin, return then to your operation until you complete it.
Then care for yourself.
If the whole louse is cut, then it is necessary that you gather the edges of the wound and immediately stitch it up when you see that there is no further excess left.
If you see that there remains excess due to the size of the louse, then it is necessary to extend for cutting the root and extracting it; and to administer the suture as we have said.
And what contains moisture from the lice, pierce it with a superficial puncture, so that you may see its place of maturity; and place the puncture below that which follows the lower part of the body, as we have said.
Then administer after the puncture a linen with an ointment and similar to it, so that it corrodes what remains from corruption, until when you see the wound already cleaned; then care for yourself with a stronger ointment of flesh until it heals.
ยง On cutting the Epiglottis in the throat from aposteme happening.
Chapter XLIII.
The ancients said this cutting of the Epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; and this is their writing.
But in those with synangiosis, it is necessary to avoid the cutting of the Epiglottis; since no relief comes from that, because all the veins and lungs are weak.
But in those who have a hot aposteme in the mouth or throat or both amygdalae when there is no illness in the nostrils, it is necessary to use cutting of the Epiglottis to escape from destruction caused by congestion. Therefore, when we want to cut the Epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut the Epiglottis under three or four circles of the Epiglottis, with a small section across its width, in that which is between two circles by amount; this should be the cutting on sifac, not cartilage; and indeed this place is suitable for cutting because it is deprived of flesh, and vessels of blood are far from it.
If the surgeon is afraid, then he must stretch out the skin of the throat with a probe.
Then let him locate the skin until it reaches the channel; if he sees any, drain the blood vessel.
Then cut as I have said; and it is noted on the incision of the channel due to the mucus that comes out of it with what breaks apart, and from the removal of the voice.
And let the open wound remain for some time.
When the fear of burning is removed, bring together two lips of the wound skin, and take only the skin itself without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it heals.
Says Albucasis.
The summary of the conversation I have related, is not an explanation except when they see that one of these abscesses has already opened on the throat of the sick; and he was raised up above death, and desires to cut his breathing; they go to incise Epiglottis, so that the sick man may breathe over the wound place with some kind of breathing, and be saved from death: and for this reason they commanded to let the wound remain open until the evil of the illness consumes itself, and the evil is itself in three days, and as if it were; then therefore they commanded to suture the wound, and cure him until he is healed.
And that which I have seen by myself is this: an maidservant took a knife and sent it into her own throat with it, and she cut a piece of the windpipe of the lungs.
And I was called to treat her, and found her groaning, as is the groan of the dead.
So I then uncovered the wound, and found a small amount of blood that had come out of the wound.
I am confident that it did not cut the vein nor the artery; and pus was emanating from the wound.
I healed it myself and treated the wound until it became healthy; and nothing happened to the servant girl except a cough; and she returned after days to her better condition.
Therefore, I say that there is no fear in the section of the Epiglottis.
Chapter on the Section of a Neck Hernia.
Chapter 44.
This swelling named neck hernia, is a large swelling, of the same color as the body; and it is common among women.
It is in two ways: either natural or accidental. Surely, it is not a natural occurrence.
The accidental one is also in two ways; of which one is similar to fatty nodes.
And the other mode is similar to a swelling that arises from a knot in an artery.
And there is fear in it, and it should not be presumed upon with a knife unless in the case where it is small; and you test it and investigate it with a probe.
If you find it similar to a fatty node and is not suspended with any veins; then cut it, as knots are cut; and remove it along with what contains it from the chest, if it is in the chest; and if not, then thoroughly examine its entirety.
Then care for the place with what is necessary for treatment, until it heals.
Chapter on the Section over the type of Nodes.
Chapter 45. There are many types of nodes, and I have already said all their species in division; and it is necessary that I explain here the difference between a node and an exitum, when there is doubt. I say, therefore, when there is heat, and fever, and violent pains, until the boiling of superfluidity subsides and corruption is completed: then indeed fever and heat cease.
Therefore, if no heat, nor fever, nor pains exist and they are contained by a purse-like envelope which is specific to them and is of the color of the body; it is a knot, like a chickpea, and becomes like dough, both greater and lesser.
And they are of two kinds: either fatty: or containing moisture.
And the colors of moisture are many, as I have said in the division. Therefore, when you approach the treatment of the Knot, it is necessary that you examine it and investigate it first with an instrument called 'Intromissum', according to its form, which will come in the chapter following this one.
And the method of investigation of boils and all knots is that you take this instrument and insert it into a moist place which you find in the boil; and you move your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin.
Then, finally, place your hand according to the size of the boil.
Then remove the 'Intromissum' and observe what comes out following its trace.
If what comes out running is moisture of any color, then cut it with a superficial incision, as I have said in the other boils.
And if no moisture comes out in the trace of the 'Intromissum', then you know that it is fatty; cut it with an incision having the shape of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with tweezers, and strip the skin from all sides with ease: and keep the purse over it if possible in order to extract the healthy one with the knot.
If the cyst is ruptured during the operation and it cannot be extracted intact, which often happens, then extract it piece by piece until something remains from it.
If something remains from it, whether little or much, a node returns most often.
If it defeats you and something remains from it, fill the wound at its completion with some corrosive powder: bind up the wound, place on top of it a hot sore made of the same substance, care for it along with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If there is a large node, then divide its two sides and care for it along with that which incarnates. If it is a pulsating vein or a non-pulsating vein for you, then go and fill the place with boiled pitch, leave it bound for two or three days until the wound decomposes and blood stops boiling: then return to cut what remains of the node.
Chapter on external instruments for cutting and piercing.
Chapter LXVI.
Among them are the forms of Instruments, and they are in three kinds.
For there is a large one among them, for there is a medium-sized one among them, for there is a small one among them.
Make them from iron with square ends well-made, so that they enter quickly into the sore.
And these are the forms of Perforators and Knives, and one of them is called Beris, meaning to pierce: they are in three kinds.
For there is a large one among them, for there is a medium-sized one among them, for there is a small one among them.
They are joined together so that they can treat sores, ulcers, fissures, and boils arising from the bone that is among them.
And others are round, smooth, soft, such as the large needles with which seats are furnished, namely of glass, or brass, or iron, or silver. And the better ones among them are those made of glass.
And there is also experience with black lead, which is used to test for fissures, whose convexity provides reflections, so that they are reflected with softness along with those reflections.
And there are again three kinds. Because among them are long ones, middle ones, and short ones, according to the size of the fissure and its constriction. The form of veins, and there are many shapes. Because among them are simple ones, that is, those with one opening; and there are three shapes as you see, large, medium, and small.
And there are blind veins; and there are three kinds.
And among them are veins with two openings; and there are three shapes for these, as well as veins with three openings, and there are three shapes for these; and all of these are necessary in their place.
These are the forms of scalpels, which are used to cut and scrape knots, and growths; and there are three shapes for these, as one large, one medium, and one small.
The ends of these which are used for cutting are sharp, the other ends are not sharp; they are not placed thus except to provide aid during scraping of knots near the fear of cutting a vein or nerve; and so that one may recover from illness, and find some relief from pain that is found in scraping growths.
These are large, and there are three shapes for them.
They are made of copper, and they are similar to a radiolum, which is used to make alcohol: and at its end there is a hidden hole called spatulum-hole; it flows into the interior and exterior as you wish, just as you see.
The spatula hidden between the fingers for incision of abscesses: the weak do not receive them; they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The forms of wound-drains for the flow of blood: they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Make them from copper or citron, round, slightly shorter in length than you see: and let them be thin.
And it is necessary that these wound-drain forms be of various sizes with you, large and small: so that you can drain the blood quickly in case of necessity, and when there is no medicine at hand for you.
However, do not use them for draining blood in every part of the body, and do not use them unless in fleshy places: such as the arms of the legs, hips, arms, breasts, stomach, groin, and similar fleshy areas, from moist flesh.
And sometimes instruments are made from them similar to the balls of a fist, according to their shape: with which blood is drained when it flows from the site of venesection or incision of a vein or artery; and sometimes they are round, according to this shape.
Chapter on the care of breast-like bumps in men resembling female breasts.
Chapter XLVII (47).
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell during sleep (that is, when they begin to dream) until they resemble female breasts; and they remain infected with a foul abscess.
Whoever recoils from that (operation), let him make an incision over the mammary gland in a crescent shape, according to this form from the line 'b' to the line 'g'. Then scrape off all the fat.
Then fill the wound with ointment made of incarnated substance.
Then gather together two lips of the wound with stitching, and care for it until it heals.
If, however, the mammary gland sinks downwards and becomes soft due to its size, as happens with women: then it must be incised on both upper sides in two similar crescent-shaped cuts, of which one is enclosed by the other at their ends so that the larger one contains the smaller, according to this form from the line 'b' to the line 'g'. Afterwards, scrape off the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, then administer what was mentioned about stitching and powders, which are necessary for healing, until it heals.
If, however, you do not complete the incision as required, because of the restlessness of the patient or because of bleeding: then fill the wound with a plaster soaked in a corrosive ointment and leave it until it consumes what remains of the fat.
Then care for it until it heals.
On the perforation of an abscess, which happens under Titillicus (a type of swelling).
Chapter 48. These ulcers occurring under Titillico, are of the species of hard worms containing cysts, and among them are those containing moistures.
Those containing moistures should be cut open by lunar section, according to this form, from line b to line g. Therefore, when everything within the ulcer is evacuated with pus, then fill it up with old cloth and leave it until another day.
Then remove the cloth, and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the ulcer is of the kind of hard worms called noduli Strophulae, then cut it as we said in the section on Strophulae equally.
If the wound extends so that it discharges pus, then administer cautery to it, as we said in what was mentioned before.
[Section on surgery for ulcers caused by an artery or vein]
Chapter XLIX.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it heals, a boil frequently occurs there; and similarly, a boil and swelling occur in veins as well.
And the signs by which it is recognized that a boil and swelling are due to an artery or vein are as follows: because when a boil is due to an artery, it is long, aggregated in the depth of the body; and when you press on the boil with your fingers, you feel as if there is grating.
And that which is due to a vein is round in the visible body.
And an incision over this boil is a mistake, and especially in the area of the armpits, the groins, the neck, and in many places on the body; and it is very dangerous.
Therefore, it must be avoided to cut it with a knife and what is also in the extremities or the head, it must be avoided.
Therefore, for that which is due to the swelling of an artery's opening, make an incision in the skin lengthwise.
Then open the incision with scissors, afterwards the artery; and free it from tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert a probe under it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread at two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
Then puncture the place between the two ligaments with a lancet until all the blood that is in it comes out, and the boil is dissolved.
Then administer a treatment that produces pus until the ligaments fall off; afterwards care for it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the boil is due to a vein incision, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand as much of the boil with the skin as possible.
Then insert the point and hold it at the place you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and there should be a double thread within it until you draw it out from the other side.
Then bind the ulcer with a good ligature; as I have told you before, in the ligature of the vein, with two parts and two ends threaded. If you fear that the thread may be drawn out, then insert another needle with a new thread under the entire ulcer at the incision; press and tighten your threads in four places.
Then cut the ulcer in the middle until it comes out what is inside; then cut off the surplus skin and release what is bound from that.
Then place a poultice upon it (the ulcer) which you immersed in wine and oil.
Then administer the treatment, which is made with lints and oils, until it heals.
Chapter on the ulcer that occurs from a twist of the nerves.
Chapter L (the letter 'L' stands for Latin word "ulcus" which means ulcer).
As it happens with an apostema in an Artery and a Vein, similarly it happens with an apostema in Nerves: what happens to them is due to a blow, or it is due to excessive labor, and similar causes: and it occurs most often in places of joints, or heel, and in every place where the joints are moving: and it is a heavy abscess. Its color is similar to the rest of the body, and it is found in several dispositions without pain: and when it is tightened with violence, one feels weak like in a fainting spell.
And the abscess is not accumulated deep within the body, on the contrary, it is under the skin, and itself moves to every part, and does not go towards the front, or before, nor to the rear towards the back.
What therefore is in the joints, it should not be invaded with iron.
Perhaps it may happen due to constriction.
In that which is from them in the head, or in the forehead, pierce the skin with a lancet.
If therefore the abscess is small, then hold it with forceps and cut it off from the root.
And if it is large, then hang it up with a hook and scrape it: then remove it, and dress the wound with suture: take care of it until it heals.
[Section on the cutting of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.]
Chapter L (Roman numeral). Sometimes several people have frequent abscesses in their bellies and in the other parts of their bodies, which are called "Fungalia", similar to mushrooms.
Their root is delicate, and its head is coarse, and their lips are turned inside out.
It is small from them: it is what becomes very large from them.
And indeed I have seen a man, and within his belly were two things which were more like certain mushrooms: there was no difference between them, white, with fine roots, and their lips turned inside out, and they opened, and moisture flowed from them always.
I therefore cut it and found that one weighed about X and VIII ounces, and the other about VI ounces. And the operation in cutting them is to consider then if he is weak and moist, and the mushroom white, moist, fine-rooted: then cut him with a wide spatula, and be careful to have cauteries present with you in fire.
For often much blood is expelled during his section: therefore beware if blood conquers you, then cauterize him.
If you see him weak, fearful and afraid of the cut with iron, then take a thread made of lead correctly, and tie it with it to athelul (a kind of ointment or paste): its method is as we have said, and leave him for two days.
Then add in the stringing of lead (cautery).
Therefore do not cease to string lead, whenever it presses on the mushroom, until it is cut off and falls by itself without effort.
If the mushroom is large-rooted, then there is some fear and dread in cutting it, especially as it is within the belly.
Nevertheless, it is possible to cut its middle part.
Then cauterize him so that he does not return.
Then take care of him until the wound heals.
And be careful not to cut a mushroom of dark color, with few senses, foul appearance: for it is a cancerous abscess; and I will come back after this reminder about Cancer.
On the treatment of hernia of the umbilicus.
In omnibus quidem operationibus que sunt necessaria in curanda omni morpho, ut aperiatur purgatur aut cauterizetur aut sicut est in alis, est necessarium ut habeamus eiusmodi instrumenta que ad operandum possunt etiam si non fuerint usitata. Et in hoc capitulo erunt nomina instrumentorum, quibus utilia sunt in omnibus operationibus; atque de cura eminentiae umbilici, sicut dicitur supra, scribetur breviter, ut pateat ad eam operandum qui hoc libello non familiaris erit.
A swelling of the umbilicus arises for various reasons.
It may arise from ruptures of the liver, which is above the abdomen; and out comes pus, or the intestines, according to what happens in other ruptures.
It may also arise from blood flowing from a vein, or an artery, as was mentioned earlier.
It may also arise from obstruction of wind in it.
If it is due to a rupture of the liver, and the release of pus; then its color is similar to that of an abscess; it is soft, painless; and appears in a different position.
And if it is due to the passage of the intestines; then its position, as we have said, is of more violent difference.
Therefore, when you press it with your fingers, it disappears; then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound; and it is greatly enlarged at the entrance of the bath, and has intense pain.
But if it is due to moisture, it is soft; then it does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor can it be compressed, nor does it increase in size.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs appears an abscess turning black from the edge.
But if it is due to rotten flesh; then the abscess is large, hard, and firm, and it pusifies according to a certain quantity.
But if it is due to wind; then when touched, it is soft. And the operation in it is, that you consider then, if the swelling of the umbilicus is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or wind; then it is necessary to prevent its treatment.
For there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I said that abscesses due to an artery or vein occur.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia: then it is necessary that you command the patient to hold his breath and stand extended.
Then mark with the hot iron around the entire navel.
Afterwards command him to lie down on his back upon your hands.
Then circle with a wide spatula around the navel over the place you have marked with the hot iron.
Then extend the middle of the incision upward with a large hook.
Then tie him around with a strong thread or a silken cord and let the knot be that of a surgeon's knot.
Afterwards open the extended incision above the ligament.
If you find it already caught by the ligament: then extract the hernia and insert your index finger into it and push the intestine towards the inner abdomen; and if you find a hernia sac, then take it with the hook and cut off its excess.
If, however, it is an artery or vein opposite to you: then circle it much.
Afterwards return to your work.
And take two needles and insert them into two strong threads; and insert the two needles into the circle you made around the tumor in the shape of a cross, causing them to penetrate.
Then tie the tumor in four places on the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles and let the rotten flesh extend; and it will fall by itself or cut it when it becomes thin and rots.
Afterwards take care of him with whatever is necessary from the ointments until he is healed.
If the protrusion of the navel is from a swollen flesh in him or from moisture: then hollow out the tumor as we have said.
And extract blood or moisture that you find in it.
Then take care of it along with the place where it is solidified.
Chapter on Cancer Care. Title LXXXIII.
For I myself was unable to heal anyone from that; nor have I seen another before me who has achieved this.
And the operation on it when it is located as we have said, is to precede and loosen the sick person from black cholera several times.
Then if you find it with an obvious plentitude (of blood), perform phlebotomy on it.
Then prepare the sick person with a preparation in which the operation takes place.
Then insert the hooks that are suitable for Cancer into it (the abscess).
Then hollow out the entire thing from all sides with skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots; and allow the blood to flow, do not cut or remove it quickly, rather press the places, and clean away the coagulated blood with your hand or if possible there with instruments.
If the flow of coagulated blood from an incision of an artery or vein opposes you, then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off.
Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
Paragraph on treating Hydrophobia (rabies).
Chapter LIV.
We now narrate on the division of types of Hydropsis, and how accumulation of water occurs; and signs of all species, and treatment of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron, is only the type of ascites alone; it does not come into contact with iron of the type tympanitis; neither deeply with the type hyposarcae, for it is deadly.
If you have already been treated for this type of hydropsis, tympanitis with medicines and it did not help; then consider.
For if the sick person has already become weakened, or there is another illness along with hydropsis; such as if it is accompanied by cough, loose bowels, and similar ones; then beware not to treat him with iron; for it is dangerous.
But if you see a person who is overflowing with strength and there is no illness other than hydropsis; and it is not a child, nor an old person; then the method of operation in him is that you lift up the sick person standing before your hands, and the assistant follows behind him and presses his abdomen with his hand forcing water down to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a thorny sponge in this shape.
Let it be of two pointed parts, long, and having sharp tips like a sponge.
Nevertheless, there should be something of shortness in it gradually, so that it does not penetrate as far during the operation up to the intestine and harm it.
Then consider.
For if the hydrops is generated from the intestines; then it must be pulled out with a section from the navel by a length of three fingers below towards the lower part above the chest.
But if the hydrops is generated due to liver disease; then your incision should be from the navel by three fingers on the left side.
If its generation is due to the spleen, then let there be a section on the right side: and it is not necessary also that there should be a section on the side above which the sick person lies, so that superfluities do not run to the weak place.
Then perforate the skin entirely with the instrument.
Then insert into that incision, and slide your hand with the spatula under the skin, as if you were peeling it; let the quantity peeled off be the size of a nail or about that.
Then perforate the peel (sifac) until the spatula reaches the empty place; and that is the watery place.
Then remove it (the splenic tumor), and insert into the opening an instrument of this shape.
It is like a cannula; it is made of silver, brass or copper, lead, cleaned and polished: to its lower part there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes, two on one side and one on the other; its end is cut in the manner of a reed incision, as you see; at the upper end of it there is a loop.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately descends upon the instrument; therefore draw off from the water a quantity halfway.
Because if you draw off more than necessary from it, perhaps the sick person will die by resolution of his animal spirit; or he may have a fainting fit which is approaching death.
But draw off from it according to its potency, and according to the signs that the sick person's condition gives you by his pulse and the quality of it.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
This is because it is immediately retained due to the skin which retains the opening that is above the peel (sifac); about which I told you to perforate it in that way.
Then apply the instrument on the second day if you see the patient can endure it: also extract a small amount from water. Use it for a few days without fear and guard yourself against error until there remains in the water only a little.
If you fear for the patient and release much water from it, then take care of him with hot sand burial, much sweating in a bath and sun, and wait for thirst: and take care of him with the most powerful medicines until he is cured: and cauterize over the stomach, spleen, and liver, after the extraction of water: as I have told you in that which preceded.
On the care of infants who are born in places where their urinary passages have not been pierced.
Chapter LV. When someone gives birth to an infant from his mother's womb and the head is not pierced, or the opening is narrow, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore, one must immediately pierce it with a very sharp spatula in this manner:
Then place a slender nail made of lead into the hole and tie it; and hold it for three or four days.
When he wants to emit urine, remove it (the nail) and mix (it with something).
Then bring it back.
And if you do not place lead (or a similar substance), it is now possible that the urine which flows over the area, does not allow the hole to close.
He whose hole is narrowed (or constricted), is treated with lead (or a similar substance) for many days until it is enlarged.
Those who have the hole in an incorrect location are harmed.
This is because from those who are born, the hole is at the end of the spine: therefore he cannot mix (it with something) towards the front, until he lifts the spine with his hand to the upper regions. It is not generation (for him), because the semen cannot reach the womb in the correct way; and it is a very foul sickness.
The method of treatment in this case is for the sick person to lie down on his back.
Then extend the spine of his head with your left hand to a very strong extension, and cut the head of the spine from its place near the priapium (a term referring to an abnormal enlargement or prolongation of the penis) with a sharp knife or chisel: as is the incision of a reed, or like you root something, so that the middle comes out similar to the head of the spine: and for the hole to fall in the middle according to what is necessary.
And beware during your operation from blood flow.
This often happens (or can happen).
Therefore oppose him with something that cuts blood and take care of the wound until it is healed.
Section on problems concerning the foreskin (or prepuce) and the head of the penis, and rotting, blackening, and adhesion.
Head LVI.
These Albathers frequently occur in the vein, and it is a prominence of foul flesh.
And from it one is malignant, and another is not malignant.
Do not malignant one suspend with a fine hook and cut it off, until you clean it all.
Then place on it a basin immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it yourself afterwards with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.
If the Albather is malignant, of foul color, then it is necessary that you administer cautery after its incision and its ligation.
If, however, the Albather is in the foreskin of a captive man, not circumcised, and part of it is within the foreskin, and part of it is outside: then you must remove the Albather that is inside first, until it consolidates, then care for it externally; because when you care for it at the same time, the foreskin will not heal unless it protrudes.
And now they also occur in the testicles, and the foreskin becomes black and rotten.
Therefore, it is necessary that you hollow out everything that has become blackened, and what will rot, or is already rotten.
Then line it over with honey that has been beaten with flour of quince pits and sieved grains of crushed herbs.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If, however, there is bleeding, then administer cautery with a lunar cautery in this manner.
Because cautery is helpful for two conditions at the same time, namely bleeding and wound when it is ruptured.
If the head of the vein is corrupted and destroyed entirely within an hour: then it is necessary that you insert a cannula made of lead into the meat of the penis to mix weak wine over it.
In the actual adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis, and this adherence does not occur except in him whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required for it: and sometimes adherence occurs due to a wound or abscess: therefore, it is necessary to excoriate (or scrape) it with a blunt spatula until the ligament dissolves, and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
If it is difficult to determine exactly (the adhered tissue), then it is necessary to scrape something from the head of the penis and the foreskin.
Since the foreskin, when it is thin, may be easily pierced due to its thinness quickly.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thin linen cloth which has already been soaked in cold water, to prevent them from adhering again.
Then it is to be treated with a styptic until it becomes firm. Chapter on the cleansing of infants and the treatment of mistakes occurring in them.
Chapter 57.
Circumcision is not the solution to continuity, as are other wounds: but since it comes from our operation, by our will, and its use is for boys specifically, it is necessary that we mark a better outcome and an easier way leading to health in it.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
Since I have found the majority of craftsmen and phlebotomists to use cleansing, by circumcising with a new knife and with tweezers: they use alfecatum (a type of bandage) and ligature with thread, and incision with a nail.
And I myself have already tested all those methods, and I found no better cleansing with scissors, and with suture with thread.
Because, in the cleansing with scissors, skin often escapes.
Because the foreskin has two layers of skin: perhaps the outer skin is cut and the inner layer tears: therefore one is forced to make another incision, and pain will follow.
And with the cleansing that is done through the alfecat, that is, by hand (digital method), which tailors use, it is not securely cut at the extremity of the male member because perhaps it enters the opening of it.
However, with the cleansing by nail, perhaps iron comes out and ruins your operation; and the skin of a child is short by nature, and often this occurs such that it does not need cleaning; and I have already seen that.
The cleansing with scissors and suture with thread has proven good to me; because scissors are proportionate to the incision; therefore the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below.
Therefore when you press your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportionate, and they cut according to one operation at one time; and compression is made in a similar shape, holding the skin with a rod from all sides, so that no error occurs at all.
And the method of your operation is that you should make a child, especially if it is one who understands a little, aware that you do not do this, except that you tie thread on his rod only; and leave him until another day.
Then make him happy and rejoice in every way possible for you from the fact that he receives his understanding.
Then insert your hand to its shaft, and blow on the skin, and pull it upwards, until the head of the shaft emerges.
Then clean it thoroughly from whatever dirt accumulates upon it.
Then bind the sealed place with double thread.
Then tie below it a lesser bandage secondly. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower bandage securely, and cut between two bandages.
Then raise the skin quickly upwards, and extract the head of the shaft.
Then let the blood flow slowly (for it is better) and sprinkle powder on top; and upon the powder place a cloth in which an egg yolk boiled in rose water has been beaten up with fresh olive oil; and leave it upon this until another day; and take care of it with other treatment, until it heals.
The form of the forceps for cleaning is as follows.
Let the two ends be blunt and rounded, so that the branch of the nail does not protrude from them; and let the length of the two points be equal to the length of two handles equally.
But if the error occurs during cleaning, it is because perhaps the inner skin escapes completely or a part of it near the incision. Therefore, before making the incision, stretch it out with your fingernail from your hour and cut it evenly.
If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract it with a tweezers and cut it.
If three days have passed and there remains something inflated under the shaft, then leave it until the abscess becomes warm and scabs over; remove the scab with ease, and cut it according to your preparation; beware of the head of the shaft.
That will not harm him.
Apply that with it, which consolidates the wound from the powders that we have mentioned in the treatise on powders: and if it cuts through the skin beyond measure, and goes into deeper layers, it does not harm him even then.
Therefore, apply that with it until he is healed.
Chapter on the extraction of a retained worm in the bladder.
Chapter LVIII.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by a blockage made from stone, frozen blood, pus, flesh born, and similar things from what we mentioned in the methods of treatment division.
If the urine is not released and you see that its retention is due to a stone already present in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary for the patient to be weakened by being bent over his knees.
Then place his feet on his back, and let him stretch out his abdomen from the upper part of his back, and have him contract his breath as much as possible.
Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is pressed towards expulsion of the stone, urine is released.
If it is not released as previously mentioned, and the patient is strong against the weak: then it is necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called a syringe, whose form is S. It should be made of silver, subtle, soft, concave like the reed of a bird's quill in delicacy and radius, long like the palm of one hand and a half: to which a fine cannula should be attached at its head.
And the method of exit of urine through it is to take a doubled thread, tie a piece of flax or cotton, good binding at its end: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut with scissors if there is any excess flax, but introduce into the cannula forcefully, like pulling.
Then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and white egg: and make the patient sit on a chair, and warm the bladder, and his member with moist oils and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the penis gently until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then double it from the upper part of the navel. Then push the syringe inside it until it reaches the Bladder, and feel that it has already reached the empty place: and this is not done according to this order unless because the passage, through which it goes, is where there is a twist.
Then stretch out the thread with wool gradually.
For the vine follows the wool.
Then draw it out and let the vine run through the urine way: and repeat the syringe, and do not cease doing this until the bladder empties, and the sick person finds relief. Section on the quality of clysterizing the bladder with a Cylinder (Clepsydra).
Chapter LIX.
It is deaf, that is, closed.
And there are three openings in it, two on one side and one on the other, as you can see.
And there should be a concave place where that which drives it is, according to the quantity that is needed without addition, until when something is pulled out with it, it is attracted by humidities; and when it is driven, along with it, it is expelled to a distance: this is how the clepshydra works, from which naphtha, that is, Greek fire, is projected in the battles of Mars.
Therefore, when the desire is to project moisture into the bladder, introduce the end of the clepshydra into the moisture and pull out with it what drives it towards the upper part; for moisture is attracted in the concavity of the clepshydra. Then introduce its end into a cane, as we have said in a syringe.
Then drive the moisture with what drives it; for that moisture quickly reaches the bladder, so that one feels unwell. The form of a subtle clyster for irrigating the bladder.
Then insert the thread into those holes as they are turned. Then gather the circle, as it is gathered with a thong; when you place within it what you wish from moisture, oil and water.
Then tie it in the instrument; and make it like you did with the bladder by pressing with your hand until moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter on the Extraction of Stones.
Chapter Sixty. We have said about the types of stones, and their treatment with medications; and we distinguished between the stone generated in kidneys, bladder, and its entirety; and we spoke about the stone that is operated on by hand and section; and it is a stone generated properly in the bladder; and he who is strangled by a rod; and I am telling you this with clear explanation and abridgment.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder most often happens to boys.
And among its signs is that urine exits from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears in it white sand, and the weak one scratches his rod, and struggles with it, and often hangs down. Then it rises up, and exits along with it in many of them.
And the healing of boys is easy until they have reached fourteen years of age.
It is difficult in the elderly.
In youth it is moderate, that is to say, between the two: and that of which the Stone (crystal) is larger, the cure is easier; and if it is smaller, the treatment is contrary to it.
When we come to the cure, it is first necessary that we clean the sick one with an enema, which draws out all the dung that is in his bowels; for sometimes it prevents the discovery of the Stone (crystal) during examination. Then the sick one should be taken with his feet, shaken, and moved to lower parts; so that the Stone (crystal) descends into the deep bladder or jumps from a high place several times.
Then make him sit with his hands in your hands, and his hands should be under his loins, so that the bladder becomes entirely lowered towards the lower parts.
Then examine (search) him and touch him externally.
If you feel the Stone (crystal) in a space, then immediately approach it with an incision.
If it does not fall under your touch completely, then it is necessary that you clean the index finger with oil from the left hand if the sick one is a child; or the middle finger if the sick one is an adult, and insert it into his anus and search for the Stone (crystal), until it stands under your finger; and gradually turn it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger and push it out towards the exterior against the place where you wish to make an incision; and command the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and command another assistant to lift the testicles with his right hand towards the upper parts; and with the other hand, remove the skin that is under the testicles in the part from where the incision is.
Then insert a probang (Spatula) shaped as follows.
Then find the place between anus and testicles, not in the middle but to the left side: and the incision should be above the stone, and your finger should be in the anus: and make a transverse incision, so that the incision is wide externally and narrow internally, according to the amount that the exit of the stone from it should not be larger.
For perhaps the finger which is in the anus presses the stone at the incision and comes out without difficulty.
And know that from the stone are its angles and corners, which makes its exit difficult due to this reason.
And it is soft, like a gland, and round; and the exit of it is easy.
Therefore to the one who has corners and edges, add in the fissure (crack or cleft).
If it does not come out in this way, then one should apply pressure on top of it; or tie over it properly with a cord whose tip is like the moon, which presses upon the stone and does not slip away from it; or to introduce an instrument beneath it with a curved tip.
But if you cannot apply pressure on it, then enlarge the opening slightly.
If something stops you due to blood, cut it with a knife.
But if the stone is larger than one, then first push a large one towards the bladder (vesica).
Then cut upon it.
Afterwards push a small one after that; and do the same if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then ignorance is to cut on top of it with a large incision.
Because it happens to the sick one of the two things, either death or a constant flow of urine; because the place is not consolidated at all.
Administer the purgation until it goes out; or break the opening with forceps until you draw it piecemeal.
When you have completed your operation, fill the wound with tar, aloes, and dragon's blood; tie it up, and place upon it a cloth soaked in oil or wine, or rose-oil, and cold water; to let the abscess settle down warmly.
Then turn the sick person on his neck, and do not loosen the binding until the third day.
When you loosen it (the binding), anoint the place with much oil and water.
Then take care of him with the unguent daphne, and the unguent basilicum, until it heals.
If, however, an abscess hot and corrosive occurs in the wound; such as if blood congeals in the bladder and urine is prevented from it; and this is known by the expulsion of blood with urine.
Therefore insert your finger into the wound and draw out the blood.
For if it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder, and its rotting.
Then clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and apply any kind of remedy that agrees with it in healing, until it heals.
And it is necessary during the entire course of treatment, to tie together both hips and bind them with a cause for the medicines that are placed on the place.
If the stone is small and it is in the urethra and it is pounded there and the urine outlet is prevented; then care for him with what I have said before reaching the incision.
For many times you will be excused from the incision in this treatment, for I have already proved it (the above remedy). The instrument is to receive a Perforator from iron alferic, whose shape is triangular at the end, sharp and fixed into wood.
Then take thread, and tie it with a rod under a stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then introduce the perforating iron into the rod with ease until the Perforator reaches the same stone; and rotate the Perforator with your hand on the said stone gradually; and you shall exert force to make it penetrate from the other side.
Indeed, urine is discharged immediately.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outside part of the rod.
It is indeed broken and it comes out with the urine, and the ill one gets healed.
If however this treatment is not prepared for you for some reason that prevents it, then tie thread under the stone, and another thread on top of the stone. Then cut across the rod on the stone between two ties.
Then draw it out.
Afterwards, loosen the ligature and clean off the frozen blood which is made in the wound.
And the thread under the stone is not necessary unless to prevent its return to the bladder; and another thread on top is not necessary except that when the thread below is removed after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place, and covers the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for you to lift the skin above when tying the upper thread so that it returns to its proper position and covers the wound, as we have said.
Chapter on the Extraction of Stones in Women.
Chapter LXI.
A stone is seldom generated in women.
If however a stone happens to any of them, then the treatment is difficult and forbidden because of many modes.
One of them is: that perhaps a woman is a virgin. And the second one is, because you do not find a woman who discloses herself to the doctor when she is chaste or married.
Thirdly, because you do not find a woman well versed in this art, especially the operation with her hand.
And fourthly, distance from the place of the stone (stone here refers to a gallstone); hence it requires deep incision, and this entails fear.
If necessity demands it (the operation), then you must take a female doctor who is well-versed; she is seldom found.
But if you exclude this (female doctor), then seek a chaste and skillful doctor, who is present; a well-informed woman obstetrician skilled in women's matters or a woman knowledgeable in the art; make her present, especially instructing her to do everything as she examines the stone. Firstly, it is to examine if a woman is a virgin: then you should insert your finger into her anus and seek the stone.
If you find the stone, grasp it with your finger and then instruct the obstetrician to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and examine the stone after she places her left hand on the bladder and presses it gently. If the stone is found, then you should move it gently from the bladder opening to lower areas with utmost care until it reaches the root of the hip.
Then cut across it at the midpoint of the bladder near the root of the hip, from whatever side you wish to prepare him, and he will feel the stone in that area; his finger should not be removed from the stone while gripping it, pressing down on it; the incision should initially be small.
Then insert a rod over that cut.
If he feels a stone, then let him add to the cut according to a proportional amount that the stone is expelled from there.
And know that the shapes of stones are many. For these there is one small, large, smooth and rough, long and round having branches.
Know its shape so that it may be indicated to you on that which you wish.
If blood overcomes you, then let add in the place zegi crushed and hold it for an hour until the blood is cut off.
If the flow of blood overcomes you and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery that has been cut: then place powder on the spot, and bind it with thread fitting for ligature; do not move it; and let the stone remain, and do not extract it yourself.
Perhaps a weak woman may die.
Then take care of the wound.
When the sharpness of blood subsides after days and the place becomes putrid, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter on cutting a watery hernia.
Chapter 62.
A watery hernia is not something other than an accumulation of moisture within the albo sac, which is under the skin of the testicle containing the egg; and it is called the albo sac. And sometimes it is within its own panniculus that nature has prepared for itself in the part of the egg, until it seems to be; which is another egg and is the skin of the testicle between the albo sac that we said; and this does not happen often.
And indeed the generation of this branch is due to a weakness that happens in testicles; therefore, this material is discharged towards them.
And sometimes it happens due to striking upon the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. For its color is either sloping towards citrinitas (yellowish), or red like blood, or foul-smelling, black, or watery white; and the one that is more is this one.
For if it is in the scrotal white part that we have mentioned, then the abscess is round and somewhat shorter than the shape of an owl's eye; and the testicle does not appear, because moisture contains it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in the scrotum proper to itself, then the abscess is round with a part like an owl's eye; and therefore the man bursts because it is another egg (ovum).
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the scrotal white part, then it falls under the sense (of touch).
When therefore the power of perception desires to know the color of the moisture, then experiment on the color of the moisture in an abscess with a probe inserted, whose shape was previously mentioned.
According to that which comes out following the probe, judge about what is between it (the abscess and the probe).
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron (surgery), then it is necessary that you command the sick man, if possible for him, to have his body bled; and you see his body full.
Then he lies on his back on a low bed, and place many cloths beneath him.
Then you sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on his right, who will extend his leg (the sick man's) to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the flank of the abdomen.
Then take a broad probe, and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length, almost up to the scrotal bone; and make the incision according to the line of equal length that divides the skin of the testicles, until you reach the white albugo encompassing it; and scrape it and observe, or be careful not to cut it; and let your scraping be on the part that hangs down more with the egg; and examine carefully with the scraping according to the amount that is possible for you.
Perform a wide water expulsion on the albugo (the white part of the testicle), and remove all the water. Then separate the two parts of the scrotum with your fingers, and pull down the albugo to the upper part, without touching the skin surrounding the testicles; and cut the albugo as you can in any way, either completely or partially, particularly on its delicate side.
For if you do not examine and search carefully, there is no certainty that the water will not return during the incision.
But if an egg comes out from its shell externally during your operation hour: then when you finish the incision of the albugo, reduce it.
Then bring together the two parts of the scrotal skin with a stitch.
Then take care of it as you would any other wound, until it heals.
If you find a corrupted egg from any blackness, then it is necessary to tie the containers that are suspended, fearing bleeding.
Then remove the testicle with its spermatic cord, and remove the egg; then take care of it as we said earlier.
If the water is collected in two parts, then you know that there are two branches; therefore, cut the other part equally as you did on the other side.
And if it seems to you that the operation should be one, then do so; then remove the blood.
Insert a wet wool thread into the incisions, or in rose oil: and place another wool on the outside which you have immersed in wine and oil, and expand it over two testicles, and look inside the abdomen: and put double cloths on top, they are poultices: and tie them above with a ligament that has six knots.
Then two cloths are taken and sweated, and filled with carminative, according to this shape: and the ends which are pressed should be wrapped with wet wool or linen: and they will be joined with a ligature in the loins: and one end will take hold of the anus up to the back, and the second will take hold at the part of the neck: and two ends lower down will be on the two thighs, and two other ends will be on the two groins: and the entire ligature will be joined in the loins.
And sometimes this ramus is artificially treated with cautery in place of the incision with iron: and it is that you should take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the testicles with it: and it is lit, as we have said: until the white silicone containing water is revealed: then take the cautery, according to this shape.
It resembles Greek letters.
Then pierce that with it and let it burn until all the moisture comes out.
Then stretch that with forceps, and scrape it with a fine-pointed cautery that has been lit, and cut into it as much as possible for you, until you have removed all of it.
And be careful not to let the fire touch the egg.
And know that this operation is healthier, more distant from bleeding, and better than an operation with incision.
If it causes a counteraction to you at the time of the section or at the time of the cautery for an abscess, or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary that you treat what causes the counteraction to you from that with the appropriate treatment, according to what was previously mentioned.
If the patient is weak and fearful, and does not await this operation due to its horrible nature: then administer a purgative as I have previously said, and it is so.
When you are informed by what was previously said about the meaning of a watery discharge from the vagina: then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then purge the abscess in its lower part with a wide spatula: and place the purgation along the length of the body, and let the opening be wide, until it is cured by water entirely.
Then place a hot compress on the spot and bind it, and let him remain until the remaining water is cured: then treat him until the wound heals.
If the counteraction is to the discharge of water at the time when you purge it, and this is not due to any other reason, except that a white mass obstructs the opening of the wound and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary that you insert a feather or an instrument with which water from hydropic sores is extracted, whose form was previously mentioned: or add in the operation of the wound a little more.
And know that the water will return and accumulate after six months, approximately.
When it accumulates, then it should be purged in the same manner, and the patient shall pass his days thus.
Chapter on the treatment of fleshy ramics.
Chapter LXIII.
Know that, in a section over this Raimic, it leads to danger in many dispositions due to fear.
Therefore, it seems wise to me to release it from there.
And I am remembering the operation and the appearance of the abscess in it.
Therefore, I say that many abscesses occur in the bodies, from which testicles are composed; and this happens due to many causes. Or from an excessive sharpness or acuteness that flows toward the testicles.
Or from a blow.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it; and the abscess is severe.
And perhaps it is a stone abscess, whose color is dark, and no sensation is felt in it.
And sometimes it happens from the knotting and swelling of the arteries, and inflation of them; as has already been remembered; or from the inflation of veins.
Therefore, what is from it due to the swelling of the arteries can be known through the position of the abscess, when you compress it with your fingers.
And one should not touch it completely.
But what happens from the inflation of veins does not scatter anything at the point of compression with the fingers. And now it is possible that a section can be made over this appearance and over the remaining flesh; and it is for the sake of cutting the skin of the testicles.
Then stretch the egg upward and extract it along with a white piece of silk; and release the suspenders from the testicles, and tie the testicles; and cut the suspenders after you have released them from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is consolidated with those born tissues, then it should be drawn out and cut. If there is an adherence between something from a syphon or within the vessel: then it is necessary to release the entire adherence and cut it with a round incision.
If there is a birth of flesh in the place of an adherence that is behind it: then it is necessary to cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said. When your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool immersed in rose oil and wine; afterwards take care of it along with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter on the treatment of branches, which is related to vines.
Chapter LXIIII (62nd).
A pile is a pouch-like abscess similar to a bunch of grapes with the consistency of testicles; it becomes difficult for movement and exercise, and walking, especially for the sick.
And in the treatment of this illness there is fear due to the memory of what preceded it.
However, it is necessary to say that the operation on it should be done as the first ones did. Therefore I say that you must make the sick person sit on an elevated seat.
Then cut with a wide sharp crosswise incision on the vessels until they are exposed.
Then scrape it off from all sides, as I have told you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then cut it at the middle crosswise along its length of the body, and remove what collects from putrid and foul humors.
Care for the wound with treatment of other wounds where the power to generate pus exists, so that vessels which nourish one testicle fall.
For it is not evil through that.
If it happens that the vine is in all vessels, then they must be removed for this reason: lest the testicles be deprived of nourishment due to the incision, and decay or burn, and not be useful with them.
Chapter on the care of intestinal reeds. Chapter 65.
Why do intestines come out through that rupture to one testicle?
And this rupture is either from the siphon or its extension.
These two kinds of ruptures occur from various causes: either by striking, jumping, shouting, lifting heavy objects or similar things.
And the sign is when it is from the extension of the siphon.
It happens gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly: it is an abscess equal to the turned-over hollow: because the siphon compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it when it is from a cut in the siphon, because it causes a sudden severe pain at its origin: and it is an abscess different, appearing under the skin near to: and that is due to the outflow of the intestine, and its course to the exterior through the siphon.
And sometimes it comes out with a worm in the intestine: and this is called the intestinal reed, and worm: and sometimes it occurs with flatulence.
And sometimes feces run into the intestine and are held there; it is a danger to the sick for it brings about painful conditions, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of this disease with iron there is fear; therefore caution must be taken to avoid accidents during it.
The method of operation is to command the sick person to reduce their intestine with their own hand into the hollow within themselves, if they obey the return.
Then he lies on his back upon his neck between your hands and elevate his legs.
Then stretch the skin that follows the skin upward and cut the skin of the testicles entirely along its length.
Then tie the two lips of the incision with sutures, as many as you need to open the incision with them; and the incision should be in accordance with the size that can allow the egg to come out.
Then scrape the scrotum and what is beneath the skin of the testicles until the scrotum becomes white all over; then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that part between the scrotum and the albumen under the skin of the egg, and through it, without being attached to the posterior part of the egg.
Then press the skin of the testicles with your right hand while at the same time extending the scrotal albumen upwards with your left hand; and lift the egg with the scrotum to the part of the incision; and command the attendant to extend the egg upward, and you solve the attachment that is behind the complete solution.
And examine with your fingers if there is nothing in the scrotum wrapped in hard, rolled-up intestine.
But if you find something from it; then push it downwards into the lower abdomen.
Then take a probe with a thick thread, made from linen from ten threads; and insert it at the last scrotum, that is, the tunica, which follows the skin of the testicles after section; then cut off the ends which project from the thread, until there are four threads.
Then compose some of them on top of others in the form of a cross; and bind with it the alsifach, of which we have spoken, since it is a strong ligament under the skin of the testicles, until it cannot let any of the fluids that nourish them pass through to them; so that a hot abscess does not occur there.
And place again the ligament beyond the first ligament, at least two fingers away.
And after these two ligaments, let out from the scrotum, what is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity of size of a finger; and cut the rest entirely according to roundness, and remove the egg.
Then cut in the lower part of the scrotal skin along which blood and pus run, as we have told you in what was previously mentioned.
Then administer wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and administer the ligament as we have told you.
And sometimes the scrotum of the testicles that we mentioned is cauterized after its incision, fearing blood flow.
This often happens.
And let go of the ligament until it falls off by itself.
If the case is slow to heal, then foment it with warm water; and place on it what we have said, until it falls off.
Then take care of the wound with the treatment for wounds, until it heals.
Chapter on Hydroceles (swellings filled with fluid).
Head, LXVI. (This is a Roman numeral for sixty-sixth, referring to the chapter on treating conditions related to the head.)
In this ramichia, I did not see anyone who dared to treat it with iron. (Ramichia is a term for a surgical instrument resembling forceps used in the nose or ear.)
And the first ones said that it happens as we told in ramichia which is with wine. (The context suggests a discussion about a medical condition or treatment.)
That is to tie the vessels after section on it with ease below; then cut in the middle and treat lastly with what opens itself; until the vessels fall out; and cure the wound, as we said, until it heals. (The text seems to discuss a surgical procedure for treating a medical condition or injury.)
Chapter on rupture that happens in groins. (Disruption refers to a sudden tear or separation of tissues, possibly a hernia in this context.)
Head, LXVII. (Refers to the sixty-seventh chapter, discussing conditions related to the head.)
When rupture occurs in groins, as we said, and a location protrudes, and nothing from the intestines descends towards the testicles; and if it does descend, it is insufficient and returns in all hours; but if prolonged with it, a split occurs in sifach until the intestines descend into sifach. (The text seems to discuss a hernia condition related to the groin.)
And this occurs from the extension of sifach, which is in the groins, as we said. (The context suggests a further discussion about hernia or related conditions.)
That is because sifach extends; then it softens, and the location is pushed out. (The text seems to discuss a medical condition or symptom related to the extension of sifach.)
And its treatment is with cautery, as its previous narrative said. (The context suggests a discussion about treating a medical condition or injury using cautery.)
And it is sometimes treated with iron, in this manner; and there is, that the sick one lies on his back between your hands. (The text seems to discuss a surgical procedure for treating a medical condition or injury.)
Then cut the location of rupture and protrusion with a width-wise incision, according to the size of three fingers. (The text appears to describe a surgical procedure for treating a hernia or related condition.)
Then tie the ligature and, what is beneath the skin, until the white sifach is exposed, which is beneath the skin following it.
Then take the radium and place it on the projecting part of the sifach and press it to the depth of the intestines.
Then cut out two protruding parts at the end of the radius from the sifach and sew them together with a stitch; then extract the end of the radius.
And do not cut the sifach at all, nor draw out the yolk, nor anything else as I had told you in the treatment of the intestine's branches. Then treat that with the treatment of wounds.
When you make an incision, clean it and restore the wound until it heals.
For sifach contracts and no protrusion is added to the rupture.
And cautery is better here, since it is closer to salvation.
Chapter on the softening of the scrotum skin.
Chapter LXXVIII.
The skin of the scrotum is often softened in some men, which causes the flesh between them to become soft, and it becomes an unpleasant sight.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who asks about the treatment of this to make the patient lie down on his back and make an incision through all the softened skin over the natural skin. Then sew together the two folds with a stitch; and if you wish, trim off the excess of the softened skin with three or four stitches, or a strong stitch.
Then treat this with the treatment of other wounds until it heals and the threads fall out.
Chapter on castration.
Head LXIX.
You should know that castration is forbidden by our law: and therefore it would be permitted for me not to remember it in my book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons.
One reason is that it should be in the knowledge of a physician when he is asked about it: and so that he may know the treatment for him to whom it happens.
And the second reason is that we often need castration of certain animals, for our use through it, such as rams, hirsute swine, and cats, and similar ones among animals.
I say therefore, that castration is done according to two modes. Or by attrition.
Or by fissure and section.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is: that we make the animal sit in hot water until his testicles are softened and relaxed and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and no longer appear under touch.
But in castration by fissure and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of his testicles with your left hand.
And this mode of castration is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition perhaps leaves something from the testicles, wherefore the animal desires intercourse.
Then cure the wound until it heals.
Chapter on the care of Hermaphroditus in two modes.
Head LXX.
Hermaphroditus is of men according to two modes.
One of them is that it appears in him what follows the space, or on the skin of the testicles, in what is between two testicles, with a figure similar to the vagina of a woman, in which are hairs: and sometimes urine flows from it which is on the skin of the testicles.
In women there is one species, and it is a vagina of a woman on top of the pubis like small testicles of a man, projecting towards the outside; one of which is like the male member known as Priapus, and two like two testicles.
And the treatment of the three species, two from men, and one from women, is that you must cut into the flesh until the imprint flees.
Then heal them with the remedies for other wounds.
However, in the second species of men, from which urine flows out, which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, and there is absolutely no cure for it.
Chapter on Incision of Warts and Protruding Skin in Women's Vaginas.
Chapter 71.
A wart is perhaps added on top of a natural condition until it becomes ugly and the appearance is spoiled: and sometimes it grows so much in certain women that it expands like in men, and reaches intercourse.
Therefore, you must hold the excess wart with the hand or with a hook and cut it: and not at the extremity of the incision, especially in deep roots, so that there is no bleeding.
Then heal the wart itself with the remedies for wounds until it heals.
But flesh that has come out is the flesh that is born in the opening of the womb until it fills itself: and sometimes it comes out towards the outside like a tail; and for this reason some call the disease "caudad.
It is necessary therefore that we cut it as we do with a tumor, and treat it until it heals.
On the treatment of an Alractic ulcer, which is not perforated in a woman.
Chapter LXXII.
The Alractic ulcer is when there is an unperforated boil on a woman or a small hole.
And it is either natural or accidental.
The accidental one is from the preceding illness; and it itself arises either from flesh born attached, or from subcutaneous tissue, or from fat; and it arises either in the depth of the matrix (womb), or in its sides, or on top of it, or below it; and it forbids coitus and impregnation, parturition, and perhaps menstruation.
Its recognition is through the examination of an obstetrician, if it appears that the swelling is near the opening (of the matrix).
If it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers or a rod.
If the swelling is from subcutaneous tissue and it is near two lips (of the matrix): then apply a hot iron, and break it.
And place small poultices on top of the two lips.
Then place your thumbs of both hands together and let the woman be on her back with her legs spread apart.
Then stretch out the two lips with strength until the subcutaneous tissue is broken and the swelling opens up.
Then take thread and dip it in oil, and place it on the spot; let the woman rub it daily so that the area does not become hard by another thing.
If the subcutaneous tissue is thick and coarse: then it is necessary to cut it with a narrow-bladed leech-like leaf of myrtle.
If the swelling is from flesh born attached: then suspend it with hooks and cut it; and have with you medicines that stop blood flow without bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and frankincense mixed with sheep's fat.
Then administer a wide cannula made of lead, so that the wound does not heal quickly, hold it for some days; and apply linen cloth, then treat the rest with the usual care, until it heals.
And sometimes a birth of flesh from the matrix arises: it is therefore necessary that they be cut according to this manner: as long as there is no cancerous growth, for the cancerous matter in the matrix should not come into contact with iron at all.
Section on the treatment of hemorrhoids, by Attehelil and Botheor for women.
Chapter LXXIII.
Indeed, hemorrhoids are the opening of veins until much blood continuously flows from them.
When hemorrhoids harden, they become warts; and I have already said what their types are, and their signs; now I will say here what receives treatment and what does not.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the matrix and not perceptible to touch, then no treatment with iron is given.
But those on the opening of the matrix that can be felt are those that receive treatment.
Therefore, it is necessary to introduce a woman into a cold house.
Then Attehelil extends himself with forceps or with rough cloth and cuts them from their roots.
Then he sprinkles powder over them near the flow of blood from one of the incision wounds without biting; like acacia, dragon's blood, pitch, and similar substances.
Then he pushes his feet against the wall for an hour.
Afterwards, place her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then have her sit in a decoction of sumac, rinds of pomegranates, and tannins and similar substances.
Then take barley flour, and make it into a paste with honey and vinegar, and apply it on his back.
If blood is cut out along with it, that's good; if not, make the back adhere to blisters and nipples, without scarification.
Then take wool and dip it in the juice of tar-thorn, or the juice of argolis, or the juice of elm bark, that is, alder, Pontic wine, and make it stick to the wound.
When an abscess becomes quiet, then care for the place with ointments until it heals.
Albarth is red and resembles the heads of alhaasse, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore, you should cut what appears from it, as I said in thehelil equally; and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter on the Perforation of the Expelled Fetus that occurs in the Womb.
Chapter LXXIV.
In the womb, many kinds of abscesses occur, such as cancer, stone abscess, ulcers, adubelati, alekilati, that is, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, ragadiae, thelil, and warm abscess.
And I myself have already said all these diseases and their kinds, the signs of each one, and the cures for them in another division; it is necessary to say in this treatment about the warm abscess that occurs in the womb when it is from abscesses that collect pus, and we need to know how its opening with iron is done.
Therefore, you should consider.
If the pain of the abscess is sharp at its beginning with striking and burning and fever; if it turns red on itself when applied to the sense; then do not rush with its perforation: and take care of it with what helps for maturation, until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a seat which has two armrests, and she should lean back or recline on her back, and gather her feet towards the lower part of her belly; and let her hips be spread apart, and let her place her arms under her knees, and tie each one with a band appropriate for that.
Then the midwife shall sit on the woman's right side, and administer the instrument with which the opening of the womb is opened.
The form comes to those who are in labor.
And it is necessary when you are to administer this instrument that you make a deep incision with the rod in the woman's womb; so that what enters from the instrument is not deeper than the depth of the womb, and injures the weak.
If the instrument is too deep, then it is necessary that you place small pebbles on the surface of the depth of the womb; so as to prevent the entire entry of the instrument into the depth of the womb; and it is necessary that you place a loop, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side; and that you hold the instrument and turn the loop with the attendant until the depth of the womb is opened.
When it appears that the child is about to be born and touched with the hand, and it is soft and smooth; then it is necessary that you separate her herself from the head with a broad spatula.
When the pus is expelled, then it is necessary that you place linen soaked in rose oil or green oil with a certain stickiness on the wound; and place the linen, and remove the section from the depth of the womb.
Place a clean linen soaked in boiling wine vinegar over the womb and on the comb; and on top of that, place a clean cloth dipped in water in which mallow has been boiled.
Then it shall be treated after two days with an ointment suitable for that purpose, until it heals.
And sometimes the matrix and wound are cleansed, so that it is purged with water and honey: then with water in which the root of the lily has been boiled, or long aristolochia: then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden internally within the matrix, then it is necessary to refrain from treating it with iron, rather cure it with what was said above concerning division.
Part Two: Teachings on Obstetrics, how to treat living fetuses that have exited in an unnatural manner.
Chapter LXXXI.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to first know the shape of a natural birth.
Therefore, the signs of this are as follows: when you see a woman pressing towards the lower regions, and desires to smell the air, and is swollen above her belly with childbirth, and hastens the exit of the fetus; then know that this birth is in its natural shape, and its outlet is over its head, and the afterbirth is accompanying it: either suspended or hanging from the navel. When you see these signs, then press down on her abdomen so that the fetus descends quickly.
But if it is a birth other than this, it is unnatural, inadmissible.
For sometimes the fetus comes out with its feet first, and its body goes out before its head, and one foot or hand; or a single hand or foot: or its head and one hand; or its belly: and perhaps it turns over onto its neck, and similar unnatural shapes.
It is necessary therefore for the Midwife (Obstetrician), to be wise and skillful in all these matters, and should beware of error and deception; and I am showing every figure from them, and how the intellect is in it, and this will be indicated by it, and it shall stand upon it.
When the fetus comes out on top of its own exit, and it becomes strong upon the woman, and the delivery becomes difficult for her, and you see her strength already weakened: then make her sit on a seat, or let the women hold her; and let her inhale steam from boiled fennel seeds, and with moist oils.
Then the midwife introduces a small spatula into her fingers, and she probes with it the cervix, and cuts it with her nails until what is inside runs out due to moisture; and press the womb of the woman until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then it is necessary to use a female enema with fennel mucilage, with sesame oil.
Then order her after the enema, that she is compressed; and make her sneeze with snuff, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour.
The fetus will come out immediately.
If two hands of the fetus come out first, then you must gently pull them back slowly.
If it does not obey at the entrance, then place the woman on a seat and raise her feet up; then hit the seat on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the impact.
If the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies; then cut them and take out the rest of the fetus; and tie his hand with cloth, and take him out equally; for he will come out.
The outcome [occurs] upon its feet.
When the fetus exits upon its feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards: then gradually turn it: afterwards straighten it.
Then take one of its feet and extend it slowly.
And when they [the legs] come out as far as the hips, then command it to be pressed and make her sneeze with pepper: for it will be born if God so desires.
And if it does not come out as we have said [described], then gradually bring the fetus back until you put it in its natural position.
For it will then be born easily through that [exit].
If it is prevented from coming out as we have said [described], then take some mallow root pulp, sesame oil and soluble gum: grind all of them together with good pounding in a mortar: then apply the mixture to the inside wall of the woman's womb and lower abdomen.
Then make her sit in warm water until she sweats.
When you see that her lower parts are already warmed, then make [something] of myrrh for her and place it upon it.
When one hour has passed, then make her sit on a chair.
Then make her sneeze: and hold her mouth and nose: and press the lower part of the stomach gently with pressure.
For the feces will come out immediately.
Exit birth over the knees and hands.
When it comes out in this manner, then insert your hands gradually.
Then the woman lies on her back with her feet hanging down and she lies down on the bed and encloses her hands.
Then press gently upon the stomach of hers.
Then take out what is under her feet from the sheets until it is ready at the bottom.
If the birth does not come out, then take her feet and shake them with strong shaking.
Then press what is above the hypocondrium gently until the birth comes up to higher parts.
Then insert your hands and push the birth gradually: and command the woman to press until the birth comes out.
Exit birth hanging broadly from the hands.
Insert your hand for reduction (reducing a dislocated joint or bone).
If she cannot be reduced [back into place], then carry the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then lay her down on the bed and strike her legs violently.
Then administer the ointment you have prepared from mucilages (a thick gelatinous substance obtained by boiling plant materials).
If she receives birth, then make her sit on a chair.
Then study the reduction of the hand, and equalize the fetus according to its natural figure: and make the woman sneeze, and command her to press herself until it exits.
The exit of the fetus is on its neck, with hands spread, and its face is towards the back of its mother.
The midwife must hold the hand of the fetus, then gradually turn it and equalize it with ease.
When it is equalized, then place it on the wound as I have said with oil and mucilages.
Then command her to move it slowly.
When you have done that, then make her sit on a stool and command her to lean to the right side.
Then command her to press it: and make her sneeze with cathartics.
The prepared fetus exits on the side.
When it descends through the mother's orifice in this manner with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your nail until it is expelled due to moisture.
If the fetus is hanging on its face and neck, then cut it from the navel so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus towards the inside until you place it as needed; and command the woman to press herself several times; for it will exit easily.
The exit of twins or many fetuses.
You should know that twins often give birth; and sometimes three or even four are born.
Nevertheless, it is unusual and rare.
However, it is a thing outside of nature and they do not live long; and the afterbirth containing them, although multiplying, is one; and they are separated by the siphunx, which distinguishes between them tied at each one's navel.
And at times they come forth like a single fetus through the natural exit, easily: and they come forth through an inexpressible exit, as we have said. If some of them are difficult at childbirth and reach what we mentioned in unnatural forms, then care for them as we have said: it should be done with a subtle probe and do what is done easily and slowly, and invent according to every form with the one who is being prepared by his natural ability leading towards health.
Sometimes it is formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten: and already proven to me that a woman has aborted seven, and another fifteen, all of which were formed.
That which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore, this entire matter should be in the knowledge of the obstetrician. Perhaps it will reach a similar one; therefore, let him oppose it with what is necessary.
Chapter on the extraction of a dead fetus.
If you care for a dead fetus with what I said in the division of medicine and it does not come out, and you will have to operate using your hand, then you must consider.
If the woman is in good health and not with any accident from which her loss is feared, then the woman should lie on the bed on her back, and her head be inclined downward, and her legs elevated: and the attendant should hold her from both sides, or she may be tied to the bed, so that her body is not pulled out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the bone matrix with moist oils (such as) aloe emodin, fenugreek, and flax seeds. Then the midwife should wet her hand with these oils and mucilages, then introduce it easily into the matrix (uterus).
Then she should seek a place where to fix the hooks for the child, and the areas that correspond to it.
Then consider if the child is prepared to descend upon its head: then fix hooks in its eyes, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or under its beard, or in its armpits, or near the ribs, and below the hips.
If it is a descent upon its feet, then fix them on the chest and in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary that she holds the hook with her right hand: and puts a thread on it between the fingers of the left hand: and introduces it easily, and fixes the hook in one of those places which we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty place (the fetus's head).
Then the extension should be extended equally, and not only in a straight line, but rather move to all parts, so that its exit is relieved: as it is done when pulling a tooth (to loosen it).
And it is necessary that the extension is softened in this place.
If a part is retained from it, then the midwife should wet certain fingers with oil and insert them from that side to turn what is being retained.
If a part of the fetus comes out, then the hooks should be moved to a higher place: do this until the whole fetus comes out.
If the hand comes out first, and it cannot be retracted because of its dislocation: then a cloth should be wrapped around it.
Then pull out the limb completely when it comes out, and cut it either at the joint of the foot or at the elbow. Therefore, you should do this with one hand on the limb and with both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large or if it becomes dislocated during delivery, or water has accumulated around its head: then introduce a pointed and sharp instrument called Spatumile into the fingers, and pierce the head with it and drain the water; or tear it apart using an instrument called Almisdac, whose shape comes with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head naturally, then separate it with algengematum; or pull it out with misdach, as we have said.
Then draw out the bones with forceps.
If the head comes out and becomes dislocated at the collarbone: then it is pierced until the moisture that is in the chest is released.
If it does not twist nor obey to come out: then cut the head as much as possible for you.
If there is an abscess below the stomach, or if there is hydropisis in it: then pierce it until the moisture runs out from it.
If the fetus is above its own feet, then drawing it out is easy, and guiding it to the bone of the matrix is simple.
If it becomes dislocated in the abdomen or chest: then pull it out with the cloth you have wrapped around your hand; and pierce the abdomen or chest until what is inside runs out.
If the remaining limbs are removed and the head returns: then the midwife shall introduce her left hand. If the cervix is open, then introduce the hand deeply into the cervix and seek the head with it, and draw it forth with the fingers up to the cervix: Then introduce a hook or hooks and draw it forth with them.
If the cervix is contracted due to a hot abscess that has occurred there: then it is not necessary to labor over it, but rather to administer a solution of moist substances and oil: And to apply poultices: And sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, it may be equalized: then administer what was said for a living fetus.
If that cannot be done, it shall be cut into pieces and extracted.
And it is necessary not to leave anything of the second part inside at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what was said for hot abscesses that occur in the uterus.
If bleeding occurs, descend into waters of stibium and administer the remainder of the treatment.
And I myself have seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus: Then she conceived again over it, afterwards another fetus also died.
A long time passed and then an abscess occurred in her navel, which became swollen until it was open, and began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called for her treatment, and treated her for a long time: but the wound did not heal.
Then I placed over it some strong adhesive plasters: and the bone came out of the place.
Then some days passed, and another bone came out.
I was amazed therefore, since there is no bone in the abdomen.
So I thought, because the fetus were dead bones.
I asked therefore for a wound, and drew out many bones, the woman being in good condition: and she lived thus for a long time, and sent out little pus from the place.
And I did not fix this foreign object here, unless because there is knowledge and assistance to that which the healing craftsman administers with his hand in treatment.
Chapter on the shapes of necessary instruments for extracting a fetus.
Chapter LXXVII.
Below is the shape of the Squeezer, by which books are made equal, as it has two windings at both ends of two wooden rods.
However, this winding should be finer than the squeezer: and it is made so, either of ivory or of boxwood.
And the width of all the rods should be like two fingers: and each edge is like one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and half: and in the middle of the two rods are two additions of the same type of wood, which have already been fixed on both sides; whose length is half a palm and less, and width is like two fingers or less.
These two instruments are inserted into the mouth of the matrix to open it when you rotate the two screws.
The shape of the screw that opens the matrix.
Another shape, similar to the former, but finer and lighter.
Make it from ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the forceps.
However, at the end of it there should be two protrusions as you see here above: and the length of each protrusion is about a palm: and the width of each one is, two fingers.
Therefore, when you wish to open the matrix with it, then have the woman sit on the bed, with her legs apart, opening what is between her thighs.
Then insert these two protrusions together into the matrix: and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her hips.
Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, equally according to the amount by which you wish to open the mouth of the matrix, until the midwife does what she wants.
The shape of another screw, different from the one described by the ancients, is called "Impeller", it propels the fetus.
The shape of Almisdac that crushes a small head. The shape of the uncinus with one spike.
The shape of the uncinus with two spikes.
The shape of forceps with saw-like teeth, by which the fetal head is crushed.
The form of Spatumilis has two extremities for cutting off the head.
The form of two expanded Spatumilium (instruments).
All these instruments are operated and the more numerous their forms are, and prepared by the craftsman, the quicker for its operation, and higher in people's esteem, because of its quantity.
Therefore, do not despise any instrument from among them, but prepare it for yourself.
Indeed, the necessity of these (instruments) is beyond excuse.
Chapter on the second extraction (removal of a foreign body).
Chapter LXXVIII:
When the Afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary that you command the weak one to hold her breath.
Then make her sneeze with pepper and close her nose and your hand on her mouth.
If it thus comes out (the Afterbirth), it is good.
If not (the Afterbirth comes out), then take the pot and pierce a hole in its cover; and place within it the herbs opening the womb, such as camomile, rue, anise, fennel, cassia wood, centaury: take all these herbs or some of them, and immerse them in water, and place them over the fire.
Then place the wick of the reed over the hole of the pot's cover and the other end inside the womb; and hold it until the vapor reaches the cavity of the womb.
Then make her sneeze again, as we said before.
For indeed the Afterbirth will come out easily.
If however it remains after this treatment and does not come out; then command the Midwife to dip her hand in sesame oil or althea gum. Then she will insert her hand into the womb and search for the Afterbirth with it.
When she finds it (the Afterbirth), then take it, and pull it out slowly.
If it is attached deeply in the womb, then insert your hand (as I have said before), until when she finds the Afterbirth, and pulls it out slowly according to the right direction, so that it does not fall out of the womb due to strong pull; rather it should be moved gently from side to side: then add more in accordance with the strength of the pull.
It will then obey and survive and come out from its attachment.
If a bone in the matrix is dislocated, as we have already stated: treat it with stimulation (shaking), and with a medicament from an oil pot with herbs.
If it does not come out with everything we have stated, then beware of overexerting yourself in the process of extraction.
It is necessary that what comes out to the bone of the matrix from there should be tied to the woman's hip.
Then, perform a cleansing with the four-drug ointment.
For it will rot her after days, and it will dissolve and come out.
However, when it rots, raise the bad smell from her to her stomach and head, and damage the weakened part.
Therefore, fumigations suitable for that should be administered.
Some of the ancients have already tried fumigations of nasturtium and fig leaves.
The form of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated during retention of the Second Stage and menstruation.
Make it like an alcamea flask or a jar: and place the wide end over the fire: the fumigation should be placed above plums: hold her with it until that fumigation is consumed: then another one can be repeated.
Chapter on the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Chapter LXXIX (79).
Many boys are born, and the anuses of these children are not perforated, which the operator has already cauterized with a subtle probe (probe for opening the anus).
Therefore, the midwife should pierce it with her finger; and if she cannot, she should pierce it with a spatula sharp; and let her be careful not to touch the muscle.
Place upon him a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil.
Then care for it with unguent until it heals.
If you fear that it is choking, then put a lead cannula into the opening and leave it there for several days; remove it when the child wants to come out.
Now it happens that anophelia (strangulated hernia) also occurs due to consolidation of a wound or an abscess.
Therefore, that consolidation should be cut; then it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and lead. Chapter on the cure of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Chapter 80.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are nodation (strangulated hernia) and grossness that occurs near the anus outdoors; or in a space of one part; and there is one fistula, or more than one.
When that nodation (strangulated hernia) becomes ancient, it is opened and watery moisture runs out from it, or thin pus.
And sometimes they are penetrating fistulas.
And there are fistulas when they penetrate into the space up to the bladder and up to the bowel.
And there are penetrating fistulas up to the juncture of the hip and up to the node of the tailbone.
From that which is recognized as a penetrating fistula up to the anus, even if it is not a penetrating one, is when you insert your finger into the anus; and you insert a thin probe made of copper or iron into the fistula, if there is no tortuosity.
If there is a twist [or bend] in it, then introduce into it a thin probe of lead or a horse's hair [bristle], until you feel the probe, or a hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it fully, nor does anything come out from the incision, nor is there any pus or worms as I said: then you will know that it is not penetrating; therefore proceed to treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or the ureter: then its sign is the discharge of urine from it, and its stoppage by this means that the site should be closed with medicines.
If it is penetrating to the junction of the hip or to the hip bone: then its sign is that the probe reaches it if there is no twist to the bone; and the discovery of pain in the surrounding area, and that pus always discharges from it; and that no medicine helps in it, nor does it heal with a salve.
And in all fistulas that penetrate there is no cure at all; and the cure of them is torment and emptiness for him, to whom they are applied, from foolish physicians, upon whom they are formed. But in that which is not penetrating and is not old, healing may be hoped for with a probe; according to what I tell you, and I have already proved: and it is as follows - the patient lies weak between your hands on his back; and both of his legs are raised up to the hips themselves; and the hips themselves are inclined towards the abdomen itself.
Then introduce a probe of lead or of air if there is a twist in the fistula, until you know where the probe has reached.
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must introduce your finger into the anus.
If you feel that a thing has already pierced through your finger by itself and it is recognized, except that you feel something between your finger and the bone or flesh: then you shall know for sure that it penetrates; do not labor on it, because there is no healing in it, as we have said.
They say that flesh heals in some people and the remedy, by which help is expected, is, to burn cautery with a fine tip according to the width of the fistula, as was said before, and to introduce it into the fistula until it reaches the anus.
Then do this twice or three times until you know that all the added flesh filtering similar to chicken feather quill has been burnt.
Then wrap it with linen in butter until the burned flesh comes out; then take care of it with ointments producing and consolidating flesh.
If it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
If the thing comes out and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick layer of flesh or bone between it and the thing: and you see that the fistula follows the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula and you go on cutting with the thing in the fistula until the section reaches the end of the thing, and the thing is released and falls out.
Then clean the filtering flesh similar to chicken feather quill, so that nothing remains of it.
If blood beats you and dissolves the filtering flesh between you and your operation, then it is better that you burn it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Because cautery with fire brings about good conditions, burning of the added flesh, removal of blood, and drying of moisture.
Then, care it with bandages rolled in butter or boiled cabbages until the place releases pus, and those burned flesh exudes into the pus.
Then care for the wound with hardening ointments, those producing hard flesh; there are remedies that contain styptic and drying agents.
For when it is restored, then it heals; do not fear repetition. If, however, the fistula has reached the depth of the anus and extends beyond the body's excess; then insert your finger into the anus and investigate it.
If therefore you feel a tentative sensation between yourself and her, and there is a membrane of sheepskin or flesh that is close to penetration; then there is no operation on it except by way of trust and hope.
Because it is administered in one of three ways: either to cauterize it itself, as we have said; or to excise it until you reach the hollow of it, so that you can insert bandages and cure it from close by.
And do not proceed too much with the excision so as not to cut the muscle containing the anus and cause an unfortunate outcome of evacuation without will. Then care for it with what I have said. Perhaps it will heal; or you elongate the membrane itself and clean it when you cut it up to the anus as we have said, either with the sensation of touch, or with another sharp tool at the end.
Then clean the fleshy parts filtered during excision until you can with examination.
Then attempt the restoration of the entire wound with excision and the upper opening where it is consolidated; the fistula remains open in the internal part of the anus, and it will be easier for evacuation.
And sometimes a fistula drains in this manner: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula, which is on the side of the anus near the body surface with skin and anus margin; then take a probe with a perforated tip, similar to an alembic point, that is, prepared from calfskin, according to this shape.
And insert into it a rolled thread of five strings, and around it.
Then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until it reaches its hollow.
If it penetrates the anus margin internally, then pull out the thread from that opening; so that you insert your finger into the anus and draw out the end of the thread, and join both ends together; and tie each end separately, and let it stay for one or two days; and the more the thread sinks into the flesh, tie it well, until the flesh between the two ends of the thread falls off and drops away; then take care of the wound until it heals.
For indeed, it is not for you to do this because of the arm so that you may not cut it yourself.
Then do with it as we said until it heals.
The shape of a spatula with a spiked tip used to open the fistula, whose sharpness is very acute, and the other part is not acute so that it does not cut what is not necessary, as you can see.
Chapter on the suture of hemorrhoids from which blood runs after cutting them; and care for fissures (anal cracks).
Chapter LXXXI.
Hemorrhoids are of two types.
Within the anus are found, resembling bladders or charcoal, or even like the seeds of grapes.
Some are small and others large. Blood is always flowing from them, and there is one [source of bleeding], and they are many.
They are outside the anus and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus, are for the most part dry, from which citron water flows or a little blood in a continuous course; and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is within the anus is to instruct the patient to fast: it is expressed and squeezed out until it appears at the anus for you [to see].
Therefore, hold them with tweezers or keep them with your nail.
Then cut them at their roots.
If they are not held by the tweezers due to their moisture and softening, then grasp them with a rough cloth or with a glove made of double wool, and pull them out with your fingers.
Then cut them and sprinkle some hot powders on top of the cut area to make it a place for cautery.
Or cauterize them according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
Then treat them with the remaining treatment until they heal.
If the anus does not obey the evacuation, then enema the patient with an enema containing a small amount of purgative so that he may cleanse himself from what is in the anus, and make him obedient to evacuation when he squeezes himself.
If the atheli are external to the anus, then their condition is light and easy; it is to grasp them with your nail or with tweezers and cut them.
Then take care of them as we said, until they get well.
If the wound is not to be cut with iron, then one should apply suture according to this manner.
Take a thread wrapped around and insert it into the point.
Then remove the fat from above and make it penetrate with the point to the root on the other side; wrap the ends of the thread around the tip of the needle, and let them be wide, and tightly tie the suture with strong knots.
Then tie the thread and remove the needle.
Make this with all the fat, and leave one; but do not take it out yourself, to prevent excessive bleeding.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch over the wound and put it on the anus; and order the patient to rest.
Then let him go until he falls asleep.
When the fat becomes cold, care for them with ointments and other treatments, until they get well.
Chapter on the care of fissures.
For they often occur from excessive drying of feces and constriction of nature.
When they become chronic and medicine does not help them, then one should shave with pointed spatula or with your own nail until they become moist, and the outer layer which prevents their healing is removed.
Then take care of them until they heal as required.
If they do not heal: then shave them more vigorously than before until they bleed a lot, and then care for them until they get well.
Chapter on the treatment of sores, both ulcerated and not ulcerated, as well as abscesses and boils.
Then care for that; and if you wish, cauterize it according to what has come before in its chapter.
However, from the atheroma, there is one elevation, small and rough, filtered, round on the surface of the body.
And it often happens in children's hands.
And its treatment is to stretch the atheroma, and cut it; or to stitch it with silk thread; or with hair, until it falls off.
And if you wish, cauterize it with fire, or with a sharp medicine; and now the inverted atheromas are uprooted, but not the non-inverted ones with the tool that I will mention. Ant is also a small, filtered elevation, large on the surface of the body, penetrating deeply; and when it is found by coldness, it feels like the bite of an ant, and it occurs throughout the body; and it often happens in hands.
And its treatment is to take a reed from a goose feather or strong bird feather; and place the reed over the ant-like elevation until it forms a circle around its parts.
Then turn your hand with the reed until it cuts off what is around the ant-like elevation; and place it deep into the flesh, and uproot the ant-elevation from its root. And if you wish, do it with an airtight cannula or iron, in this shape.
The upper end of the cannula should be drawn up to its limit and rolled over the thumb so that it may be easily held and turned back.
And if you wish to cauterize a scabies, do so according to what was mentioned in the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on cautery.
Chapter on the shapes of instruments used for enemas in diseases of the anus, and of the solution of the abdomen, and colic.
Chapter LXXXIII.
When an enema is made of silver, gold, copper or tin.
And sometimes it is made small and large, according to those in which it is administered.
Therefore what is given for the cure of small children should be small, and the enema for weak or painful anuses as well.
Large enema.
Small enema.
The cannula used for the small enema should have a large upper end, which is tied to the uterus, be wide according to this method: and it should have a distinction so that the uterus may be ligated as you see, and its lower end, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed, that is, not open, soft, very thin, drawn out to fine points: and in one of its sides there should be two holes, and in the other side only one hole.
And the size of the hole should be according to the size of grains and not too large: and let the uterus in which the medicines are placed be an animal bladder or a sheep's skin, which is small like the shape of a small goat's foot: whose root is one palm.
When the uterus is placed, tighten around its head a strong cord made of castor oil (clisterium) in two places where it is divided by a tightening mechanism.
Then apply the castor oil (clisterium).
And this is the shape of the circle depicted here, and the holes. The quality of the application of castor oil (clisterium) is as follows: fill the bladder or the bladder made of medicine that is heated to the amount tolerable by the sick person; be careful not for it to be too hot or too cold.
Then the sick person lies on his back and raises his legs towards the top; place a bedsheet or cloth under him (intahan), that is, the skin people lie on or a linen cloth.
Then anoint the end of the castor oil (clisterium) with olive oil, or egg white, or marsh mallow gum, or something similar.
Then insert it into the anus with ease.
Then let the assistant take hold of the bladder with both his hands and squeeze it intensely until everything that is in the castor oil (clisterium) has been expelled into the intestines. Then remove the castor oil (clisterium), and let the sick person raise his legs towards the wall. If the medicine forces him out, then hold as much as possible.
And if he sleeps through the night with it, it is more helpful in the healing process.
If you apply castor oil (clisterium) to him in the disease of abscesses in the stomach and he hurries out; then repeat the castor oil (clisterium), until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or ulcers in the anus, then let the purge be very subtle and soft, from the enemas with which children are cleansed.
Let this be the form of a subtle enema, on which the skin is tightly stretched.
Chapter on the treatment of head wounds without bone fracture.
Chapter 84.
I have already said in the division of treating wounds that it belongs to the book, and here I will say the treatment with hands, and with medicines according to completion.
Therefore, wounds are classified according to the cause by which they occur, and according to the place where the wound falls.
Therefore, the causes of wounds are numerous and similar to being struck by a stone; cutting with a sword or knife; being pierced with a spear, log, or arrow; and similar things from many other objects.
However, wounds that occur according to the parts of the body are, for example, a wound on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, or back; and similar ones from those members.
And I am telling the treatment of some wounds to set forth the reasoning and rule for the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory of the compositors will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore.
When there is a simple wound on the head and no bone fracture occurs; consider if it was caused by being struck by a stone or similar objects and only broke the skin; and if the wound is large, beware of imminent formation of hot ulcers; then hurry, and make phlebotomy immediately; do not delay this; and draw out from his blood according to its strength; if there is no prohibition for phlebotomy, especially if the blood that exits from the wound is scant.
And let phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
Let the sick person avoid self-filling, and wine, and heavy foods.
If something forbids reduction, then let it be reduced from food, and not approach meat or wine.
And place on the wound if it happens to him an abscess hot, heated clay infused in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is stiptic.
If you are secure from the hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood, and has not changed air, the powder that I will tell later: and if already the air has changed, then place on it some unguents until it is healed.
If the wound is large or from a sword cut and similar: and the edges of it should not be brought together by small dots, then bring them together with stitches, according to what I will tell about stitching in abdominal wounds.
If the wound is already detected from bone and hangs, and there is no retention of it unless in a small sling: then cut it.
Then care for the wound with medicines, and restore hard flesh to it instead of skin, and order the sick person to eat foods in which there is heaviness, such as heads and cooked wheat, until it becomes soft; and similar things.
If you find putrefaction in the skin, and it does not adhere to bone: then cut off the putrefied part entirely, and throw it away; then care for that.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows, and it cannot be separated by medicines, then seek above the artery.
If you find it not cut, then cut it with a spatula, or tie it.
If necessity compels and it does not conform to what has been said, then cauterize it until the blood is cut off.
Method of the Powder for Burns.
Take one part of olibanum, two parts of the blood of a dragon, and three parts of unslaked lime: grind it all thoroughly, and sieve it: and fill the wound with it, and constrict it well, until it adheres well on top, and coagulate with the blood.
Then bind it above with small linen cloths, and leave it alone, do not unbind it until it does not move away.
For the medicine is not pulled out from him until he is healed.
Then take care of the rest of the cure until they are healed.
On wounds of the neck.
On the eighty-fifth matter [or chapter].
If a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in its treatment compared to a simple wound of the head.
If the nerve or artery of the neck has already been cut, then, if it is a nerve, there is no skill in its treatment except to delay care because it causes violent stiffness, like cinnabar and pitch and similar substances.
Because they harm nerves and contract them.
And do not place anything cold on the wound at all: because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is superior to the parts; and let what is used for treatment be from soft medicines, such as lime mixed with sweet water several times infused with oil, or rose oil, or pitch, when it is washed even with sweet water; and other mineral stones in this way, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then administer suture; or rolled lips with powdered poultry [or chicken] parts.
Then care for it until it heals.
If the wound is deep or if a cavity occurs in its lower part, where pus has already gathered, then pierce it in a more depressed place.
If the artery has already been cut in the wound and its blood flow has followed, then separate it or cut it off and tie it; or cauterize it if necessity demands that.
If the windpipe (spondiles) has been cut completely or partially and the trachea has been saved, then gather the lips of the skin with suture on top of a cannula for the throat, and do not touch the throat, but rather lift it, and reduce it to its natural shape.
Then tie it with a suitable suture and let it remain for some days.
Then treat it with ointments containing astringents and drying agents until it heals.
If the wound has made an impression on the bone, then examine it thoroughly; if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all of them as you can: and leave what cannot be prepared to rot, until the wound separates and heals over.
If the wound is recent, then dust it with the powder I mentioned before.
If there appears to be bone in the wound and it becomes a fistula: then treat it as described in its chapter.
Chapter 86.
If a wound is emitting pus and the sick person breathes from it, then you know that the wound is fatal.
If the wound is not deep and is recent with blood, then do not apply powder to it immediately or tie it up so that the blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart and kill the sick person; but put on an attracting ointment and dissolve it twice a day.
If an attracting ointment is not available to you, then place a piece of old cotton over the wound's opening, so that it absorbs what is coming out from its moisture; and make the sick person sleep on the wound so that it can run towards it and gather together.
If three days or more have passed since the wound and there is no spasm, no bad heart tremor, no constriction in breathing, and you see that its other conditions are good, then you know that the wound is healed.
Treat yourself and with liniments, and the rest of the cure, until you are healed.
If the healing is cut open, and it now opens continuously, then know that it has become a Fistula.
Therefore, treat it from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from sword or knife cut, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with the following from suturing, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone and cut out pieces from it, then examine the wound, and hurry to remove those pieces, if they are separated.
But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound rots, for it is better to let them be extracted when rotten.
The judgment of the wounds resulting from accidents on other limbs is the same as that which we have said.
Chapter on Wounds of the Abdomen and the Exit of Intestines, and their Healing.
Chapter LXXXVII.
A rupture which occurs in the abdomen, is great, medium, or small.
From a great rupture, intestines or the number of intestines sometimes comes out.
Therefore, their insertion and suturing is done more forcefully and difficultly.
A small rupture is also difficult in another way.
Therefore it is more difficult to reduce them if you do not hurry for their insertion to its place immediately; since it becomes swollen, opens and thickens; therefore the entry of it becomes difficult.
Therefore a medium rupture is better because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in these two types.
You should know that stitching (of) the vein is according to four modes.
Two common stitches join together for the stitching of the abdomen, and for the stitching of other wounds on the body; and two other stitches properly communicate with the remaining wounds.
However, they (the two common stitches) are more proper for the stitching of the abdomen; and I tell you one by one with explanation, and clarification. Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and something from the intestine comes out of it, and it becomes difficult to bring back (it), then this is due to one of two modes.
Or because of the smallness of the tear (disruption), as we have said; or because there is inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
When this is so, then it is necessary to heat (it), so that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth (in) warm water only.
Or you boil in water fennel seeds, and cumin, and pepper, and coriander with it (the affected intestine), until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes this (the heated matter) makes wine in which there is bitterness; and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflation.
When you see that the inflation has been resolved, then moisten (the affected intestine) with water in which wormwood or mallow was boiled.
For this an opening is made for it when the disease is small.
If its return occurs after this treatment, then sew up the tear with a little, using the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared, than when it is done by force and lack of an instrument.
Let the part of it that is twisted, sharp and the other part not sharp, and the end (should not be) subtle like a spatula, rather it should be less sharp; and this resembles a clam shell as you can see.
When the wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it should be reduced to its natural shape in its own place if possible above it, for it is better.
When the wound is wide at the lower part of the abdomen: then it should be made to lie on its back and place its legs higher than its head.
And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head and chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if the wound is in one of two parts of the abdomen, then direct your attention and consider that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other part.
And thus it must be done with large wounds and with medium sized wounds.
But with small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make a devout servant of your presence hold the whole wound with his hand and gather up the lips.
Then give him who follows to sew something after something, this is the common method of suture for one.
And it is that you receive a needle or a number of needles according to the size of the wound.
Then detach from the edge of the wound the width of a ring finger, that is, of the doctor; and sew one needle beyond which you introduce the thread into both ends of the skin, with both ends of the sifac that is under the skin from inside, until it passes through from another side, and you have already gathered together both ends of the skin, and both ends of the sifac: and they become four rows.
Then sew with double thread around the needle several times from both sides simultaneously until the lips of the wound have been gathered together by an appropriate gathering.
Then release the thickness of the finger also, and fix another point on it; afterwards draw it straight with thread, as you did with the first point.
Do not cease to do that with the needle you require from the points, until you complete the constriction of the entire wound.
Let the needle be medium between thickness and subtlety; because fine needles very easily penetrate the flesh, and thick ones are difficult to enter the skin; for this reason, it is necessary that they be medium in subtlety and thickness.
And it is not necessary to shape the needle in the two extremities of skin close together; so that the flesh is not penetrated quickly, and the wound is opened before its consolidation, and they do not extend even with suturing, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
Then cut the tip of the needle so as not to hurt the weak one while asleep; and place small cloth balls on them from all sides, which hold the tips of the needle; and release them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of sewing with needles in such a manner is more suitable for small wounds.
Because it is sufficient for their sewing one or two needles, or approximately those.
The second sewing is common; to gather together with sewing the ends of four: the ends of skin, and the ends of the sifac in place of one, with a needle on which there is a thread wound equally in subtlety and thickness.
Then, when you penetrate with the needle these ends of four, draw back the needle from the part where it entered, so that the thread pulled up from the upper part of the wound falls out; thus there will be sewing, like the sewing of cloth where cloth is bound together, and place between every sewing a quantity equal to the thickness of a little finger.
Humans know this suture.
And with this suture, I myself healed the wound of a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the wound was larger than one palm; and there was expelled from the intestines about two palms from the middle intestine, and the rupture was in the middle of the abdomen.
I then returned it after his intestines were stabilized outside the wound for 24 hours.
The wound was then consolidated within a space that was approximately 15 days; and I cured him, and he recovered; and he lived many years after that, restored to his own dispositions.
And the physicians had judged that he would not recover.
And it was a miracle that I did not cure it with ointment.
Because I was in a place where no ointment could be found nor any medicine.
I therefore put warm water over the wound twice a day, and I persistently washed it with water sweetened with honey until it healed.
However, I will speak of two types of sutures according to the account of the language.
And it begins with sharp suture: and you insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
When the needle pierces the skin and follows the length and width of the entire body: release the tip of the sifac on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate into the tip of another one from the inner part to the outer part at the other end.
When you have made it penetrate thus, then make it penetrate again in the same end needle from the outer part to the inner part; and release the tip of the sifac on the side where it was inserted, and make the needle penetrate into the tip of another one from the inner part to the outer part, and make it penetrate together with your penetration as you do so in the sifac tip at that end, until it penetrates completely.
Then commence also from the same side, and take out that same with its extremity, which is from sifac on the other side, and extract the point that has pierced through it.
Then return it into that skin, and take out the extremity of sifac on the other side with this extremity of mirach; and extract it from the skin on that side, and make it as one, and the other; and make it as one after the other, until you have extracted all of it according to that example.
And the sum total of this suture is that you suture the skins of animals so that their skins will be attached: thus you suture sifac with one part of one extremity of the skin; and you let it go with another part on the other side, until you have completed.
The second kind of proper suture, as Galen said.
This discourse is told as if one should suture it in the same way as those who heal do, that is, by bringing together all parts fitting to each other according to nature; and by joining the extremity of sifac with its other extremity, and the extremity of mirach with the other extremity of it.
And that is done as I have told you.
It is necessary that you shape the point on the extremity of mirach close to yourself from the outer part, and make it penetrate into the inner one alone; and you let go of the two extremities of sifac.
Then turn the point and make it penetrate from the outer part into the two extremities of sifac, that is, on both sides.
Then turn both of them and make both penetrate from the inner part to the outer one, into the two extremities of mirach on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common easy one, and it is the suture whose previous description has been remembered.
This is therefore the saying of Galen.
And they said something.
The suture of the abdomen is being repaired with two needles.
What is to be done is to insert a thread into each of them: and begin with the insertion of a needle from that which is near to you, and let it pass through to the other side, according to the seam of those who sew leather equally.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen: then the suture of it is more difficult than the rest of the places of the abdomen.
The judgment of the treatment of the wound, is the judgment of other wounds.
What is to be done is that when you conquer a recent wound with its own blood, before the air alters it; and you reduce the intestine, and cleanse it and prepare it; then put it over powdered incarnations.
If the air has already altered the wound; then put on it some unguents that are present to you, so that they make pus, and let threads fall, and be covered with sifac and myrrh.
Then take care of it as is the treatment of other wounds, until it heals.
If there are no medications present to you; then put over it immediately, when it begins to emit pus, old cloth; and change it twice a day, as I taught you, until it heals.
If you fear that the wound communicates with the principal members in damage; then it is necessary that you immerse linen softened in oil of temperate heat, or in rose oil; and put it in the area around the genitals, and under the shoulders.
If he feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his intestines (for it often happens that this occurs), then clisterize him with warm stiptic wine; especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and a penetrating evacuation has been made into its concavity.
And know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal; and what is from the small intestine is harder to heal.
The intestine that is called Jejunum does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it at all; and this is because of the abundance of its veins, and the size of them, and because of the subtlety of its body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
If what proceeds from the wound is pus, and you have recently found it; lead it back according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
If however, it has passed space and has already become green or black; then it is necessary that you tie it with thread above the place that has turned black from it, to prevent blood flow.
For in pus there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of the thread hanging from below on the lower part of the wound outside it; to relieve its attraction upon you, and extraction of the pus at the site of the wound, and the emission of the pus from the wound.
Remembering a wound that occurs in the Intestine.
When there is a rupture in the Intestine and it is small; then it may be possible to restore it in some people; because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a lance thrust, and the wound was from the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old; and it became a Fistula, and exuded feces, and flatulence.
I therefore treated [it], until I was not confident in its healing; neither did I cease to explore it, until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
When I saw the place already consolidated, I feared for the patient, lest something harmful might happen to it in its belly; and no such harm happened to him from that.
And he remained in better dispositions of himself, eating and drinking, and urinating, and entered the bath, and was exercised in his regimen.
And some of the experimentalists said that when an injury occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner.
And it is, that you receive ants with large heads.
Then gather two lips of the wound and place one ant with an open mouth on top of the two lips of the wound.
When its head is placed upon them, and it closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it will stick and cannot be loosened.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing that according to the size of the wound.
Then return it [the patient] and sew up the wound.
For those heads remain attached in the intestine until it is eaten, and healed, and no harm comes to the patient from this. And it is now possible that the intestine can be tied even with a thin thread; this has been removed from the animal's intestine and attached to it after it is inserted into the point.
And it is, that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and scrape it a lot.
Then tie a thin linen thread at its end.
Then insert the thread into the point and sew with it the intestine.
Then reduce it to dislocation. This method of suture with worms and intestine, is not but by the way of trust and hope.
Know that a large, wide wound, especially if it is in one of the slender intestines: then there is no skill but subtlety, nor is its healing at all.
Chapter on the care of the bladder, and fistulas.
Chapter LXXXVIII.
Know that every wound or boil when it becomes old and decays, and turns into an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and always emits pus, nor is it cut off: then it is called universally in whatever member it may be Fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
And Fistula indeed is according to truth a knot filtered, hard, white: with which there is no pain, but it has the hollow of a bird's feather: and for this reason some call it Risati, that is, feather.
And it is at certain times moist which emits pus.
And perhaps moisture is cut in certain times.
And sometimes this moisture is much and it is little; and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And I have already mentioned in the division, when I said wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal nor grows flesh in it is not that because of one cause, but because of one of nine causes.
One of which is due to scarcity of blood in the body; or due to its malice; or because there is hard flesh between it and its lips, preventing growth of flesh; or because it is full of filths and filthinesses; or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the matter sent to it is of bad quality; or because the remedy is inappropriate for its healing; or because corruption falling on the region is a kind of pestilence, or due to the property of the region as happens in Caesaraugusta: there is difficult digestion of diseases and healing of boils is delayed by nature; or because in it is one bone, or number of bones.
And I have already shown you all those causes and their signs, as well as their treatments with medicines in division: here it is necessary for me to make you know the treatment for a Fistula and a Zukan, which occurs by way of surgery with the hand.
Know then that a Fistula happens in all members of the body.
For among these [conditions] are Fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or intestines; or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs; or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints; such as the hand and foot: and among these are those that come close to a principal member and similar ones.
That which among these Fistulas is according to this method, is one that is difficult for healing, and does not receive treatment, and the occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If it is among the Fistulas one whose depth does not reach to those places that I have mentioned: and if you hope for healing of it, and trust in its treatment, and wish to reach knowledge about it: then take a probe made from bronze or iron, if the fistula extends along a straight path, and carefully investigate it with the same.
If there is twisting in the Fistula: then investigate it with a probe made from fine lead.
Because lead is softened and is easily bent around a twist.
If the Fistula has multiple openings: it is not possible for you to probe it.
Cauterize therefore from among its openings one opening.
For the moisture that you cauterize it with, flows in reverse through other openings and runs out from them.
Then carefully investigate and inquire according to the method that is possible for you: so that you may know whether there is a bone or nerve there, and whether the fistula has a hollowed out area far away or near; or whether it is a fistula with multiple openings, which covers the entire thing, with all your strength: with your questioning of the patient, and the examination of pain when compressed with your hand at the place, and similar signs and symptoms.
When therefore you have stood over all that station truly, then go for treatment according to confidence: and it is, that you consider then, if it is a Fistula near appearing, or in a safe place distant from the joint, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I told you: then cut the Fistula according to what was mentioned in my narrative, and remove what is in it by filtration, and corrupt flesh, that is born in its opening from flesh, or membrane, and similar things: and care for it until it heals.
If the Fistula is deep-seated and straight, then it should be cut as deeply as possible for you.
Then clean it from all the corrupt flesh of it.
Then administer a linen bandage wrapped in sharp medicines: and insert it up to the concavity of the Fistula that you have grasped with iron: do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that remains in the concavity of the Fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that produce healthy flesh until it heals.
But if it does not heal by this, then cauterize it as we have told.
If the cause of the Fistula is bone, and you are certain of this: then inquire about it, and cut it according to what I have told you: if it does not prevent you from anything from the vein, or nerve, or main member, as we said.
If a bone is discovered for you and there is something corrupted and blackened in it: then file it down until the corruption of it is completely removed.
Then care for it with that which causes it to heal itself, until it heals.
If it does not heal, and discharges pus as it did: then know, that you have not reached complete removal of the corruption.
Therefore, excise above it a second time, and seek out its reason, and cleanse it thoroughly with your utmost strength.
Then restore it.
If it heals, that is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in a remote depth of the body, which you have not reached.
Therefore, you are not capable in it, except to let it go by nature.
If the rotten bone is small and it is possible for you, draw it out with fine forceps suitable for that purpose.
If there are several bones, then seek out their removal altogether, do not leave anything of them with your strength.
If a resistance comes to you from something related to the moistures, and it is not fear or error in the incision of them, then cut those moistures and fleshes, if they are there, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then place over the wound something that will rot it; and let it go until it rots what is around the bones from fleshes and moistures.
And keep the wound so that it does not become consolidated.
And compress the incision which you made in your operation.
Or place on it, if you are afraid, a piece of copper submerged in finely ground sulfur with oil; or a piece of copper submerged in the Egyptian ointment, or some green ointment.
For when those moistures rot and separate from the bones, their removal will be facilitated, and their pulling out.
If there is a large bone, such as the leg bone, or hip bone, and similar to them, and what has been rotten from it is a large part: then shave it with ultimate rasp, until that blackness and corruption is removed.
Then restore the wound.
If what is inside it is rotten and it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to sew it up, and to cut it all the way through until the place where the corruption has reached: then care for it, until it hardens. And I tell you about the case that happened to a man in his leg: put it as an example and aid for your operation.
The man was young and about thirty years old, who had a pain in his limb, caused by something that moved upon him within the body, that is, from inside, until the matter reached the leg, and it was cut out with a large incision: and there was no external cause for it.
The time elapsed with the error of physicians until the abscess was opened, and many substances gathered around it.
After the treatment of this was delayed, until the leg became a fistula, and many openings were made in it: which all discharged pus, and bodily moisture.
A multitude of physicians cured him for about two years, and no one skilled in the art of surgery was there until I was summoned and saw his leg, and the substances that were flowing from those openings with a large course: even the body of the man had already become paralyzed, and his complexion was jaundiced.
Therefore, I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached the bone.
Then I examined all the openings: and found that they were reaching each other from every part of the leg. I approached it and cut open one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone: and I found it corrupted: which was already rotten, and darkened, and had become putrid, and pierced through until it penetrated to the marrow.
I then sawed what was exposed to me, and prepared it from the rotten bone.
And I separated, which was not in the bone except that corruption, which I cut off and sawed.
I had already removed it.
Then I placed the healing of the wound with strengthening medicines in a long space.
Not consolidated.
Then I attempted restoration of it.
Not restored.
Then I restored it with medicines and it consolidated quickly and healed; and this iteration was not necessary in the operation or cutting of it, except due to the disposition of the patient's weakness, his little tolerance, and my fear over him regarding death; because it happened to him at all hours from an excess of evacuation, with bad fainting spells.
He was therefore completely healed; and new flesh grew hard at the site of the bone, and a good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned; and he turned back to his dispositions; and he did not suffer any harm at all from walking.
If the protruding bone in the body is already broken; then it should be excised in this way: and it is: take a ligament and tie it at the end of the protruding bone; and command someone to pull it upwards; and place another larger ligament over the first one. Then bind it over the flesh that is attached to the bone; and extend its end so that you pull the flesh downwards; and you will open the flesh over the place where you wish to excise, so as not to harm the knife.
Place a stick or board under the bone below it properly; because when you do that, it is not forbidden to cut away decayed flesh.
It is necessary that the Trephine (Serratura) be over the diseased area slightly, so that there is no excavation of the bone in the corrupt place; and it does not appear to the senses in its appearance, and compels another for its Trephination. If the bone is corrupted and not projecting, but rather adjoining a part of it; and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it: then cut away all the flesh from every part.
Then place the lever below.
Then cut with the saw on that side where the corruption is, until the Trephine is joined on the other side; and let the Trephine be slightly shorter than the length of the corruption, as we have said.
If the corruption is at a joint: cut the corrupted joint itself, and saw the bone where it adjoins on the other side.
But if the corruption is at the junction of two joints: then it has no cure except for abrasion (scraping).
If the corruption is in the beak of the hand or foot: then there is a great difficulty in that.
It is necessary that you examine how the corruption appears to you.
Scrape (abrade) it and clean it according to whatever disposable condition you have, and with whatever tool it can be corrected for you; as long as it does not cause opposition to a Vein or a Nerve.
And know that cutting and sawing tools for bones are many according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their roughness or fineness, their size, smallness, hardness and rarity.
Therefore it is necessary that you prepare a tool suitable for every kind of operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you the type of tool you need according to the effort required, when your study is prolonged.
Recognition of the methods of this art is evidence of the methods of diseases: for then you will find for yourself that which is suitable to him from instruments for every ailment.
Form of the saw.
Form of another saw.
Form of another saw.
Form of another saw.
This form of the saw should be made correctly. Make its upper part an arch, sharpen it with iron; and make its handle of boxwood, and make it pyramidal correctly.
Form of the rasp for joints.
The head of this rasp should be in the form of a star keycap; and its points should be according to the form of the points of the file-rake.
It is not suitable unless it is rubbed with it on the heads of joints when they are broken, or a large and great bone.
Form of the larger rasp.
Form of the middle-sized rasp.
Form of the broad rasp.
Form of the rasp with a hollow.
Form of another, more delicate rasp.
Form of another rasp with a curved tip.
Form of the small, delicate rasp.
Form of the rasp for cutting bones.
Also, the form of the large rasp.
It resembles a Chisel and its tip is like a saw; it is used in many places by reason of bone-files.
Form of the rasp suitable for filing that which has been perforated from bones.
Its tip is triangular and sharp-pointed.
It comes from India.
And similarly, it is necessary that all things which we have said are made of file makers, cutters and sawyers.
On the incision of extremities and the setting of bones.
Head, LXXXIX.
They rot at the extremities, either externally or internally.
If you have treated that corruption with medicinal care and it does not improve: and if you see the corruption advance in a limb which nothing has checked: then it is necessary that you amputate that limb until the corruption exits, so that the weak may pass through it from death or from the greater evil which is due to the loss of a member.
And the sign of this (affliction) is that the limb darkens until it appears rotten; or it is burned by fire and then rots after being blackened; until the rot is amputated up to where it follows the limb, and it spreads through the entire body.
Approach it (the wound) then with the incision, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from a blow by certain poisonous creatures such as marine scorpions, vipers, adders, and similar ones.
If corruption or a blow occurs at the tip of the finger, then amputate the finger and do not leave any space for the corruption to spread, so that it may not advance toward the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then amputate it at its root and do not leave any space for the corruption to spread, until it takes hold of the forearm.
And if it advances in the arm, then amputate the arm at the elbow joint. If the corruption passes through and you see that it is about an elbow-length, then there is death for the weak one.
And beyond that in treatment is the measure of strength.
And similarly do this for the foot when corruption advances in the toe; then amputate it at one joint: and if it takes hold of the ball of the foot, then amputate the entire foot.
If it reaches up to the knee, then amputate the leg at the joint of the knee.
If corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no skill in that except to release and leave the weak one to death.
The method for cutting a limb, or for tying it, is to tighten the ligament below where you wish to cut, and then tighten another ligament above the same place.
Extend the servant ligament one to the lower parts, and extend the other servant ligament upward.
And separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments, with a wide spatula, until the whole flesh is laid bare.
Then it should be cut or tied.
It is necessary that you place a cloth of linen over all the parts and not touch the healthy place with the knife; and if there should be any injury to the weak, let it be accompanied by hot abscess.
If there should be internal bleeding while you are working, then quickly cauterize the place or put some powders on it that absorb blood.
Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligament and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot, this same thing happens that I am telling you.
Because blackening occurred in his foot, like burn caused by fire; and the decay first affected his toe, until it spread to the entire foot.
The man then moved away from himself, after he saw the decay occur in his limb with great pain, which he found by pain and burn; and he cut it at the joint, and was healed.
And after a long period of time, the same decay occurred in the index finger of his other hand. He then came to me, and I attempted to recover the shortage by applying medicine to his hand after cleaning his body; but there was no improvement, and it spread to another finger; until decay began in the hand.
He therefore called me to cut his hand; and I did not want it, hoping that there would be excess repercussion from me on him; and I also feared his death during the cutting of his hand.
Because a man's virtue was above his fall.
Since he had given up on me, he returned to his own land; and he came to me from him, because he hastened, and he cut off his entire hand; and he was healed.
And I have not brought this narrative except as an aid for that which falls under the genus of this sickness; and it is to signify what is signified, and according to how it is carried out.
Chapter on Care of the Sinews, and the Quality of Cleansing with Medicines.
Chapter XC.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends until it makes a collection of pus; then it bursts or perforates and what is within the pus exits, and there remains a hollow place as if it were a vessel; and the skin that is above it is like a thin cloth; and it does not reach its final corruption nor presses on bone, nerve, or ligament: it deserves to be called a sinus; and it is not called a fistula; but if the space of it extends until corruption presses into one of these members, then it is called a fistula, or ulcer.
And the care of it is to cut that skin all around as it rolls; especially when it has become thin and made like a cloth; and you trust that it will not adhere because of its corruption.
If you hope that the skin will adhere and it does not follow that this final corruption follows; and if there is a thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with cleansing; and it is to consider for a sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is emitted from it has a foul smell: then clisterize it with medicine from Egypt, which is vinegar, oil, and zinziber, taking equal parts, and mix them in a vessel: and boil it over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey.
Then take what is necessary from it: and dissolve it with water and honey, and clisterize the sinus with it: and bind up the opening of it, and let the medicine remain in it for a quantity of two hours.
Then extract it with pressure: make this for days until the sinus is cleansed and the foul smell is removed.
And at times clisterize with water and ashes, when this medicine is not present to you: and it is so that you may take the ashes of vinewood logs, or the ashes from oak trees: and pour water upon it.
Then cook it and clisterize with it until you are confident that the sinus is already cleansed.
If the patient is not able to endure the Egyptian medicine or water and ashes, then clisterize it with water and honey mixed with a little crushed ginger.
Or clisterize it with honey and wine mixed together, because the property of honey is to cleanse and wash: and wine makes the sinus sticky, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness in the wine.
Whenever you do this and believe that the corruption of the sinus is already removed: then clisterize it with what causes flesh to grow in it.
And it is so that you may take from the plaster dyafinicon: and dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic wine: or clisterize it with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
If the orifice of the Sinus is narrow and cannot take the cannula for cleansing: then widen it slightly with iron; or place linen wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment in it until it widens.
And similarly, if the orifice is also wide, then bring the lips together with suture; and let the amount go in which cleansing enters without additional quantity.
And similarly, if the orifice from which pus flows is elevated towards above: then cut it in a lower location within it, so that the pus flows out below; because pus when constricted in the depth of the Sinus, prevents flesh to grow in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the Sinus about below as you wish: then try to prepare a member so that pus flows out from it with ease according to how you are prepared for it.
Try not to retain anything from the pus in it at all; and receive medicines that are applied on top of the wound, suitable for what you want.
Spread them on a linen cloth.
And let the linen cloth be of such size that it allows communication with the entire Sinus.
Then cut with scissors a hole straight in the orifice of the Sinus, wider than the orifice of the Sinus slightly.
Then spread soft ointments over a second linen cloth according to the size of the hole; and place it on top of it at a distance from the orifice of the Sinus, so that the exit of pus is relieved; and do not remove the large linen cloth unless after several days.
The one who is on the orifice of the Sinus, is the one whom you remove at every hour, so that what accumulates in it from pus is expelled; and know this, whether the liquid that flows out of it is much, little, digested or undigested.
And again consider the place of the sinus, whether its lord feels pain there, or there is no pain there, and if there is an abscess there, or there is no abscess there.
When your treatment is thus extended, and you see the matter coming out of the sinus opening, then you shall know that the sinus has adhered or is approaching adherence; therefore dissolve it in the morning or on the third day: and when you open the wound, then change the bandage, and renew the ointment. If however pus comes out of the sinus after a long time, subtle matter, then do not despair of its adherence, for healing is approaching, since there are men who delay wound healing and there are those who act contrary to this.
If however after many days pus that is not digested comes out of the sinus, then you shall know that the sinus does not adhere.
If the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then add astringents to the treatment, but let the physicians make sure that the treatments are humid in substance and dry in effect, such as ointment dyafinicon when it is made with an excess of zegi.
And from the ultimate remedy, it is that you shall receive ointment dyafinicon, which is dissolved with rose oil and shaken over it equal old wine by volume in substance.
Then mix it with that and use it.
And now make a similar action when you do not have ointment dyafinicon, honey, when you boil it until it thickens and use it.
Or receive myrrh, aloe, and frankincense; grind all of them together, and powder it over honey while it is on fire.
Then draw a line upon the cloth over it, and bind it over the bladder; and draw with honey that you have boiled, until it thickens; and powderize the substance, and place it upon the cloth, and bind it.
And sometimes administered in it long arsenic (Aristolochia), and roots of celestial lily, and is lily; and flour of the plant, and centaury.
Use them as simple ones, or combined, grind them and the vessels themselves; and powderize over honey that I mentioned, and use it.
If the matter of the bladder is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, then you shall know that there is corruption in its depth; or it already makes an impression on the bones, or in the other hard members, or ligaments; then cure it with fistula treatment, according to what was mentioned before. Chapter on the treatment of boils and scratched nails, and incision and cutting.
Chapter CXCI.
Boil (Panaritium) is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb finger or toe; and perhaps it arises in other fingers.
When it is prolonged and neglected in the treatment of its abscess, and it becomes abscessed with hot abscess; or it is corrupted and emits pus until it erodes the root of the nail; and perhaps it completely corrupts it, and corruption reaches the bone, until there is a foul odor; and the tip of the finger becomes wide, and the color of it becomes dark.
When you treat it, when as we said, your treatment does not help; then it is necessary that you cut with iron all the surplus that remains from the nail.
Then cauterize the wound after that.
For cauterization is very helpful.
If the bone is healthy and also the nail is sound, and empty additions press the flesh towards the interior and begin to pierce it and wound it: then it is necessary that you place subtle Radium under the angle of the nail which pierces the flesh and push it up; and cut the flesh easily, and apply on it what remains of the medicine from burning, corrosive substances until all of it is removed.
Cure it with ointments until it heals.
If already corruption presses on the bone, then it is necessary to cut that bone and remove it; for the bone will never heal as long as a corrupted bone remains within.
If you see corruption and spreading of the tumor on a finger, then cut it at one knuckle, according to its previously mentioned description.
Then treat it until it heals.
If however the nail is worn down or struck, and there is a violent pain, then it is necessary to bleed the patient first.
Then cut the nail with a sharp instrument called Spatulium in a crosswise direction from above towards the visible part.
And be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause an increase of violent pain over the patient and this will lead to the growth of additional flesh in that place.
Then treat that place with a remedy that soothes the pains.
A finger that is born in some human hands may be all flesh; and it may have bones in some of them, and a nail in others; and some of these are born at the root of the joint or its growth begins in some knuckles of the finger.
That which is born on some knuckles of the finger does not move; and that which is born near a joint of the finger, perhaps moves.
The fleshly one among them is easily cut open.
To cut it at its root with a broad spatula (spatumili lato).
The treatment of the one whose birth is joined to the juncture of the roots is difficult.
Therefore, refrain from cutting it (him).
In the one who is born on the digit at the end of the knuckles, then it is necessary to cut the flesh of his round incision up to the bone first.
Then saw the bone with one of those saws that fit for that purpose.
Then care for it until it heals.
Consolidation that happens to the fingers often occurs either from the birth of man, meaning it is born with him, or from consolidation of wounds, burns by fire, and similar things.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut off that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
Then place a piece of linen or cloth soaked in rose oil between them to prevent their rapid consolidation and separate them: or place between them a thin lead plate until the location is healed according to what is necessary.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers with the palm, then cut off that consolidation according to what is prepared and fits the shape of the limb.
Chapter on Defects of Incisions.
Chapter XCII (92).
Chapters 92: The swellings are the veins that are twisted, thick, and filled with melancholic excesses which occur in many parts of the body; and most frequently they happen in the legs, especially in those who travel often and labor, and those who carry heavy loads.
Therefore, it is necessary to administer a purgative of the body with strong emetics from black bile at times.
Then make a venesection (bloodletting) from the patient's basilica vein.
The cure of them (wounds or ulcers) with iron is in two ways.
One of these is to lance and draw out black blood.
And the other way is to open a vein and drain completely.
The lancing (of an abscess) is done in this manner.
Pour warm wine or vinegar over the leg first, with much hot water, until the thick, foul blood is dissolved.
Then bind the affected leg from the upper part of the hip to the lower part of the thigh with bandages.
Then cut the vein at one, or two, or three places, making a wide incision.
Then cut the nail to below, until the quantity of blood which you see is sufficient and that which the strength of the patient can endure.
Afterwards bind it (the wound) and order him to abstain from foods that produce black bile; and repeat the leeching and bloodletting when the veins are filled, and this hurts the patient.
The draining (of an abscess) is done in this manner.
Scrape the affected leg if there are many hairs in it.
Then immerse it (the leg) in a bath; or pour warm water over the affected leg until it turns red and the veins swell; or exercise it with strong movements if there is no bath available for him, until the limb becomes warm.
Then make a long incision directly over the vein; or at the end of it near the knee, or at the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with unguis (nails), and scrape the vein from all sides, until it becomes sensitive; and at its appearance, what you see is turning from red to dark purple.
When it comes out of the skin, you see it white like a cord.
Then insert under it (the vein) radium (small rod-like instrument), until when it is raised and comes out of the skin; hang it with a blind nail, softly.
Then cut another section near that section with three fingers.
Then scrape the skin from the top of the vein until it appears.
Then lift it (the vein) with radii (small tongs-like instruments) as you did before, and hang it with another nail as you did at first.
Then cut another section or multiple sections as needed.
Then lift it (the vein) and make the final incision at the heel (calcaneum).
Then pull out the portion above the sectioned area.
Do this until you pull out the entire vein from the upper section or all sections, until when it comes out entirely; then make the final incision (cut).
If it does not obey you to pull out and lift; then insert the awl with a strong thread twice, tie it and pull it (the vein) out itself; or insert under it radium; and turn your hand over all parts until it comes out.
And be careful, do not cut (it).
For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult for you to lift it and there may be injury from this on the patient.
When you pull out the entire vein; then place on the wound site a linen soaked in wine and rose oil or olive oil; and take care of him until he heals.
If the vein is contracted with a winding shape and does not follow what was said according to rectitude; then it is necessary that you find (pierce) all parts of its winding, and the points of its winding.
Then suspend it with forceps until you have removed it entirely: and beware at your cut on it not to injure the vein or wound it: for it will be difficult for you to remove or extract it if injured.
Preserve your caution.
The method of healing a wound caused by a thorn.
The procedure for blinding with a hook.
It is not like the other hooks in hardness or sharpness at its end so as not to injure a vein: and it has a large flexibleness, gentle: because if it were subtle, it would injure a vein with its subtlety: rather, let it have an excess of bulk, as we said.
On the extraction of the leg vein. Chapter XCIII.
This vein is generated in the limbs on warm lands, as Alizegi says, and in the lands of the Arabs, and in dry, warm lands with little softness, that is, where no plant or tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the limbs.
Indeed, its generation is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, as happens within the bodies of snakes and worms called ascariasis and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein's manifestation is that it happens when there is a swelling in the limb.
Then it is blistered.
Then the vein begins to emerge from the place of blistering, as if it were a root of a plant or an animal.
When its end appears from it, then it is necessary that you roll over on it a piece of lead whose weight is a keil drachm, up to two drachms and the node: and release the suspended lead from the limb.
Whenever something comes out from there to the outside, encase it in lead, and tie it up.
If it extends too much, then cut off a part of it, and encase the remaining portion.
And do not cut it at the root before it comes out completely.
Because if you cut it, it contracts and enters the flesh; it causes an abscess to appear, and rot in that place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it should be treated gently and extracted gradually until it comes out completely from the end of it, and nothing remains from it in the body; and from this vein, in some men, there comes out what is in length five palms and ten.
And now it has reached me, because a man has come out from twenty palms (length).
If it is cut during your treatment time: then insert a probe into its opening and perforate it with a long one, along with the body, until all that is in it from matter is evacuated; and administer the rottenness of the place with medications for several days. Then treat it as an abscess cure.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself; and multiple openings occur to it, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Therefore, treat it as we have said in the section, and with what was mentioned before.
[Section on] Surgery of worms generated under the skin, and it is called Bouin disease.
Chapter 94.
This disease is called Bouin disease in a certain land among us, because it often occurs to cows and there is a small worm that is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it pervades the whole body, ascending and descending; and it is shown to the sense during its movement from limb to limb, until it bursts at any place where it bursts on the skin, and escapes.
Its generation is from the rottenness of certain fluids.
As worms and snakes, that is, earthworms and roundworms occur in the abdomen.
And it is feared from its malignity.
Because when it pervades the body and rises to the head, and reaches a place; then perhaps it opens there, and escapes, and destroys an eye; and this often happens.
When one wishes to heal it and extract it, then this is not done except during its movement and appearance to the sense.
Therefore, one must tighten what is above it, and what is below it with a strong ligature.
Then cut above it, and extract him.
If it penetrates into the flesh and you do not find it; then place a cautery on the place with fire until it dies.
And the greater one fears, is its corruption which destroys the eye, as we have said. If you see it already reaching the head near the eye; then tighten below it with a good bandage.
Then cut above it, and extract him.
And the sick one must use his self-cleaning of the body with medications dissolving bad, rotten fluids.
And let him beware of foods causing rottenness.
Chapter on the incision due to Nakir's disease.
Chapter CXV.
This disease is called in our land Nakir; and it is pain which occurs in certain limbs; then it changes from limb to limb.
And I myself have already seen it, as I am telling you.
I was summoned to a sick woman in certain villages.
And she rolled up her arm, and I saw a smaller swelling in the vein of the arm.
And after staying for an hour, I saw a swelling move with a probe, like a worm, ascending to her shoulder more quickly than is possible; as quick as living silver when it runs from place to place.
The pain then left that place and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then she sat for an hour, and ran through the rest of her body until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that it was turning over its entire body, as I observed.
I marveled at the rapidity of its change from limb to limb.
And indeed, I had not seen this illness with my eyes before in such a manner.
Nevertheless, I have seen many who suffer from a change of pain from limb to limb; I have not seen it with my eyes as I have seen it in a woman.
And I do not think that it was anything other than because the woman was from those who are from dry villages, with veins exposed; hence it appears to the sense that the windiness was changed.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this reason in those who are well-nourished and in bodies with hidden veins.
Since you desire to cure it and the patient feels that pain; if it appears to your eye as we have said, then squeeze above it, quickly below it; cut above it until that windiness constricted emerges; and cauterize the place.
If, however, you do not see it with your eyes: then cure it with the expulsion of the body and with that which expels windiness; crush and expel them with foul pills and pills made from soapwort and similar substances.
Chapter on the Extraction of Arrows.
Chapter LXVI. The arrows are diversified according to their types and the places where they fall from the body.
The diversity of arrows is that some have large tips and small ones; some are concave and others blind.
And among them are those having three angles.
And from these are those which have tongues.
And among them are those which have stars.
Indeed, those which are according to the members on which they fall, it is according to two modes.
For indeed members are either hollowed from the main limbs, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and similar ones.
When it falls into any one of these members and appears to you as signs of death, which I shall tell you afterwards, then it is necessary that you cut out the extraction of this arrowhead from them, for death follows it in many dispositions.
And when these signs do not appear to you and the arrowhead is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it yourself and take care of the wound.
For the signs of the brain when an arrowhead falls into it and penetrates the bone and exits from what is above the brain are: because headache occurs from that, and scotoma (blindness), and dizziness, and redness in eyes, and swelling, and redness of tongue, and spasm, and confusion of intellect, and vomiting of choler.
And perhaps blood will come out from the nostrils or ears.
And perhaps speech is cut off and voice is destroyed.
And from the wound site comes out moisture white like pulp (of a vegetable)
From there it goes out something similar to liquid flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not come out by itself.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are as follows: it is near the left nipple and it feels as though it were fixed in a hard thing, not in something soft.
And perhaps the arrow's movement is like the movement of the pulse and black blood runs from the wound.
And this is followed by coldness in the limbs, cold sweat, and fainting.
Therefore, know that death is approaching certainly.
The sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is the emission of frothy blood from the wound, and vessels that follow the neck must be removed, and the color of the sick must be changed.
And it breathes out a great, deep breath, and seeks attraction to cold air.
If the arrow falls into the pleura, which is in the chest, then it is near small ribs; and there is a great shortness of breath with intense pain, with sighing, and all limbs of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested comes out from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the abdomen and lodges there, something like feces or a bladder that has already been torn apart comes out from the wound.
Therefore, there is no hope for its cure nor for the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and urine comes out, and something proceeds to the outside and the pain is greater than the sickness; then know that it is fatal.
The remaining limbs, as well as the face, neck, throat, spatula, aid, dorsal vertebrae, hip, leg, and similar bones are saved according to various arrangements when the arrow does not hit an artery or nerve, and the arrow is not venomous.
And I tell you what I saw about these arrows, so that it may indicate to you regarding your cure.
What happened is that an arrow fell into the eye of a certain man, at the root of his nose.
Therefore I extracted it from the other side, below his ear fat: and he was healed, and no damage occurred to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen upon his eyelid under the lower lid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not obtain anything more than a small part of it which adhered to its wooden shaft: and the arrow was large among the arrows of Turkish bows, with soft iron, in which there are no feathers.
Therefore the Jew was healed, and no accidental harm occurred to his eye. And I extracted another arrow from a Christian's throat.
And the arrow was Arabian, and it had feathers.
Therefore I made an incision over it between two windpipes: and already it was submerged in his throat.
I became sharp with it until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who it had fallen upon his abdomen: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed and nothing was changed in his condition, I made an incision over the arrow: and I probed it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no accidental harm occurred to him.
And I saw a man upon whom an arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound was consolidated over it.
After seven years, the arrow emerged at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman whose arrow fell into her womb, and the wound healed upon her, and the arrow remained within her; and no change occurred in her condition, and the woman found no harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man, whose arrow fell into his face; and the wound healed, and it remained, not finding him much pain; and similar things happened many times.
And I extracted the arrow from a man among the king's princes, which had fallen upon him in the middle of his nose and had already begun to turn slightly toward the right; and the arrow was completely hidden.
Therefore I was called for his treatment after the loss of the arrow for three days.
I therefore found the wound of the arrow to be very narrow.
Then I probed it with a delicate probe and did not feel it; but he himself found a puncture and pain on his right side beneath his ear.
Therefore I hoped that the puncture was at the end of the arrow.
Then I applied a plaster to the place where there was an attractant and digestive virtue, confident that the wound would heal and appear to me the sign of the arrow, so that I could cut above it; but it did not happen at the expected place, showing that the arrow had missed its mark.
I therefore remained with the plaster upon him for many days; but it did not happen as expected, and the wound healed in the meantime; and he remained weak from the extraction of it until one day he felt the arrow within his nose.
And he told me this.
Therefore I put sharp, corrosive medicine upon that wound for many days until it opened; and when I probed it myself, I felt the subtle end of the arrow which was attached to the wood.
Then I added sharp medicine to the opening of the wound until it became visible that the arrow-tip appeared to us; and moreover, he passed away from me with that time span of about four months.
After the wound was expanded and I had the opportunity to insert forceps into it, and move it, but it did not obey to come out; then I did not stop trying, and devising means for it with all my crafts, until on a certain day when the forceps were well made according to their form at the end of the chapter, I pulled it out.
Then I restored the wound.
And indeed physicians judge that the nasal cartilage does not heal.
I therefore restored it, and the wound healed, and the weak health became whole; nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you about the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you put this rule and significance upon what I have not said.
Because the parts and divisions of this art are not grasped with the narrative; neither does that book grasp it, nor a prudent craftsman compares much with little; and concerning what is present, about what is absent: and he discovers a new operation, and a new tool for descents of external things of this art when they occur.
I say that arrows do not come out from the members to which they are fixed, unless in two ways. Or by being drawn out from the place where it entered.
Or on the contrary, by the other part.
And that which comes out from where it entered is either a projectile in a fleshy place; and it is drawn, and comes out.
If it does not obey to come out from the hour when it fell; then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh around it rots; and the attraction of it will weaken, and its coming out will take place.
And similarly, if it is incised in the bone and does not obey you for discharge, then release it even for several days; and repeat it with attraction and movement every day, until it discharges.
If it does not obey you for discharge after several days, then it is necessary to bore holes around the bone with a fine lancet from all sides until the splinters are enlarged.
Then draw it out and remove it (the foreign body).
If the arrow is fixed in the skull bone and has already penetrated one of the ventricles of the brain and there appear some of the symptoms I mentioned earlier, then refrain from drawing the arrow out and let it be for several days until its state has become equal (with the body).
For if the arrow reaches the spinal column, then death is not prolonged for him.
And if the arrow is not fixed except within the body of the bone itself and does not penetrate as far as the spinal column, and the man remains sick for some days without any of the mentioned symptoms occurring: then apply skill in drawing out the arrow and extracting it.
If it is fixed deeply and does not obey you for drawing out, then administer a lancet around the arrow as I told you; then take care of the place until it heals.
If the arrow is already hidden in the body's location, and it is concealed and hidden from sensation, then search for it with probing (exploration).
If you feel the arrow, then draw it out with certain instruments suitable for its drawing out.
If you cannot draw it out due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow in depth, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein there: then pierce (make a small opening) above it until the wound is enlarged enough for the arrow to be extracted.
If there are ears to which he is holding, then free the fixed flesh in them from every side, with every artifice you can, and if not possible for dislocation of the flesh beyond the fracture of the ears, then twist until it comes out.
When you administer the extraction of an arrow, wherever it is, then use twisting with your hand, along with forceps to all parts, until you make it come out: and subtlety of last subtlety, so that the arrow is not broken, and its attraction and removal becomes difficult for you.
If you cannot do it from one hour, then leave it for some days, until what is around its circumference putrefies.
Then repeat it: indeed the tunica will become loose. But if the counteraction makes bleeding for you, then administer what we said in the cure chapter of it: and keep your strength from cutting a vein, or nerve, or tendon.
And administer artifice in every way as possible for the extraction of the arrow: and it should be with ease, calmness, slowness, or firmness, as I told you.
And it is necessary that when you pull the arrow, you make him weak according to the figure, according to which the arrow was at the time of its fall in him.
Because it is more beneficial.
But if it is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
The arrow that goes out from the opposite side of another part, or already proceeds something towards the exterior: or makes humpiness at the end of the arrow by sensation from the upper part of the skin nearby, and you see it projecting: cut therefore above it, and the cut should be according to the amount so that forceps can catch in it.
Then draw it out, for it becomes easy to expel.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness, until the arrowhead impresses on the bone and dilates itself; then draw it out.
And if not: let it be for some days; then attempt it again until it exits.
If the arrow shaft is in it, then push it out along with it.
If the arrow shaft fell off and you wish to administer force: then insert a concave instrument into it so that its concavity enters the tail of the arrow; then push it out along with it.
If the arrow is concave, then push it out with the instrument inserted into it.
The arrow is pulled by that (instrument).
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut all the flesh where the venom is; if it is possible for you.
Then care for it with whatever suits that (injury).
If the arrow is falling into the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close to where you touch it with your probe, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware not to cut a vein or nerve, and remove it.
Then suture the wound, if you see it, and care for it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are extracted.
The ends should be similar to a bird's beak, which have been made thus of iron; when they grasp the arrow, they do not let it go.
And they are made in many different sizes, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow, its narrowness, and the width and constriction of the wound.
Form of a lever concave.
The form of a deafening thrower (or projectile).
This is the end of the bowstring-like instrument similar to a radius (for) its passage into the concave arrow, and it is propelled with it.
The end of the lever's concave form is concave, like a bird's feather: for its passage into the arrow and the thrust from it.
Chapter on Phlebotomy of Veins.
Chapter XCVII. Veins to be bled, whose course is established within the body, are thirty.
From the head there are sixteen: two pulsating veins behind the ears, called the two herbs; and two arteries which appear at the temples; and two veins that are found at the inner corners of the eyes of both eyes, called the 'Aspicientes'; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose.
And two jugulars, which are in the neck.
And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth.
And two veins which are in the lower lip.
And these are the veins called Algecherich.
And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins that are bled in the arms, there are five veins on each arm.
One of them is called the Cephalic and it comes from the side of the wood; and the people call it the vein of the head.
Et Fusca means "And black" in English.
And it is the middle vein, and it is composed of a branch from the Basilica, and a branch from the Cephalic: and the people call it the body's vein.
And Basilica, and it is placed on the domestic side: and it is also called Titillicaris.
And the people call it the vein of the liver.
And the string of the arm, and it is placed on the elbow: and that is where bloodletting is done, and that is which appears above the thumb in a visible manner.
And Saluatella: and it is the vein that is between the ankle and the smallest bone: and there are two branches to it.
And in the leg and foot there are three veins.
One of them is which is under the bend of the thumb from the side of the forest.
And the second is Saphena: and its place is at the heel on the domestic side.
And vein of Nessus: and its place is at the heel on the forest side.
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to these.
[Section on bloodletting of two veins after the ears]
Indeed, bloodletting of the two veins that are after the ears is a help for old catarrhs, and for hematoma, and for scrofulas, and for old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bloodletting it (the vein) is according to what I have described.
And it should be shaved (the head of the sick person): and the back part of his head should be rubbed at the place of two veins with a rough cloth for good rubbing.
Then the sick person should bind his neck with bandage until the two veins appear.
And their places are after the ears, in two depressed parts of the head.
You should seek them with your finger, and where you feel a pulse from them under your finger, there mark it with wax.
Then take the lancet, and it is called Incisor.
Then introduce it under the vein into the flesh until the lancet reaches the bone.
Then slide your hand with the vein and skin upward, and cut the vein with an incising cut.
And let the length of the incision be the size of two joined fingers or approximately that, and make as much blood come out as you want.
Then tie it with threads, and release it until it heals.
And now the incision of them and their cauterization has been treated at the beginning of the book.
Chapter on phlebotomy of two Arteries in Time.
The help of phlebotomy of two arteries which are in the two times is for the old hemigraine: and the sodam pruam, and obtalmiam assiduam: and the course of superfluous effusions acute to the eyes. And the quality of phlebotomizing them is as I told you.
Let the sick person tighten his neck much until two veins appear to the senses with clear evidence and it will be shown that their pulse is felt under your finger.
Then mark them with wax.
Then slide the skin over the vein upward with your index finger and introduce the lancet below incising it, and slide the vein upward.
And cut it as you did with two other veins: and make the blood flow according to your need. Then loosen the constriction of the sick person, and place your finger over one vein.
After placing it on the affected part and applying small poultices, tie it tightly above: then let it remain until it heals.
And now recalls the reminders of those (things) to be cut and those to be extracted, at the beginning of the book.
Chapter on venesection of the forehead vein, after venesection of the cerebral vein.
But the benefit of venesection of the forehead vein is after venesection of the cerebral vein, for the ancient pains in the face; and for hemicrania, and redness; and for foul ulcers.
And the quality of this venesection is as I have told you.
A weak person should bind his neck with a bandage until the vein appears.
Then take the instrument called Fossorium.
Here is its shape (description).
Place the pointed end of the Fossorium on the vein and strike it with a mallet or another tool in its manner; then let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish.
Then heal the puncture of the weak person, and tie it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad lancet during venesection.
However, the venesector should not be one with a sharp point, as are the other venesectors, but rather one with a broad point.
The venesection should be made across (transversely), because the bone is close; and possibly the venesector will break it if it is too sharp.
Chapter on venesection of veins in two Lacrimal sacs.
But the benefit of the two veins that are in the two Lacrimal sacs of two eyes is for the eye affected by scabs and redness; also for swelling in the eye, and the pains of the face.
The quality of phlebotomy for them is to tighten a weak neck with a bandage.
Then [the assistant] for the phlebotomy: and thou shalt stand over his head.
And let the phlebotomy be made across the width rather than length, with a small cutter and wide slightly, for there is no flesh in that place.
For if the phlebotomist is subtle at the extremity, perhaps it breaks.
Then let run from the blood as much as it necessary for you.
And place upon them a cloth, and tighten them at night, and loosen them.
[Section] On the phlebotomy of Nasic Veins.
The veins of the nose, phlebotomy is for acute fever, and violent swelling, and ailments of the face, such as hemigraine and redness which occurs on the face; especially when it is old.
And the quality of phlebotomy for them is to tighten a weak neck.
Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a subtle, long cutter; and fix it in the middle of the tip of the nose, between that which separates the nose according to straightness.
For the vein is not visible there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you hold the end of your hand with the cutter slightly; and let run from the blood according to your necessity.
Then tie it at night.
For it heals quickly.
[Section] On the phlebotomy of Guidi veins.
Indeed, two of the phlebotomies of Guidi are for the constriction of coughing, and the beginning of leprosy, and melancholic ailments, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and those that are corroding; that is, herpes or meningeal.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that it binds the sick one under both neck with a ligature; and the craftsman stands over the head of the sick one, and the sick one sits on a seat.
Then phlebotomy vein to the length of phlebotomy shall be somewhat less.
Then draw a measured amount of blood, or according to what you see for the necessity that is for it.
Then do the same with another vein.
Afterwards loosen the ligature, and bind two veins tightly together: so that the sick one does not faint.
And let it (the vein) be until morning.
For the wound heals.
[Title: On Phlebotomy of Veins by Albucasis]
The veins, according to Albucasis, are useful for phlebotomy because they help with alcoholism in the mouth, and corruption of teeth; and with sores, fissures of the lips, sores (also) which are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy for those is, that you make the sick one sit before you; and bind his neck with a linen cloth.
Then roll back his lip, and look at the two veins; one of which is from the right side of the lip, and the second from the left of it; and the demonstration of each is by blackening both.
And that is true because around them (the veins) there are small, black veins.
Cut therefore each one with a cutting instrument. If there is doubt on you and you do not know which one it is; then direct your attention to the larger one of them and that one more clearly.
And do the same with the two veins that are in the upper lip; and most of all is custom with it (the phlebotomy); and cut two veins which are in the lower lip.
On phlebotomy: Vein under the tongue after cephalic phlebotomy.
Of the two veins which are under the tongue, phlebotomy is beneficial: because phlebotomy of the cephalic is for affections that are in the throat, and for diseases of the palate, and for diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing these (veins) is that the sick person should sit before you in the sunlight; and loosen his tongue, and look beneath it on one side for a vein, and on the other side for a vein; and the color of both should lean towards blackness.
So, phlebotomize each (vein), and be careful not to injure your hand while phlebotomizing them.
For beneath these (veins) are the arteries, and possibly there will be bleeding from those arteries.
On three veins in the elbow:
The three veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those whose phlebotomy is customary in all men.
And phlebotomy of these (veins) is made according to two modes.
Or by puncturing with a broad-bladed phlebotome (myrtine): or by applying oil to the point of the vein for softening: or by cutting with a phlebotome of a knife, and this is called Alnesil.
And this is its form.
This Alnesil (instrument) is for cutting.
And from these (veins) there are broad and narrow forms according to the size and constriction of the veins: The form of the phlebotome myrtine is broad, as you see.
And it (the phlebotome myrtine) is suitable for opening curved veins, full, projecting, visible, thick, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
This phlebotomist is smaller in size and more subtle in cutting.
It suits for the venesection of fine veins containing subtle, citron-colored blood.
Chapter on Venesection (Phlebotomy) from Basilica.
Among the three veins of phlebotomy, the Basilica is helpful. Because it draws blood from ailments that are under the throat and neck, as it follows the chest and abdomen; it is suitable for the phlebotomist to perform phlebotomy on it, so that he may be careful, and it should be done with caution because below it is an artery.
If the phlebotomist makes a mistake and adds in the prick, he will cut that artery and there will be bleeding.
Therefore, it is necessary that neither the phlebotomist nor the phlebotomee pricks (it); instead, it should be cut with a lancet (Alnesil).
If the Basilica does not appear in a clear manifestation, then it is necessary that you search for another or change to another; or look for one of its branches; or use the arm as replacement for phlebotome (Funem brachii).
It is indeed clear and should be cut with a lancet (Anesil) as we said earlier.
If you wish to perform the venesection of that (same) one, then it is necessary before tightening the arm, so that you touch the place, until you know the location of the pulse.
Then mark the place with a hot iron, afterwards tighten the arm, and cut the vein with a curved incision using a lancet (Alnesil) as we said earlier.
And be careful that the blow does not fall into the space from the location of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, an expansion (inflation) at the place which you marked with hot iron, then that expansion is an expansion of the artery; avoid it therefore.
If you see blood rise during venesection, like the urine of a boy, and it is thin, red: then you know that it is from the artery's blood.
Then hurry up, and place your finger over it at a longer space, then remove your finger.
If the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off), then tie the arm, and let it be; and let the weak avoid moving it; and let there be fear of it.
And do not move it for some days until it heals.
If the blood does not flow off and presses you, and medicine is not present to you at that moment, then cut the artery if it appears to you.
For its extremities contract, and the blood flows off.
Or take the bark of a fig tree and pound it; take half of it, and tie it over the appropriate place of the vein's narrowing, with a ligature and pledgets until another day.
If the blood flows off, that is good.
And if it does not: then cure the place with the memory of the one who went before, by removing dust that stops the flow of blood; and the removal of its blood is not difficult in many positions due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of a ligature from the arm.
Chapter on venesection of the femoral vein.
The help of the femoral vein venesection is that it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower body; therefore, because it is composed of a branch of the Basilica vein, and a branch of the Cephalic vein, as we said.
And it is fitting for the venesectionist that he fear that place from venesection because a nerve is beneath it.
If therefore nerve is touched in the puncture of phlebotomy, and faintness occurs, difficult will be its healing, and it may not recover fully.
And this nerve often appears to sensation.
If however it is hidden in some people and it is delicate and not shown: then it is necessary that you place your phlebotomy where you can phlebotomize it, a section with Alnesil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then pierce the vein in length.
Chapter on the Vein of the Head.
The phlebotomy of the Vein of the Head is beneficial because it draws blood from the head, and contributes to diseases of the eyes.
And it is proper in this vein, if you wish, that when phlebotomizing it with the oil phlebotomy or the myrtle phlebotomy, it is oiled with oil of olive or myrtle: because it is safer than all veins, because it is not below an artery, nor a nerve. Nevertheless it is suitable for you at the phlebotomy, that you avoid the head and arm only, and seek a softer place: and it will not hurt it, if it is not found with the first blow, that you repeat over it with the phlebotomy several times. Nevertheless perhaps it may be bled when not phlebotomized in the first blow, but it will not harm it that bleb in some.
Chapter on the Usefulness of Phlebotomy, and Cautions to be Observed in it.
The quality of phlebotomy, and its effects from which you should consider correcting it.
First of all you should know that phlebotomy is not administered unless for the conservation of health, and its maintenance, and caution against the onset of diseases.
And let phlebotomy be performed on one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely, the Cephalic, the Flexor, and the Basilic.
And let phlebotomy be done at the beginning of spring while fasting, and during summer and autumn after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
Let phlebotomy be done on the first day or third day after passing three hours from the previous day.
However, phlebotomy administered for illness does not have a fixed hour; it is done whenever the situation and necessity requires it, whether during the night or day, and at any hour and time.
And it is not appropriate to perform phlebotomy on boys until they reach fourteen years of age.
A pregnant woman shall not be subjected to phlebotomy from the fourth month until the seventh.
Elderly persons who have surpassed sixty years shall not be subjected to phlebotomy.
Therefore, when someone wishes to undergo phlebotomy for any reason, it is necessary that they clean their intestines before the procedure with a mild clisterium if there is much feces retained; so as not to attract unhealthy putrid waste from the intestines near the veins during the phlebotomy, harming the main organs.
A patient suffering from toctina (satiation or nausea) shall not be subjected to phlebotomy; nor one who is intoxicated or drunk, until that condition has been removed from them.
A person with dropsy should not be subjected to phlebotomy.
And beware of phlebotomy after suffering from colic, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive sexual activity, labor, exercise, wakefulness, fasting, or anything that weakens the body's strength in any way.
Then consider in subtlety of humors before that, if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines: if it can be done to him.
Then enter the bath, if it does not forbid him something: or exercise with some exercise, so that blood may be made more subtle.
And place phlebotomy in his chest on the third day, as we said before: and try to evacuate his chest that day with all its bad conditions such as tightness, anger, fear, and with all bodily conditions such as labor, punishment, excess, and similar ones.
And let him sit with those things present which custom of men has run with respect to aromatics, smell, joy and similar ones according to the possibility of quantity.
Then let the phlebotomist sit on the pulvinar that is higher than the phlebotomy pulvinar: then he should pull out his arm and rub it with his hand twice or thrice.
Then tie the ligature with a cord and wrap it around twice.
And let the ligature be moderate because when the ligature is uneven or too tight in the ligature, then it prevents the flow of blood; or in softening, it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then after the ligature it is necessary that the person to be bled rubs his hands together until the veins swell and are felt.
Then the phlebotomist cleans the puncture site with a little oil, old oil specifically.
Then place the index finger of his left hand on that vein where he wants to do the phlebotomy a little bit, so that the vein does not escape and the blow is not scattered.
Because veins are like fleeing cords during phlebotomy; and some of them are full of wind; and when you put the phlebotomy on it, it shrinks under the phlebotomist, and the phlebotomist is deceived, and he does not open the vein; and if he opens it, it is narrowed; therefore for this reason it is necessary that the phlebotomist should be firm and attentive to all these matters.
Then let him lay down (the) leeches.
And if not, then repeat that with another side at that place or above it with haste; unless there is no need for cautery (cauterization).
If (the vein) is cauterized or the sick person frightens, then let him go on the day or two days; and do not tie the bandage.
Perhaps it draws a boil hotly.
Do not enter (the) bathhouse.
Then let him repeat the leeching, if (there is) blood (flow).
If the opening is small or blood flows finely; and beware that the amount of blood does not leave what you want; then repeat the leeching in the same vein according to correctness, and add a little more in the procedure.
And do that with haste before cauterizing the place; because cauterized places are many among people during small operations.
If you see that (the boil) is already cauterized, then do not repeat on it at all, because it does not excuse anything from you. And place something from oil paste on it; because it encourages the flow of blood.
And it is better in this place than oil itself and other oils.
And similarly administer oil paste in all your leeching of the veins, where leeches stop the flow of blood; and this is made by Tyriacans and Alfarachs, when it is put on one of them (the oils).
Blood becomes fine and dissolves when it is thick.
If it happens at the site of leeching that a large boil occurs, for it often happens, especially to him who is not a leecher except in that place or the opening of the vein is small; then hurry and place on the spot a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated a little; and tie it for an hour; because it dissolves.
It is necessary that you do this after the exit of blood from the vein itself, when it completes itself, or from another vein.
And often abscesses and protrusions occur at the phlebotomy of the basilica (large vein in the arm).
Place your hand upon it (the abscess), then if you find softness under your pressure on it, then that protrusion is evil.
Be careful, therefore, that you place something on it (the abscess) from what was said.
For perhaps blood from the artery will flow out of it.
But make a plaster for it (the abscess) with that which contains the hardening substance, so that the place may become solidified.
Then take care of it (the patient) with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
It is necessary that you draw out blood from every man according to the strength of its virtue (the power of the bloodletting instrument).
And what appears as a purple color above the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it flow out until it becomes thin; and similarly if it is sharp (acute), then let it flow out until its sharpness is removed.
It is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting to be done once, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified, and that the bloodletter (the person performing the bloodletting) should be on the side; and for him who is weak, it should be the opposite.
It is necessary that he draws it out at the veins and that there be a narrow hole: and it is better what is administered in venesection is, that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
This method of venesection is healthy against blood flow and nerve cut, and it is more commendable and safer than venesection by width and length.
He who usually comes upon venesection with fainting, it is necessary that he be given small bread soaked in water of pomeranate juice or wine before venesection: or dried, if he is heated: and draw out from his blood in three veins, or four.
If she is of cold constitution, then let her receive before venesection bread soaked in syrup of myrrh or in syrup of honey scented with spices, or in fragrant scented syrup.
If fainting occurs during venesection and the cause is a large outflow of blood, then it is necessary that she drink meat water and subtle scented syrup: and use aromatics with algae, and let her be swaddled on her chest with this: and use the rest which we said in the division in the chapter on fainting from bleeding.
He who wants to reduce his arm and release his blood in the second degree: it is necessary for him whose venesection is for great evacuation and whose strength is weak, that he releases blood gradually by the quantity of his strength in continuous days.
But he who wants to reduce his arm and release his blood in the second degree and is obese: then let him do it after seven hours, or nine, from his first venesection.
But he who wants to draw blood from his body against the opposite part to which he leans: it is necessary that it be reduced to him on the second or third day.
In whose body there is much heated blood, which becomes sharper and causes fever: it is necessary that blood should exit from him once, and a large quantity should be drawn out of him; and the opening should be enlarged until fainting occurs; after you have observed all the conditions of venesection, and placed your hand over his pulse at the flow of blood, so that death does not occur instead of fainting.
Many times this happens when the venesectioner is unaware and falls into negligence.
And it is not appropriate when you wish to release the arm and draw blood a second time, if the orifice of the vein is already closed and the exit of blood becomes difficult, that one should press on it with force and the affected area be extended quickly.
For this is very bad indeed, rather let it go until it can be venesected a second time.
Or remove with the sharpness of the venesectioner that which has congealed from blood in the vein's orifice and place something dissolved in salt water on it.
And put upon it some turmeric or alum, or sage root, and place it under gentle compression until blood exits.
But if the vein has already been cut, then let it be and do not cover it up until the tumor settles down.
If necessity demands that blood be drawn a second time and there is no excuse, then either venesection should be done on the same spot, or on another vein in the other arm.
The band of the arm is venesected at the place of Fuscus and Basilicus, as they are not found and hidden because they are composed of them.
And the quality of venesection is that a weak hand should be inserted into warm water until it turns red and the vein appears clearly manifest.
Then tie a moderately loose ligature over it.
Then perform the venesection gradually, neither longitudinally nor transversely, but slightly curved; and let the opening be wide, and the incision for venesection be made near the joint of the hand.
Above all, it is advised to let the flow of blood run into hot water during winter time.
This venesection is safer than any other vein as it is neither artery nor nerve.
The venesection of the cephalic vein in the right hand is beneficial for diseases of the liver.
The quality of this venesection is that you should tie the cephalic vein with a ligature or your hand after inserting it into hot water until the vein swells up and becomes very sensitive.
Then perform the venesection across [the vein].
And if you cut it completely, it will not harm him at all.
Preserve, do not harm your hand with the venesection.
For under it are the nerves of the fingers exposed from the flesh.
Then immerse the hand again into hot water and let the blood run into it.
For if you do not immerse [the hand] in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein and prevent further flow.
When you have extracted the required amount of blood, then place oil and salt on the vein to prevent it from coagulating quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary that you do with every strict branch.
The remedy for phlebotomy is from the left hand. Because it is akin to sickness of the spleen; and similarly do with phlebotomy as you did in the second one equally.
The remedy for saphenous vein phlebotomy is for the sicknesses which are in the lower part of the body, such as the illnesses of the womb, and retention of menses, and the weaknesses of the kidneys, and ulcers of the hips and legs that are old, and similar ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomy for this is that a weak person should immerse his foot in warm water; and make friction on it until the veins appear; and tie above the ankle joint with a bandage.
And indeed the location of the vein is at the heel, visible towards the thumb; and they branch out from it on the face of the foot in many branches.
Therefore phlebotomy should be done in a larger branch of it or at the heel in its gathering; because it is better and safer.
If phlebotomy is done on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy instrument as if you want to cut it transversely; and let the phlebotomist be Nesil.
If there is a prohibition of the outflow of blood, then immerse his foot in warm water; and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
If the phlebotomist misses the vein in the first instance, then he should move it slightly upwards, because it is safer, and do not worry about ill-effects when you are careful of the nerves, as we said.
And likewise with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic vein, as we have said, is at the calcaneum side on the forest-side (lateral side).
And the aid of phlebotomy for it (the vein) is for pain in the ankle when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of phlebotomy for it (the vein) is that an invalid should enter the bath and hurry: and bind the leg from the side of the ankle up to the calcaneum four fingers, with thin ointment long: for it does not appear unless for that reason.
When it appears, then phlebotomy should be done according to whatever skill is possible for you, or according to a crossing (transverse): and it is better, or as if you make an incision in it with an incision, or cut it with a section (ligature).
Its location is safer, and it is hidden very much in many people.
If you do not find it (the vein) and it does not appear at all to the sense: then phlebotomy should be done for one of its branches, and there is one that appears on the back of the foot, turned towards the ear: and be careful about nerves, and let the blood flow according to the amount you want.
Then loosen the ligature, and place skin over the site of phlebotomy, and bind the site.
It is quickly cured.
On ventosation and the quality of its use.
Chapter XCVIII.
Bladders are made from horns, and from copper, and from glass.
And bladdering is done in two ways.
With incision and bloodletting; and another kind of bladdering without incision. And this kind of bladdering without incision is done in two ways as well.
Or it is done with fire.
Or it is done without fire.
And the places in the body where bladdering with incision and bloodletting are administered are fourteen.
One of them is the bladdering of Alnocrates, which is at the end of the head; and Alkehel, which is in the middle of the neck; and the bladdering of Alhagdahim, which are two plates of the neck from both sides; and the bladdering of the mind, which is under the jaw in the lower part of the mouth; and the bladdering of the two spoon-shaped places; and the bladdering of Alachosos above the end of the tail; and the bladdering of the two testicles, and they are in the middle of the arms; and the bladdering of the two legs; and the bladdering of the two calves.
And bladdering indeed does not draw blood from the veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not have the same effect as the case with phlebotomy.
It is not necessary to administer bladdering whether with fire or without it in any disease that comes from congestion until the entire body has been evacuated.
If necessity requires bladdering due to a disease or custom, we administer it at the beginning of every month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and at any time.
This is because there are some people who when their blood multiplies, until it requires extraction through bladdering, find a headache and pressure in their heads.
And from these (cases) is he who finds distention and redness on his face, on his head, and on his neck.
And from these (cases) is he who finds itching on his face and forehead, and darkness and dullness in his eyes.
And from these (cases) is he who scratches a site of his wind-inflammation. And from these (cases) is he whose laughter increases.
And from these (cases) is he who finds the taste of blood in his mouth: or who spits out the blood.
And from these (cases) is he whose sleep increases.
And from these (cases) is he who sees in his sleep blood and redness, and the dead, and wounds, and things similar to those. When we see something from these (cases), and properly if it is during the third month (trimester): we then command that the wind-inflammation should be made, after two or three hours have passed. The remedy for wind-inflammation of the neck is: because it (wind-inflammation) contributes to heaviness in the head and because it discharges to the eyes.
