After I have completed the book for you, my sons, which is the last concerning knowledge in medicine and its supplement, and after I have come to an end in it, by means of its explanations and its own declarations, it seemed good to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise, which is a part of surgery, namely, chirurgery with hand.
Since the operation with hand has been laid down in our region and during our time entirely prohibited: until perhaps the knowledge of it perished, and its trace vanished: and there remain only small descriptions in ancient books, which have been altered by hands; and error and hesitation occurred in them, until their intentions were closed and the impulse of it was prolonged: It seemed good to me that I should revive it with this Treatise's arrangement according to the way from the position, the declaration, and abbreviation; and that I come with forms of iron tools of Cautery and the rest of instruments' operation: with making additions to declarations and obtaining what is necessary.
The reason why a good craftsman of this is not found with his hand in our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to exercise before that in the science of anatomy, which Galen narrated, until he knows the remedies of members, and their forms, and their conjunction and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, and their number, and their exit, and the pulsations and quiets of veins, and their locations.
And for this reason, Hippocrates said that much is the name with the name, and little is the work, especially in the art of hand.
We have already said about it at the beginning of this book.
Since one who is not skilled in what we have said about anatomy will not be purged, but rather fall into error, in which men are slain: as I have seen many of those who are formed from this science, and boast about it without knowledge, and without experiment.
I have seen a foolish physician cut off a scrofulous apostema on a woman's neck and accidentally cut some arteries in the neck: therefore, the woman bled to death before his very eyes.
And I have seen another physician who presumed to extract a stone from an old man who had grown it, and the stone was large. Therefore, he came upon him and extracted the stone along with a fragment of the bladder. Wherefore the man died on the third day.
And I myself had been called to extract it; and I saw from the size of the stone and the state of the patient that he would die.
I have seen another physician who was receiving a stipend from some Duke of our land on account of his medicine: and a black eunuch who was with him suffered a fracture in the leg near the heel; and the physician, ignorant in this matter, bound up the fracture over the wound with ligatures and forceps, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he treated him according to his own ideas. Later he dismissed him for some days and ordered him not to loosen the bandage; and so he stood thus until a tumor formed on his leg, and his foot, and came to ruin.
Therefore I was called upon him: and I hastened to undo the bandage; and quiet came over him, and he was relieved of his pains.
But the corruption had already become established in the limb: and I could not stop it.
The decay shall cease to spread through the member until it has perished.
And I saw another physician who perforated a malignant ulcer: and after days it was healed when the wickedness of it was revealed to its master.
Because when a cancer is pure from the humor of melancholy, then it should not be reached with iron entirely unless it is in a member that can bear it, so that the whole thing may be cut off.
And for this reason, O Sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation is divided into two divisions: namely, an operation associated with health; and an operation, with which there is danger in various dispositions.
And I have already risen up in every place of this book where the operation comes, in which there is fear and dread.
Therefore it is necessary for you to be careful of this and to separate it yourself so that fools do not find a way to speak and disgrace themselves.
Take then the measure with care and protection, and use your sick ones with ease and firmness, and make use of a better way leading by the grace of God to health and praiseworthy success; and leave behind the terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal; and deliver yourselves from that which causes you fear, so that hesitation may not enter into your faith and comfort.
For it remains more for your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your quantities.
For Galen has already said in some of his warnings. Do not heal evil diseases, lest you be called evil physicians.
Now I have divided this Treatise according to three Chapters.
First Chapter.
On cautery with fire and cautery with sharp medicine, this is the first chapter arranged from head to foot, and the forms of instruments for cautery, and its tools; and all that is necessary for the operation.
Chapter second.
On section and perforation, phlebotomy and ventosities, and wounds: and extraction of arrows, and similar things: and the whole chapter, arranged in forms of instruments. ¶
Chapter third.
On restoration, and dislocation, and treatment of twisting, and similar things: the chapter is arranged from head to foot, and forms of instruments.
Before I remind you of the operation with it, it is necessary that I say the quality of its remedies and its harms, and in what composition it should be presented.
I therefore say that the discussion of the quality of the remedy and harm of the cautery is a long, subtle, scientific, and hidden knowledge.
Also there was a multitude of wise men who debated on it and disagreed among themselves; and to me, at least, a little of their discussions is sufficient for me, fearing prolongation.
I therefore say that the cautery applies universally to every composition, whether with material or without; except for two compositions, which are the hot composition without material and the dry composition without material.
In the hot and dry composition with material, they disagreed. Some said that the cautery is beneficial in it. Others said the opposite of this, namely that the cautery is not suitable for the illness which is from heat and dryness; because the nature of fire is heat; and it is inconvenient to be healed from a hot and dry illness with heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite of this said that the cautery is beneficial for all hot and dry illnesses which happen in the bodies of men; because when you compare the body of a man and his humors to the composition of fire, you find the body of the man cold.
And I myself say by that speech: because it has often been proven to me in practice.
Nevertheless, it is not necessary for it to come up again unless he who has been tested and experienced in the last chapter of cautery exercise, and knows the diversity of men's compositions, and the disposition of illnesses within themselves, and the causes and accidents of them, and the duration of their span.
From the remaining temperaments (complexions), there is no fear for you; and especially in cold and moist diseases. For indeed, all physicians have agreed on them (cauteries); and they have not disagreed on the use of cautery with them.
And know, my sons, that from the secret of treatment by cautery with fire and its goodness on cautery with medicine burning, since fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member which is being cauterized; and it does not harm another joint connected with it, unless in a slight degree.
But the action of medicine burning reaches that which is stretched out from the members; and perhaps it causes pain in a member and perhaps kills it.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not do that unless it is in excess.
Now indeed it has become known to us through experiment, because of the length of service and diligence with skill, and the position concerning truth; and because of that I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not that it is not allowed for this book of mine, I would bring to you the secret concealed in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies, by which it expels diseases, which could be demonstrated philosophically, and which would become clear to your minds.
And know, my sons, that they (physicians) themselves differ as to the time when a cautery should be made, and they put the better time in truth.
And I say that a cautery is appropriate at any time; for this reason, any harm resulting from the time (of the operation) is immersed in the benefit which is drawn near by the cautery. And especially if a cautery is for pains from necessary pains, strong, frequent, which do not tolerate delay; for this reason it is feared that there may occur a greater harm which would exceed the slight damage caused by time.
And let not that thought enter your minds, O sons, that it is not believed, except by the common people and foolish physicians, namely that there is no return for the ailment that is cured by cautery; and they put forth this as a consequence, but things are not so as they think: therefore because cautery is not, except in place of medicine, which alters complexion, and drives out humidities that are causes, wherefore pains occur.
However, the cautery is not always necessary for medicine due to the swiftness of its health, and the power of its operation, and the intensity of its dominion: it is possible that the ailment returns after a certain hour of time according to the complexion of the sick person, and the location of his ailment, and the strength of its effect: and whatever is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities within him: and whatever reaches it in its acquisition from food, and similar things as causes, unless the ailment occurs where cautery is administered.
A subtle ailment in the member of small superfluities and humidities, such as cautery for teeth, due to pain, etc., it is possible that that pain will not return in him. But that happens in a few cases.
However, the speech of the common people again, that cautery is the last resort of medicine, is correct, not for what they intend in it: because they believe that there is no cure which gives with medicine or anything after the fall of cautery.
But the matter is contrary to theirs, and their intention, that cautery is the last resort of medicine, is not, except when we administer modes of cure for some ailments, and those do not give with medicine: then we administer cautery at the end, and it cures: then it falls out that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than a cautery with iron; and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold, and the refinement of its substance; and they said that it does not cause pus at the site of cauterization. That is not entirely true; for I have already proven that it does not do this in certain bodies without any other effects.
And a cautery with it is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you heat the cautery in fire from gold, it is not known to you when heated according to the quantity desired due to the redness of gold; and when it approaches the same coldness, if you add more heat to it, it liquefies in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls out of occupation because of this; and for that reason a cautery with iron is more expedient and closer at hand among us for the purpose of the operation.
And I myself have already arranged this Chapter on the Cautery, according to chapters; and I have ordered it from head to foot: so that those who seek it may find what they want from it.
Chapter II.
Here cauterization is applied for the lordship of humidity and coldness over the brain; which are two causes of scurvy, and flow of many fluids from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and sleepiness, toothache, sore throat, and in general any sickness that occurs due to coldness, such as paralysis, scurvy, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The method of cauterization is to order the sick person: to evacuate it first with medicine dissolved in warm water for three or four nights, according to the strength of the sick person, and his age, and his habit.
Then command him to make an incision on his head with a new lancet. Then make him sit facing your hands, so that he now places his hands upon his chest.
Then place the palm of your hand on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger comes to rest, mark that place with charcoal.
Then heat the cautery oil: this is its shape. (Here follows a description of the tool.)
Then place it on the marked spot with charcoal, pressing down gradually with your hand, and you turn it. Then quickly withdraw your hand and look at the place.
If you see it has been burned away a quantity of bone from the skull or of hair, then quickly withdraw your hand. And if not, keep pressing with the iron itself or with another until you see the bones that I told you about.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, dip a cloth in the solution, and place it on the spot; let it remain for three days.
Then place a cloth dipped in butter over the burn and leave it until the scab of fire is destroyed. Then treat it with the four-ingredient ointment until it heals. (Here follows a recipe for the ointment.)
They have said that as long as a wound remains open, it discharges pus; therefore it is better and more healing.
Some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone; and hold the cautery until something of the thickness of the bone is burned.
Then grind down the burnt bone, then treat it.
Others say that when the cautery is used to its limit, an impression should be made on the bone for as long as it falls off like a layer of skin, or an instrument similar to what women use for infusing a small amount of alcohol, and they believe that vapors of the head escape from this place; and leave the open wound for a long time.
Then it shall be treated until it solidifies.
To me, these two kinds of cautery do not appear at all except in certain men according to the way of fear.
And let him be sent away, with me it is better for his own safety.
For indeed the head is weakened by the continuity of its own solution; as we have testified in other members; and especially when the head of the weak is naturally frail; and the first kind of cautery is safer and better according to me, and I use it; therefore, operate with it for safety.
Chapter III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the whole head: and it is prolonged in the sick, and uses herbs, and poultices, and leeches, and oils, and plasters. Moreover, if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, as we have mentioned, and it does not improve from these [measures]: then consider. If the head of the sick person is strong by nature and not weak, and it finds intense coldness: then cauterize with another cautery gently under that [part]. Then cauterize it on the whole horn of his head with a cautery, so that the skin is not pierced through, and an amount of bone is uncovered as we have mentioned. And cauterize it with one cautery on the occiput of his head, at the place which is called a vessel; and it is a place where a vent is placed; pour your warm oil into this, and do not uncover the bone. For the sick person finds intense pain from that [source of pain], and different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And I will say this cautery for the place itself; and it is necessary that it be a cautery which cauterizes horns of the head, and the occiput more delicately with a cautery which cauterizes the middle of the head.
Chapter III [The third chapter]
When there is pain and swelling in part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is treated with purifying medicines for the head, and further treatment is administered as I have said in the division of illnesses, and it does not improve: then cauterization is applied to this [condition] according to two methods: either cauterization with a sharp hot medicine; or with iron.
The cautery with a sharp burning medicine is to receive one garlic clove, peel it, and cut off its ends from both sides. Then divide the place of pain at the time with a wide lance, until there is a place under the skin where the tooth can be captured.
Introduce it into the same place under the skin until it is hidden: then press on it with a suitable ligature and leave it for fifteen hours, then dissolve it and extract the garlic, and leave the wound for two or three days; afterwards put a hot plaster submerged in butter over it until a pus forms: then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to perform that procedure with certain burning medicines which I have written about in the twelfth treatise on poisons.
But cauterization of this kind is as follows: Fire Cautery, whose form is as follows:
And it is called Clauilis: because its head's form resembles a nail, in which there is some curved part, and in the middle of it there is a small projection.
Then place it on the location and hold your hand; and you rotate the iron slowly with speed; let the quantity to be cauterized be of skin thickness, as its half. And lift your hand, so that an artery below it is not burned and blood flow occurs.
Then immerse the cotton in a saltwater solution and place it on the location, leave it for three days; then immerse the cotton with butter; afterwards treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemicania with a second part of the Cautery cutlery. Beware not to make an incision in the artery of this hemicania, not anciently.
[Heading] On the method of cauterization in ancient hemicania.
When you treat a hemicania, as we have said in the previous treatment and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment does not help; and you see from the disease that it is insufficient for what we have said with the first cautery with medicine, or with cautery with fire, then it is necessary to heat the Cautery cutlery until it becomes white, after you mark the location of pain with a line whose length is half a finger, or about that; and lay your hand aside once, and press it until you make an incision in the artery, and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuous movement of the jaw, which occurs during chewing, so that the side or nerve that moves it is not burned, and a spasm does not occur.
And it should be concerning the care and caution regarding the flow of blood from a severed artery. In the cutting (of an artery), fear is present and particularly for him who does not know what he is doing and is not diligent or experienced; and he should first abandon the operation with this person.
And I shall come (again) with a reminder of the management of bleeding from an artery according to its own method, and in its proper place in this book.
If you see that this cautery does not suffice for the patient and you see the body of the weak one bearing the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, care for the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer cautery, as we have said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with cautery having two knives. Indeed, cauterization is better in this way and more beneficial.
On the method of cauterizing in pain of an ear.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with solvents, and with other treatments as we have said in division, and yet the pain does not subside, then cauterize with fire: this is what is called Punctum; its form is as follows.
Then the punctum is made with it after its ignition around the entire ear, as it is described; or around both if pain occurs on both sides. And extend the cautery slightly away from the root of the ear after marking the spots with pitch; and let the quantity of the cauterization be ten puncta in every ear, and about that.
Then care for the spots until they heal.
On the method of cauterizing in a torture.
Chapter VII.
The torture that is cured with cauterization, is not other than those occurring by phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of illnesses.
And to be avoided are cauterization and bleeding of those occurring by excision, and spasm of a nerve.
When this kind of torture cannot be cured by herbs, and purges, and gargles, then it is necessary that you cauterize the sick person with three Cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and second a little below his earlobe, and third at the junction of the two lips.
Place your Cautery on the weaker side of the body. Since softening does not occur unless in the healthy part.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize with the Cautery itself directly on the upper end of the ear lobe near the vertex, and another at the earlobe; whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the Cautery until a quantity equal to half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the Cautery, and it is of the type of a scalpel, whose shape was mentioned before; but it should not be too thin, as you can see; and it is necessary that there be a scalpel in it of excessive thickness a little less.
Then take care of the places where this was done until they are healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy occurs and it cannot be cured with what has been said, and the sick person does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four Cauteries over all his skull, and a Cautery in the middle of his head, as was mentioned before, and a Cautery on the back of his head, according to what has been described; and the method of cauterization should be according to what has been described.
Also cauterized on the face of the stomach with a cautery; and it is more ultimate.
Then cured when that which preceded has been done.
Head IX.
It is necessary that in drink, for the sick head, there be first great hyerae, and purifying pills of brain.
Then shave the sick head entirely, and place on its backside ointment from synapi described in the treatise of ointments; place it there often.
For that is the method of cautery; and make it in the same order as I said there.
If then he is healed by this, it is good. If not: then make for him three cauteries on the backside of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye; and place between every cautery a thickness of finger.
Then care for the cautery, as for what went before.
If however you wish an addition, and the sick one can bear it; then make a cautery in the middle. And if you want an addition: then cauterize it over two horns.
Then care for it until he is healed; and let the cautery be anointed according to the shape that was given before.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in paralysis, and softening.
Head X.
It is necessary to proceed with cleansing the head with hyeers and as was said before.
Then shave the sick head; afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery on every horn of the head, and with a cautery on the backside of it, and with three on the spine of the neck.
If however in sickness you require softening of the body with more of these, and the sick one can bear it, and the illness is strong: then cauterize it with four cauteries on the spine, and the last one with a cautery until it burns through the skin most of it, and loosen your hand. Then take care of yourself until you are healed: and thus cauterize with oil.
On the method of cauterization for epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless his epilepsy is due to phlegm.
Therefore it is necessary to clean the brain of the epileptic patient first with hyssop and with the rest of the treatment that we have mentioned earlier, when the patient is critically ill or tolerant of medication.
If the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medication, then administer gargarisma and cleansing food for the brain, many days before with good nourishment.
Then shave his head, then cauterize the patient himself with a single cautery in the middle of the head according to what has been described earlier; and with another cautery on the back of his head and over all the horn of his head. If the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with the cauteries mentioned earlier for paralysis, and mollification of the body on vertebrae of the neck and backbone; and let it be oil-cauterized as described earlier.
If the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery according to this method.
On the method of cauterization for melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize the patient with the cauteries mentioned for paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of declivis leading to melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give him a drink that cleanses his brain as described earlier; then shave the head of the patient, and make a well-centered bandage from linen, similar to a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head, and the weak person sitting square should hold it from all sides.
Then apply the liniment. And it is more suitable for ancient butter of sheep. Heat it over the fire with a suitable temperature measure, so that when the finger is introduced into it, it can tolerate it. Then evacuate it from the middle of his head in a circle, and release it until it cools down.
Make him do this once a week with the rest of his good regimen until he is cured.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small punctures in it, as long as you hold it with the cautery; it should be aromatic.
For this type of cauterization moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place a warm cloth soaked in butter or goose fat on it.
[Chapter Title] Method of Cauterization as the Water Descends to the Eye.
Chapter 13.
When the beginning of water appears in the eye through the signs that I said in the division, then begin and wash the sick person while cleansing his head.
And keep him away from all moisture, and make him sit in a bath for several days while fasting.
Then order him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his own head. Then cauterize it over two temples with two cauteries, if the descent of water appears in both eyes at once; or from one side, if the water appears in only one eye; and cut off all veins and arteries that are under the skin using the cautery, and let the cauteries be long in length equal to the temples' width; and avoid bleeding.
If you see something coming out of it, then cut it off immediately with any medicine that is possible; and I will come with the wisdom that is in extracting arteries and cutting them off, and taking care to avoid bleeding.
And sometimes, it is cauterized in the neck, under two bones, with two cauteries emitted lastly.
On the ancient method of cauterizing in the tear ducts.
When tears of the eyes are chronic and on veins and arteries that are visible externally on the head, it is verified that it is due to an excess of cold, phlegmatic humors; then cauterize with a cautery as I have described in the beginning concerning descending water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries on the neck under the two bones. And if necessary, then cauterize it carefully on all sides of the eye, above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in nasal stench.
Chapter 15. When treating it as mentioned above, and the medication does not work; then hurry, and give infirmocochia for three nights; then shave its head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized cautery along with an oil cautery. Then cauterize it with a claw-shaped cautery and two cauteries under the eyebrows, slightly above the hairline.
And be careful not to cut the artery.
And this is the form of the claw-shaped cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in softening the eyelid.
Chapter 16. When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture; then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, along with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the eyebrows with two small cauteries in all parts; and they should extend from the temples; and the length of the entire cautery should be according to the length of the eyebrows; and do not bring your hand with the cautery too close, rather according to the quantity that is burned by the third eyelash.
In the manner of cauterizing the eyelid, when hairs are turned inward and piercing the eye.
The cautery is in two modes: either a cautery with fire, or a cautery with a burning medicine.
In the cautery with fire, command the sick person to release his hairs if he is among those who clean them, until they grow out and are evened. If they pierce him at the root of his eye: then bind his eyes with a plaster so that they do not move until they grow out.
When they grow out and are evened, then place the head of the sick person on your lap. Then mark the eyelids of his eyes with wax, mark that it is in the shape of a myrtle leaf; let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then put a warm dish on cheesecloth or on psyllium gum over the eye.
Then apply fire to the cautery, whose form is this.
Then cauterize according to the shape you marked, slowly in several places until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, entirely appearing properly.
And your mark of health is that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting and hairs rising at the site of piercing the eye.
Then lift up your hand then, and let him go for three days.
Then put a warm dish with butter on him until the scab falls off. Then care for him with an ointment until he is healed.
If some of the hairs return after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cautery on that spot as you did at first.
If hairs are in the lower part [of the body]: then cauterize it until it is brought to its natural place; and ensure that the hairs do not prick the eye.
You should advise the sick person to let go of his hairs until they grow longer and match. Make from parchment a shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and unabsorbed lime from each a weight of one ounce or approximately that; then grind them together with good grinding, so that it is done quickly, lest it becomes cold. Then from the ointment spread on parchment as a shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a heated cotton soaked in egg white, and the head of the sick person should be in your lap.
And place your index finger on the medicine and press it slightly. And you move it whenever the sick person feels the bite of the medicine, since its bite is like fire.
While he continues to feel this bite, then release the medicine and move it with your finger. When the bite ceases, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And then consider if you see the eyelid raised like when it is drawn up by heat or incision, it is good: and if not, then repeat on the same place from the medicine where the medicine does not press and does not discolor, until your operation is equal and the eye contracts.
Then place on it a cotton with butter until the burnt skin is removed. Then care for it with diaphinicon ointment, or another, until it heals.
It is necessary for you during the operation that you keep the final safeguard, lest anything from the medicine fall into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes softened after days and something fights from hairs within the eye, then repeat the medicine upon that place which became soft due to the eyelid, just as you did at first. Then care for it until it heals.
And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified in size and smallness. Therefore according to this your consideration should be: and not hidden the way of rightness for him who has devotion for this art.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in the lacrimal fistula.
When you treat the fistula, if your treatment does not help as we said in the classification of diseases, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Order the sick man to put his head in your lap, and hold his head by your hands in such a way that it is not moved or shaken with his head.
Then place the cotton soaked in oil or psillium poultice on his eye: then cauterize it with this cautery whose shape is as follows.
Be hollowed like the form of a goose feather quill from one end, with which the cautery is made: and if you wish it to penetrate up to the other end, and if you wish it to be bent upward in this way.
Nevertheless, it is better for your use that it is hollowed.
Then squeeze the fistula if it is open and extract pus from it, and excise it: and if it is not open, then open it and extract its pus.
Then place upon it the cautery, which is made very hot.
Hold your hand near the cautery, at the nose's part, close to the eye, so that your hand does not wander or tremble; and you place the cautery on the eyelid fat, and burn it.
If you therefore reach at the beginning of your cautery to the bone, it will be good. And if not: then heat the cautery again, once or twice, as needed; and leave it for three days.
Then place the cotton with butter, and care for it with an drying ointment until healed.
If it exceeds forty days and is not healed: then place on it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone appears; and grind it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for abscesses, which some first ones said. Direct yourself to the place of the abscess, and open it; then place into the same opening a thin camel bone, that is, a fine cannula, whose shape this is. And pour into it a weight of drachmae in melted lead, and hold your hand with the cannula's retention good, and not move at all weak, so that it does not run or reach the melted lead to its eye.
And it is necessary that you place on the eye of the weak a cotton soaked in egg white or water.
For lead burns the abscess place, and heals it wonderfully with its healing.
If the abscess heals as we said with cautery and treatment, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to make a hole in the nose and lead the abscess to the nasal passage, according to what comes in its place itself.
Method of Cauterization in Fissures of Lips.
Chapter XX.
When you treat these fissures, as we said in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then prepare a small cautery tool shaped like this.
And let its concavity be like that of a scalpel, fine.
Then place it (the cautery) quickly on the fissures until the cauterization reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then care for it with pitch, until it heals.
Chapter on Cauterizing a Mouth Fistula.
If a boil occurs on the root of the gum, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it becomes pus and bursts; afterwards it turns into an old abscess, and the pus runs and forms a fistula: then treat it, but if treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize it with fire according to its size, so that it can fill the fistula. Then insert the hot iron into the hole of the fistula and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches its depth and end; do this once or twice.
Then take care of it after that, as we said about treatment, until it is cured.
If the pus separates and heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and remove the rotten bone according to what comes into its head.
Chapter on Cauterizing the Softened Gum and Teeth.
If the gum becomes soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medicine does not help, then place the head of the patient on your lap.
Then fire-cauterize, and the shape will come after this so that you can place a Cannula on the tooth and insert the heated cautery quickly into it: hold your hand for a short while until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And move your hand: then repeatedly apply the cautery as often as you wish.
The sick person should fill his own mouth with water of salt and hold it for an hour; then he should spit it out.
For the tooth which is moved firms, and the gums, being softened, are closed, and the corruption of moisture dries up.
On the method of cauterizing dental pain.
When the pain of a tooth is due to coldness or there is coldness itself, or worms, and cure with medicines does not help: then cautery in it should be done according to two methods: either cautery with butter; or cautery with fire.
The cautery with butter is that you take warm butter and boil it in an iron kettle or in a cow's horn. Then take the heated cautery and apply it to the tip of the tooth. Then immerse it in the boiling butter and place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it cools; then apply it again several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or the cautery in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth; then place a hot iron on top of it until the heat reaches the depth of the hollow of the tooth.
The cautery with fire is to prepare a pipe of brass or iron. And let there be something bulky in its body so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the sick bone.
Then heat the cautery and place it on the tooth; hold your hand until the cautery cools.
Do this repeatedly, for pain will be relieved either on the same day or on another day.
And it is necessary that in the application of that Cautery, the sick person fills his bone with good oil and holds it for an hour; then he should spit it out.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Apply the cautery with any end as possible; and this is the form of the cannula.
[Chapter Title] On the method of cauterizing boils.
When boils are caused by phlegm and cold humors, and do not obey digestion through medicines, and fire digests them quickly; then use a concave cautery with this form.
Having two open ends, so that the smoke may come out from one end of the cautery; place it on top of the boil once, and a second time if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the boil.
If the boil is small; then place the cautery according to the size of the boil.
Then leave it for three days, and place a hot cloth soaked in oil on top of it until what the fire burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment until the form of the cannula heals.
[Chapter Title] On the method of cauterizing a hoarseness and constriction of the breath.
When moisture collects over the trachea of the lung, and especially when it is with coldness of the constitution, then it is necessary that the sick one be evacuated first with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it at the neck near the root of the throat in a depressed place; and take care that with the cautery you do not reach the throat, nor the skin, unless something of its kind.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck and shoulder at its end; and let the cautery be a nail, according to the manner that preceded.
Then treat it with what preceded until it is cured.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for diseases of the Lung and Cough.
When cough and disease of the lung are from cold moisture, and the sick one does not have fever nor phthisis (consumption), and the illness is old: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the clavicle in depressed, smooth, empty places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be a tube, according to the form that preceded.
And if your cauterization is to be done by pricking with a cautery called "Punctum", whose form preceded in the section on the pain of the ears; and let the pricks be thirty or so, up to the other (side).
Then treat it with what preceded until it is cured.
And now let the cautery have three branches; according to this form. Why is cauterization accompanied, when you do it with one cautery in place of three?
Head Chapter XXVII.
When the head is dislocated due to reasons of humidity, and it does not return by itself within the hour following its dislocation, when this habit of returning has become established for it, then the dislocation should be reduced first. Then the sick person lies down on his back or on his sound side. Then you press the skin that is on the inner part of the cheekbone towards the top with your left hand fingers, and if there is a joint dislocation towards the inner parts.
Then taking two-pronged cautery in fire. Its form is as follows.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of cauterization with four cauteries will come.
And when the cautery has three prongs, it forms a figure of cauterization with six cauteries, and there are prongs according to the subtlety of the skin being treated.
And this is the form of the cautery with three prongs.
And sometimes one is added to this method, making eight cauteries.
Then place the compressed stylets (porrons) on top of the cautery with salt. Then make the sick person remain calm so that the limb is not moved at any time until it recovers.
And if the dislocation is upwards (towards the shoulder), which rarely happens, then cauterize it with a flat iron cautery on the shoulder, or with many small pricks using several cauteries.
For the joining (of bones) strengthens and removes moisture; the sick person recovers.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and excessive moisture occur in the stomach until it is expelled from its state, and they multiply catarrhs on it, and various methods of treatment are not effective, then the sick person should lie down on his back, spread his legs, and extend his hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries: one cautery of the size of a finger-tip for the cochlea of the breast, another cautery like a nail, and two cauteries below, from both sides of one cautery; until the figure of the cauteries becomes triangular. And extend between each so that they do not join, when pus forms.
And the depth of the cautery be the size of two finger-widths of skin.
And the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form, let the cautery that does this be one, shaped like a circle according to this form.
The stomach is cauterized by pricking it with a cautery that restrains it: and there are signs upon the stomach to mark the spot according to your wish with wax: then cauterize it with the cautery for the spot, then care for it with the remedy that preceded until it heals.
Chapter on how to cauterize the epactus (epigastric hernia) with cold cautery.
When pain occurs in the epigastrium due to coldness and humidity, or due to excessive gas that cannot pass through its natural exit, and the patient is weak, even when treated as we have said, it does not improve: then the patient should lie on his back with his head, and mark three cauteries with wax according to this form, and the same size below the epigastrium, where the elbow of a man reaches: let the space between each cautery be the width of a finger: let the cautery be of the length of the body upright: and do not press your hand tightly with the cautery.
And let the thickness of what is to be burned be half its size without addition: and let the patient stand on his feet.
If it is not standing, then it should be lying down, which has already extended its legs, and raised its arms.
This is the form of the cautery.
And indeed it is possible for you to perform cauteries with this cautery using a sharp cautery tool when you are skillful and wise in your craft.
And beware that you do not proceed too far in cauterization so that the entire thickness of the skin is burned, for the entire body is being burned, and it reaches the intestines; because there the skin is delicate, therefore know this.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing liver abscesses.
When there is discharge, and you want to know if the abscess is in the liver flesh or its membrane; then if it is in the liver flesh, an indolent pain and heaviness without sharpness occurs; but if it is in the liver membrane, with a painful sharpness. And now you see that the treatment of this has exhausted the doctors.
The patient must therefore lie down with his head resting. Next, place the lancet in the form of an apostate's position with the encaustic: then heat the cautery resembling a ray. And this is its form. And cauterize it with the cautery until the whole skin is burnt and it reaches the siphac until all pus comes out: then care for him with healing of the wounds, until he is healed.
And it is not appropriate to use this cauterizing method, unless one's dedication to the art of medicine continues: and through whose hands these diseases occur with repeated experience: then he may dare on such operations.
But rather, let it be released, is better with me.
Section on Cauterization in Pleurisy.
Ancients said that cauterization with roots of Aristolochia for cold pleurisy in this way. And it is to take from the dry roots of Aristolochia a longer root, which is found among them, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil and light it on fire. Then cauterize it with one cautery where there is continuation of the neck with the collarbone, and with two small cauteries near the area that is beneath the chin.
And with two cauteries also where there is between the fifth and sixth ribs near the back, and with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries from the back: one where there is between two scapulas, and with two cauteries on either side of the chest, the lower cautery where it is between two scapulas.
And do not press your hand with a cautery, rather let it be clearly smelling the skin.
And some of the ancients have said that there are people who use a cautery made from iron like a ray and burn it inside where it is between the ribs until it reaches the abscess, and the pus comes out: as we said in the case of the abscess of the liver.
But in this perforation with a cautery, there is fear because either the sick person dies immediately, or a fistula occurs in the place where there is no healing.
Chapter 32: On the method of cauterizing the spleen.
When you treat the illness of the spleen, as we said in the treatment and division of diseases, and your treatment is not effective, then cautery is applied to it according to three methods, all of which are correct.
One is that you make three or four cauteries, lining them up along the length of the spleen in the shape of the cauteries for the liver, whose figure was described earlier.
And the thickness between each cautery should be the size of a finger, or more or less.
The method of cauterization should be equal, as we have said in the cauterization of the liver.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: let the weak one lie on his back.
Another method of cauterization is: having the cautery with two openings, as we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the humerus; and remove the skin, which is directly above the spleen, where the weak one's elbow comes to be; and your removal should be in accordance with the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two openings with very hot fire until it penetrates the skin on the other side; then remove the cautery; so four cauteries are made.
And if you want to cauterize with a cautery having three openings.
Then care for the cautery after you release it, to emit pus for many days; for it is more beneficial than the rest that came before in the treatment.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in hydropsis.
The cautery does not fall in hydropsis, unless properly placed on the bladder.
When you treat a hydropsic person with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division, and the treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauteries around the umbilicus, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two behind the spine, and one on the chest and another on the stomach; and the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open cautery, so that it may emit pus for a long time.
And do not evacuate the weak one from treatment after cauterization with it; for two intentions should be applied to him: and healing will hasten to him with the help of God.
The form of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be a claw-like shape, following its previous form. And the form of the one used to cauterize the back should be olive-shaped, according to its previous form.
On the method of cauterizing Feet and Legs.
When draining in Hydropsy and filled with citrus water, it is necessary to cauterize on the top of the foot at the shin, which is between the auricle and ankle; then lift your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it; then lift your hand again; and do not go near it completely.
Citrus water will flow out, and let the cautery be in this shape.
Then make two cauteries on both legs, and let the cautery be at the end of a scalpel-shaped cautery; and let the cautery be along the length of the leg, one below the knee, and the other lower by about half the leg's length; and over the entire hip place two cauteries; leave the open cautery without long treatment, so that some water flows out of it; then treat it with what we have said.
On the method of cauterizing in the dissolution of the Abdomen.
Chapter XXXV.
When the solution of the stomach is softened by cold and humidity, until its retentive and digestive powers are weakened which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with methods of treatment, but it does not heal: then one cauterizes it with a large cautionery on the stomach itself, according to what was described before in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautionery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle cautery claw: and with a subtle cautionery on top of alum over aloes, or with two cauteries.
If you see humidities in excess and the patient enduring it, then cauterize it with a cautionery on the sternum and a cautionery over the whole ilium: perhaps you may also add two small cauteries near the stomach.
For indeed, the cure is progressing, and its help does not deceive.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing Hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When in the anus there are many old hemorrhoids, or one, and they are of gross humors, cold, or corrupted by humidity, and are cured with what was said in the division, but the cure does not help: then cauterize them with three cauteries on the lower part of the lumbar vertebra under the almeidate triangle a little, and with a cautionery under the navel as if with two fingers.
And if you think that the stomach of this one is chilled and its food is not digested, and you see his face pallid, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautionery, according to what was described before: and with a cautionery over the liver of the same, and another over the spleen of the same, with a cautery claw: and let the open cautionery rest for some time: then care for him until he is healed.
Head Chapter 37.
When you excise althelul, then ignite the cautery that resembles a rod. Then introduce the burning cautery into the excised althelul and bring your last hand to it, until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows. Do this once or twice.
If there are many althelul, then cauterize each one with a separate cautery as we have described. Then care for them with that which you apply to them from the ointments until they heal up.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery upon an alcatin, it is more final in its benefit.
Method of Cauterizing a Fistula in the Anus.
Head Chapter 38.
When the sick person does not obey the incision and operation as we have described in its place, and he is afraid of it, perhaps he will heal with cauterization.
When there occurs any fistula, and it breaks, pus flows from it, and the humors are corrupted. Therefore, it is necessary to test it with a thin probe. Then recognize the depth of it with a probe.
Then heat the cautery that is like a rod. Then insert yourself (into the fistula) heated, and the depth where the probe has entered.
And repeatedly heat the cautery over it until all the corrupted bodies are burned, once or twice or three times, according to the necessity of your case.
And beware of burning the nerve or large vein if there is one nearby; or if the fistula flows toward the bladder or intestine, then beware of these places altogether.
And do not perform it unless the fistula is in a fleshy place; and remember that it does not penetrate.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
If however the place is sealed and the matter is cut away from it, and remains in that state for a long time; then you will know that it is healed completely.
If however the matter is not cut away from it, then you will know that it penetrates, or that its deep part has become corrupted, or something like that, which will remind itself at its place.
[Chapter on cauterizing kidneys]
When pain occurs in the kidneys from cold or from thick wind, and it decreases due to the weakness of the body, then it is necessary that you cauterize it over alum on top of the kidneys, with a cautery over all the kidney with cautery claw, whose preceded remembrance.
And perhaps we cauterize it for the second time in the same alum. Because three lines will come. Therefore, there will be more benefit in the liniment.
§ On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness occurs in the bladder and it becomes soft due to cold and humidity until the sick person cannot retain urine, then cauterize it at the lower part of the anus on the bladder where the hair of the beard begins, and with a cautery from the right anus, and another from the left of it: and let the length of the cauterization on the side be according to the size of a knuckle: and cauterize it with a lower back cautery, or two cauteries, if necessary: and let it follow the preceding cautery claw.
§ On the method of cauterizing the womb.
When coldness and dampness occur in the matrix (womb) and it is forbidden by that from conception, and its menstrua are corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs at their approach, then it is necessary to be cauterized with three cauteries around the umbilicus, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and a cautery on top below the back, or with two cauteries: and let the cautery be claw-shaped.
On the method of cauterizing the anus in dislocation.
When the humidities of the mucosa flow out to the perianal area, and become the cause of its exit from its place; and a sign of this is that the leg is stretched over the other when they are compared with each other; and a place of dislocation is found empty in it.
Therefore it is necessary to be cauterized weakly over the perianal area with a similar cautery circle; after you have marked it with the encaustic (beeswax) around the perianal area, as it is described; and so that the perianus falls in the middle of the circle.
If this cautery is not present to you, then be cauterized with three cauteries, with a large oil-soaked (oiled) cautery; and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin in total.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in Sciatica.
When there is pain in an ulcer of the anus and its cause is coldness and moisture: it should be treated as mentioned in the division, but the treatment does not help, then that should be aged: then it is necessary to dissolve the sick person from thick fluids with stinking pills or with artificial pills or similar ones. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization is according to two methods: either cauterization with medicines advancing or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with fire, is according to many modes.
One of them is that you cauterize on the ulcer of the anus itself with three triangular cauteries in this way. And make a good or bad depth for them. And let the space be between each cautery of the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be oiled.
Sometimes it is done that the cautery takes place in the middle on the head of the anus itself. Why are there four cauteries?
And if you want to cauterize with a circle whose form preceded the cauterization of the displacement of the anus, one: so that the circle contains the entire anus.
And burn the thickness of the skin all over.
This is the method of cauterization for Sciatica, when the pain is attached to the anus itself, and it does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, at the place where the sick person indicates, where there is pain, and your cautery four fingers on the forest part a little: let the cautery be sharp.
And the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the sick person indicates that the pain extends near the toes of the foot, then cauterize it there where he indicates, with a cautery of points, three, or four, or more, if necessary.
If he indicates that the pain is turned towards the shin of the leg, then cauterize it there with a knife-like cautery.
And be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not burn a nerve or the great artery with it, and draw harm upon the sick person by that, or cause shrinkage (contraction).
And I myself have seen one and another of those who cauterized above the heel, and burned in the cauterization, and the leg became swollen until it reached the foot, and it was completely perforated, and the whole foot was corrupted: then follows the opening of the stomach, and death after that.
If the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And some wise men have said in cauterizing the anus, that this method of cautery is appropriate for it. Make a similar probe of iron, whose diameter is half the breadth of the palm: and let it be at its opening according to its size, that of the nucleus of the thumb or less: and within this probe there should be a third probe.
And let the distance between all probes be the size of a knuckle: and let the probes be open at two ends: and their height should be like that of a knuckle, or two knuckles: and make handles of iron suitably placed on the probes.
Then it is heated in the fire until it turns red and sparks fly: then it should be placed on a basin for the anus of the sick person lying on his healthy side. Cauterize it therefore with three round cauteries at one time.
Then let him be for three days. Afterward, pack it with butter: and let the open wound be for many days. Then care for him with ointment, until he is healed.
Says Albucasis, in this manner of cauterizing, we are not used to it much, due to the frightening appearance of it: and therefore, few are found who will wait on it.
Nevertheless, it is good for him who endures it, and finds a place for it.
The cautery with medicines for the ailment is that you should make two openings on each side of the perforated armillary sphere, through which goes the key of its door from bronze or iron, the length of the wall: whose height in them shall be two knots, or almost themselves.
And let the space that is between both be of the thickness of a finger's joint, and let it be open below and above: and let them contain each other according to this shape.
Then place it on an ointment box, with the weak one lying on the healthy side. And press your hand strongly upon the ointment box. Then pour water between two circles which has been slightly heated by fire and hold it for the amount of an hour: and let the weak one bear the biting of it, and his burning, for he finds the biting as if by fire, until the biting stops.
Then clean your hand with the tool and remove hot water from the ointment box along with sweet water: then let it be for three days.
And place butter on it until the soot of burning is removed: and let it be for some days, and pus will flow from it. It is indeed the last aid.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg, make a splint for him in such a way as you made the splint for an ankle equally.
This is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of drugs. Take alkali and half of unburnt lime: grind both of them well, and put them in a new pot, whose lower part is perforated with a small hole according to the quantity that enters the radius: and place another earthen pot below it: and pour over alkali and lime from sweet water, so that they are submerged by about a finger: after which you press them with your hand: and leave the pot until the water becomes sharp at the lower part of the earthen pot.
Then gather up all that water and pour it over another lime: and boil until it returns.
For indeed it will then be very strong for sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and in the cauterization of other members. Since it performs the operation of fire itself.
And among the medicines are those with which the anal fissures, and also tes-sie, and honey of cardamom, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed. [Section break]
And Galen himself reported the cure of a certain man from the ancients, who was cured of pain in the anal fissure and sciatic vein: and he praised it very highly. And he said that it does not require another cure, and that he was cured from the disease in one bath, until he reported that perhaps he himself was bathed and came out already healed.
And it is to be taken from green senna: and if not found, dry one may be used, recently prepared: and grind a lot with some fat, and place it on the anal fissure, or thigh, or hip: and bind it, and leave for three hours, or until he feels weak sensation of burning. Then introduce him into the bath (or basin).
When his body becomes hot, introduce him into the bed. For pain retreats, and it heals (or gets cured).
And know that no one should use cautery with these medications unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that the feces of a goat, when it is cauterized upon the sciatic vein, gives it: and it becomes cautery according to this method. Wool is taken, and it is soaked in old oil, and it should be placed over a deep place which is between the big toe of the foot and the heel, and is closer to the heel.
Then take dry feces of a goat, and burn it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it upon the wool, and let it be until it is extinguished (or quenched). And then repeat this (procedure) again. Do not stop doing that until the sensation arrives over the middle (point), up to the ankle, and the pain rests.
And this method of cautery is named cautery "Vaccinum".
Chapter on Cauterizing Pain in the Back.
When pain occurs in the back due to many causes, either from a fall, or blow, or excessive evacuation, and similar things, from the influx of cold and moist matter: and cauterization indeed does not apply unless in this single manner, which is made by the influx of cold and moist matter.
Therefore, after the evacuation of a sick person with foul pills and similar things, they should be placed on the back where there is pain, three lines according to the width of the palm, after signing them with encaustic in each line five times, or more according to the quantity that comes from the strength of the patient: and cauterization shall be made with cauteriopuncti (cauterizing punctures).
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries, along with a middle claw cautery, in this manner.
On the method of cauterizing in the beginning of a Hump.
This disease frequently occurs among small children.
And the sign of its beginning in children is that it happens on top of a stridor in breathing during elevation and movement; and you find at the end of the backbone and its knots, which has already begun to emerge above the other vertebrae.
When you see that and wish to do it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in this manner.
And the cautery should envelop all parts of the vertebrae equally; and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebrae with a pointed cautery, take two or three lines; let the points be close to each other.
Then take care of the place until it heals as previously described.
And be careful not to administer cautery in a hump that occurs due to a muscle spasm.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Gout and joint pains.
When joint pains occur from cold humors that are discharged to any part of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary among physicians to call it gout properly.
When cold gout is being treated with the methods of treatment and the pain does not subside, then cautery can remove them.
And it is to be cauterized after evacuation around the joint of the foot, with many cauteries; and the cautery should be an Olive one.
If it is necessary to make punctures on the face of the foot, then do so with a cautery. If the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it on all the knee with three or four cauteries from every side, using the same cautery of Clavius.
If more than one cautery is necessary for you, then cauterize it. Do not immerse your hand with the cautery, rather let it be about the thickness of the skin.
If pains ascend to the knees and back: then administer what we have said in its own chapter.
If there are pains only in the hands, then puncture around the hinges of the fingers, just like two lines are rolled up.
If there remain pains in the fingers, then puncture them on every knot and on the back of the hand.
If the pain ascends after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize them from every side.
Do not evacuate a sick person from good care, from receiving medications. For if the regimen becomes good and phlegm is evacuated, it will be cured with the help of God using this cautery.
Chapter on Cauterizing in Ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groins and the intestine or bladder descends to the testicle, which is beginning: then it is necessary to order the sick man to fast on his own day. And he should use lenients so that the feces will descend from his own bowels.
Then let him sit on your hands upon his back; and command him to hold his breath until it comes out, or a hernia or intestine appears.
Then reduce him with your fingers and mark the place of rupture on his neck, with the sign whose end is like half a circle above the body.
Then apply the cautery of this shape until it turns white and let it drop seeds. Then reduce the intestine or hernia into its hollow place. Then let the servant place his hand on the place so that the intestine does not come out; and you have already opened between the legs of the weak one, and placed a weight there, and another servant is over his legs, and another over his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on the mark with your hand holding the cautery straight. And hold him until you come to the bone with it; or repeat with another tool if you have not reached the bone with it the first time.
And be careful when the exit of the intestine occurs during your cauterization lest you burn him and it happens over the weak one or death or great harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation does not succeed.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate, according to their measure.
Then care for him with the rest of the ointments until he is healed.
And let the weak one lie on his back for forty days until the wound is healed.
And it is necessary that you give him nourishment of the duration of his treatment to soften his stomach so that the intestine does not come out during effort and evacuation.
Then when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a well-made bandage and let him hold it for another forty days.
And it should be diminished by labor, and filling with food and drink, and vehement voices.
When using this regimen, it is cured with an entire cure.
And I will say the treatment of ruptures with incision in its own chapter.
But if ruptures occur in the remaining abdomen and are beginning, and force does not add to them, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and let that which is burned be as the third of it from then on. Then care for it, just as we said; no more should be added.
And some of the first have said: that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this shape.
After it is marked with the enkaustrum, and a line is placed that is across its width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line downward. And place your hand in the middle with the clawed cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for pain due to a fall or blow.
Chapter 48.
If pain occurs in certain limbs from a fall or blow and it persists for a long time and does not help with medicine, then it should be cauterized with the puncture cautery.
And the puncture cautery for every limb should be according to its size and the part affected by it, and its weakness and strength, and the location of the twist, and the pain from it.
If it is cured by the first cautery, it is good. If not: then apply a second cautery to it.
Because by custom the pain of these limbs is, that they are changed from one member to the other which approaches it. Because it is necessary that you follow them with a cautery, until the sick person heals.
On the method of cauterizing leprosy.
Leprosy is sometimes greatly helped by cautery. And especially the kind of leprosy that occurs due to corruption of phlegm and melancholy: when considering the need to cauterize it.
If leprosy is beginning and you have treated it as I said in the division, but it does not subside or stop: then beware of corruption spreading over the entire body of the sick person. Then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, known as the "fifth spot," and a second below it, facing the forehead at the end of the hairline, two on either side of the horns, and one behind, on the nape of the neck.
And with the last finger of your hand, apply the cautery slightly, so as to make a small impression on the bone, and let the scabs be displaced: to relieve the expiration of coarse vapors from it, and cauterize also the spleen, according to what has preceded.
If leprosy has spread over the sick person and is manifestly apparent: then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries that I have mentioned on the head, and with a cautery on the end of the nose, and two on either side of the cheeks, and two on the spondyles of the neck, and six on the spondyles of the back, and one large one over the alhahosos at the base of the coccyx, and another above it, in the same place as the anus: and two more on the hips: that is, one on each hip and two on either shoulder, and two on each elbow, and two on the soft parts of the chest: and cauterize him over all the joints, from the joints of his fingers and toes, and cauterize over every calcaneum of his feet, and the fleshy parts of his hands.
Be careful not to burn the nerves that are above the last heel bone (calcaneus).
Whenever cauterization is performed using a cautery on the ear lobe (pectinus), on the ear (stomachi) and another place (epar).
Know that the more you apply the cautery, it is more helpful and effective.
Know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy ones do; this is because his body is already anesthetized.
The cauteries should be in proportion to the size and shape of the limbs and joints according to their respective species (types) of iron tools.
Then, care for the cautery by applying powdered herb flour mixed with honey and the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter on Cauterization in Anesthesia.
When a part of the body is anesthetized and treated with medicines, oils, plasters and it does not heal, then cauterize the anesthetized part using appropriate cauteries according to the size or smallness of the member.
Let your cautery penetrate only a little deeper than the skin. Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
Whenever cauterization is performed for a numbness that occurs in the hand and foot, in the joints of the spine near the nerve exits, which move that member; the numbness is removed.
But do not presume to do it unless you are wise in the study of body anatomy and the exit of the nerves moving the body.
Chapter LI (chapter 62): Cauter
When Albaras (piles) are old and do not respond to any medical treatment; then cauterize it with a deep cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the white part is removed and the color changes.
Then care for yourself with the flour of herbs, and with oil of roses, and leaves of arnoglossa, and blood of a dove, and blood of a heron: let each part be one: mix all these together, and anoint them on a cloth, and adhere to the place until it heals.
Method for cauterizing in Cancer.
When Cancer is beginning, and if you want to stop it: then cauterize it with a ring-shaped cautery around it, as it rotates.
But the wise said that it should be cauterized by a last cautery in the middle.
It does not seem good to me: because I fear that it will burn: and I have already seen that many times.
And it is more correct to cauterize around it with a ring, as we said, or with several cauteries.
Method for cauterizing in Adubelati (ulcerated skin).
When someone has Adubelati and it delays in maturing, either due to excessive amounts causing delay or due to the weakened state of an aged person, when there is scarcity of blood, or due to time, and a hurry to mature Adubelati, then cauterize around it with many small cauteries. Then let it be released. For it will hasten with the maturation.
If you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then heat the cautery in fire, and this is its form: (drawing or description follows)
Place it in the middle of Adubelati until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be weakened so that the flow of pus may cease.
Then care for it until it heals.
Chapter on Cauterizing in a cancerous growth.
Chapter LIV: (numbering may be off due to differences in numbering
A cancer is not anything other than a walking corruption that devours the member; just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see a cancer in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then use many small and large cauteries according to the location where the cancer is.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you completely remove the corruption and nothing remains deep within.
Then let it be released for three days, and place over the cauterized places sulfur powder with oil until all scabs and corruption are removed.
Then care for it with unguents that promote healing of the flesh.
If after three days you see that fresh flesh is growing in a healthy manner without corruption, it is good.
And if not: then cauterize again over the remaining parts from the corrupted areas.
A cancer is sometimes treated with a sharp medicine. The text arises in the place of cautery.
Nevertheless, cautery with fire is quicker in aid: and I myself have already said the cauterization of it with sharp medicine in division: therefore take it when you need it there.
Section on the method of cauterizing in nails and warts.
Chapter LV.
Often occurs in the lower parts of the feet this disease: and it is a thick, filtered matter that injures the foot.
The cautery indeed is for them in two ways: cauterization with fire, and cauterization with hot water.
As for the one with fire, it should be made convex like a vulture's claw, which is made of iron, in accordance with its size to contain a nail from all sides: and it should have a thin edge.
Then place the heated object upon the nail. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the nail, until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail: and leave it for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply ointment made of forest mints, crushed with salt: and leave the ointment upon it during the night. For this reason, it will be uprooted from its roots.
Then care for the place with an ointment for generating flesh, until it is healed.
If they are not turned around and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet: then administer cauterization with hot water: and it is to be noted that you receive a cannula made of brass, iron or vulture's claw: and place it upon the nail or athlete's foot. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the cannula: retain your hand, and you turn it with the compression of your hand slightly, so that the edge of the cannula is pressed against the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait for a short time over the bite of the hot water, for an hour.
Then release it, as the nail is uprooted with its roots.
Follow them one after another until you reach all who are among them in the body.
Then care for them after they have been removed, with that which generates flesh from unguents.
On the method of cauterizing in tremor (trembling or shaking).
When a tremor occurs in a nerve due to cold or quartan fever or something else: then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the dorsal vertebrae, and with a cautery between every vertebra, and with a cautery on its chest, and with a cautery on its stomach.
The tremor subsides when it is cauterized with oil, and hastens the health of cold sickness.
Chapter on the method of cauterization by Albucasis.
Chapter LVII.
At times, Albucasis expels foul matter from the body, that is, pustules, which are produced by rotten substances.
Therefore, when they appear, it is necessary to first cauterize over every head of the pustule with a subtle cautery together with myrtle wood, whose tip is burned with fire. Or with the long root of Aristolochia. Or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they cauterize bladder stones, at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method: and they are not increased: and the excess is torn away making them, and it heals from them.
Nevertheless, it must be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for bleeding from an artery in a wound.
Many times there is bleeding from an artery that has been cut at a wound which happens externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or cauterization of a limb, and similar to these: and it is difficult to separate it.
When this happens to someone, then quickly come with your hand to the opening of the artery and place your index finger on top of it: and squeeze it very much until the blood is compressed under your finger and nothing escapes from it.
Then place in fire small oil-burning cauteries, and many in number: and blow upon them until they become very hot.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the wound and place where the artery is severed, and place the cautery on top of the vein, after you have quickly removed your finger: then hold the cautery until the blood is cut off.
If it is pushed out along with the removal of your finger from the opening of the artery and the cautery is extinguished, then take another cautery quickly, from those which are prepared in the fire.
Therefore, do not stop doing that with one after the other until the blood is cut off.
And beware lest you burn the nerve which is there and another mischief happen to the weak.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to cut it: especially because the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is drawn out, the ends of it contract and the blood is cut off. Or it is tied with a strong thread. Or medicine with the property of cutting off blood is placed on it and it is tightened with a decent ligature.
Whoever administers the cutting off of it with a ligature and tightening with cloth or with things burning and similar, does not completely benefit him, unless rarely.
If it happens to anyone that, and the doctor is not present nor medicine: then begin with the position of the index finger on the opening of the vein as we have said, and with strong constriction, until the blood is surrounded from above by the wound, and over the artery. Do not remove the finger, place it on top with cold water of intense coldness always until the blood freezes and becomes swollen, and then cut it off.
And meanwhile, consider what it needs from cautery or medicine.
On incisions, perforations, and phlebotomy on wounds and similar things.
We have said in Chapter 1 that every disease where burning with fire is appropriate and medicine, its occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cautery should be discussed.
And there I placed chapters from head to foot.
And I shall proceed in this chapter by the same way: to relieve the seeker of his sought-after thing.
And before I begin that, you sons should learn what is in this chapter regarding the fear that was mentioned in Chapter 1 about cautery.
And for that reason, there should be a greater caution because, during the operation that is in this chapter, evacuation often occurs with blood, on which life depends when opening a vein, or an incision over a boil, or opening of an abscess, or treatment of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of these, tremor, fear, and death occur in many cases.
And I warn you, lest that happen to you where there is hesitation, for sometimes, when dealing with this art, people like you fall into the modes of weak and frail men. For there are those who get angry with their disease and death is easy for him because of his excessive anger, which comes from his weakness and length of wickedness. And when sickness is from fear which signifies death.
And it is he who gives you his trumpet and tells you with it that he hopes for health, but his illness is fatal.
Therefore, it is not appropriate to agree with him who comes to you from those whose manner is such. And let your caution be greater than your desire and your greed. And do not presume about anything from it unless after certain knowledge, which verifies at your place the praiseworthy result of that to which it has reached.
And use in the care of all your patients, prediction and indication as to what it is appropriate for healing to be attained.
For in that there is help for you in acquiring fame and glory, memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with his understanding and not take away from you guidance and inspiration, for that is in his hand.
And I myself have arranged this chapter by dividing it into sections according to what preceded in the chapter on cautery, from neck to feet: so that you may be relieved of what you seek from it and what you need.
Chapter on the cure of water that collects in children's heads.
Chapter 1.
Know that this weakness often happens to boys during childbirth: or when the midwife tightens the boy's head without mercy.
And sometimes it also occurs due to unknown causes that are not known.
And indeed, I myself have not seen this illness in anyone other than boys: and to every one of them whom I saw it approached death: therefore it seemed to me fitting to abandon the operation in that case.
And indeed, I myself have seen a boy whose head was filled with water and his head grew every day until he could not sit on himself due to the size of his head: and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moistness, it either collects between the skin and the bone: or it collects under the skull bone.
And the operation on this case, if the moistness is between the skin and the bone and there is a small abscess, then it is necessary to make a middle split in the skull: and the width of the split should be as two knots, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the form of a trepan.
If therefore the moistness is more increased and the abscess is larger, then place these two splits according to this form.
And if the moistness is under the skull and there is a sign of it that you see that the openings of the skull are wide open from all sides: and water sinks down when you press it with your hand towards the inside, and it does not hide itself from you: then it is necessary to make three splits in the middle of the skull according to this method.
And after the incision, remove all the moistness completely. Then tie up the splits with cloths and plugs. Then pour oil and wine over it until the fifth day.
Then untie the knot, and care for the wound with salves and ointments.
And thou shalt not let go of binding the head with equality. Feed the sick person with all dry food of slight moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
Another method of cutting is that you consider where it appears the size of the abscess, and the collection of water.
Whenever it is more in the occiput, or in the skull, or in the right, or in the left.
Therefore ascend with an incision where it appears to you that there is an abscess and fill it with water: and cut it as far as possible.
And observe that you do not cut an artery, and there be a flow of blood, and the sick person die from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter on the incision of the arteries that are behind the ears.
Head II.
When someone has cataracts on the eyes, or on the chest, and it becomes old and medical treatment does not help: then the final cure is more in him, incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when one wants to cut them, let the sick man shave his head. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then let the sick man tighten his neck with any cloth of his. Then consider where the vein pulses. And the places of both are places that are depressed below the ears: and it is rarely hidden, unless in some men.
Then mark with wax both sides: and cut each side with a lancet on both sides, the incision reaching to the bone: and let it be made in the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the lancet under the artery, and cut it with the incision upward.
Let the length of the incision be about two joined fingers.
For when a vein is cut, blood flows out with a pulsating flow, which jumps to the inside frequently.
If, however, the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary that measurements from the ear determine the quantity of space of three fingers. Then mark with wax and cut to the bone.
And what is necessary to be taken out from blood is VI ounces, and perhaps you may take more or less out of it. The whole thing according to the quantity that appears to you from the strength of the sick person and the filling of the artery of it.
Then consider the wound. Then if something remains on the bone from the wound, then cut it so that no abscess forms hot: then tighten the wound with linens from a linen cloth.
Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When an old hemicrania or acute catarrh due to acid, moist humours and heat in the temples occurs, or an old sores, vehement and similar: and it is treated with methods of curative medicine, but it does not help: then we have experience in dealing with these ailments by extracting the arteries from the temples, or cauterizing them, as we have narrated.
The method of operation in extracting them is that the sick person shaves the hairs on the temples and exposes the visible artery in the temple. It is indeed shown to you by its pulse, and it rarely hides itself unless in a few men, or from violent cold.
If it is hidden to you, then let the sick person squeeze his head with any cloth of his, and then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or boil the place with hot water until it appears to you in a clear manifestation. Then take the probang that I have prepared earlier. Then peel off the skin with it easily until you reach the artery. Then thrust a hook into it and draw it out towards the top until you extract it from the skin, and make it come out from all sides of the layers beneath it.
If the artery is delicate: then roll it up with the end of the hook. Then cut off a portion according to the length that its ends will extend and contract, so as to avoid blood flow. For if it is not cut, and if it is not severed, the blood does not rise up deeply.
Then evacuate the blood to six ounces, down to three.
If the artery is large: then it must be tied in two places with a thick thread, strong, of silk or hemp; or with cords made of wool, so that decay does not approach it before the wound is consolidated and blood flow occurs.
Then cut off the excess which is between two ligaments. Do this at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone, with a small-bladed cautery: until its ends are cut off, and it remains in place for this same operation.
And it is better work, unless he who is ill has a fever, or his condition is heated. Because the cautery is from those things which aid in ending moisture. Therefore it is better to aid (him).
And after the extraction of the arteries, it is necessary that the place be filled with cooked old linen: and small pieces of freshly made wool should be placed on top.
And after the dissolution (of a wound), it is to be treated with dry medicines which cause flesh to grow, and with linen, until it heals.
If in the meantime while you are operating blood flow occurs from an artery, then hasten to cut it with a cautery, or fill the place with wax: and press your hand until the blood is cut off. If nothing of those things is present to you, then place your finger on the place until the blood freezes. And wet the place with water of intense coldness, until the sharpness subsides and it is constricted as required.
And because the vein which is lighter and easier to extract is to be cauterized with this cautery having two small blades: let the sharpness of the two blades be similar to amalgamated metal. Nevertheless, they are much less sharp than two small knives. Because if they are as sharp as two small knives, frost should be applied to both of them: and flesh will not be cut with speed. When there is a slight thickening [in the body], heat from fire should be applied, and the flesh should be cut off quickly; for this operation is better than any work, and easier, and lighter.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space between the two knives be of the size of a finger's thickness, after you have marked two places with hot iron; place both very hot knives until they reach the bone and cut through the vein in two places: so that what is between its extremities will be removed. For this cautery does not solidify completely.
Chapter IV.
Chapter on the treatment of continuous sharp tears from the eyes.
When tears are persistent and run from the veins on the exterior of the skull at the top of the head: and no healing medicine is applied to them with medicines, and the face of the sick person turns red, and a movement like that of ants is felt on the forehead: and the eyes are exhausted, wet, so much that the hair around them has started to rot due to rotting: and the eyelids have been heated by the sharpness of tears: then the ancients resorted to this treatment for them, and they called it a cure with the knife.
And is it to instruct the sick person to shave the hair that are on his forehead. Then make three cuts on the forehead, each equal in length to the forehead, and let the length of the cut be about two fingers, and one of them should be centered at the middle of the forehead, and the second slightly below the movement of the arms, and the third on the other side: and avoid cutting arteries that are on both sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the distance between all cuts be the width of three connected fingers: and have a piece of prepared sponge or dried cloth ready with which you will absorb blood.
Then introduce a spatula with two sharp ends, which is followed by the following shape: From the first incision that is at the temple, up to the second incision: and scrape with it all the skin that is between the two cuts, including the part above the eye. Then do the same from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then remove the spatula and insert another tool called a sharp scalpel, blunt on one side, but not blunt on the other side, into the first incision again. And this is its form.
And place its sharp side turned towards the flesh attached with skin, and its blunt side turned towards the bone: and push it in until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut off along with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except for the incision should be continued up to where it appears on the skin.
Then make this, in the middle fissure until another fissure.
And when the quantity of blood flows out equal, squeeze places from the fragments of coagulated blood.
Then place linen cloth from old cooking on all the fissures and place upon them small lice soaked in wine, oil or vinegar. And see to it that no abscess becomes hot.
And on the third day loosen the binding and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then take care of it with basilicon ointment, and the rest that heal wounds, until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
Chapter on the care of sharp tears and catarrh for the eyes from the inner parts of the head.
When sharp catarrh or frequent and intense occurs to someone, you see their eyes strained, small, and the sight is already weakened: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out from them, and in the deep parts of the head there is acute pain, hurting and sneezing follows: then take the matter that comes from many veins, which sharp catarrh or these conditions do not occur unless from numerous veins.
A better treatment for them is this. And it should be ordered that a shaving of the forehead [should be given] to the sick one. Then make one incision in the middle of the forehead, or somewhat less wide, from the left temple to the right temple; and let the incision reach the bone; and move your hand away from the temples that are moved during chewing until when the bone is exposed; and dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with a heated iron or with scissors made of flax. Then bind them above with thread; and moisten the threads with wine and oil so that no hot abscess occurs.
And when you remove it, and see that the hot abscess is about to burst; then it must be scraped until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then treat it with astringent dressing that promotes growth of flesh; as if you were to take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony; and prepare an ointment from them, and administer it for the growth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
[Section on the treatment falling into the ear.]
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or something similar to a stone like iron and glass: or it is from a plant such as peas and beans: or it is liquid, such as water, vinegar, and similar things: or it is some animal.
When a stone falls into the ear or anything similar to stones that do not grow within the ear and are not added, expose only the ear: if you see a stone, then pour something from broken oil or sesame into the ear. Then administer its extraction and make it sneeze with pepper and poppy seeds placed near the nose when you place around the ear fragments of cloth or wool and stretch the ear upward.
It often goes out (the stone) with this care.
If it does not go out, then administer its extraction with Geista (phenazone), that is, subtle pizigaroli: whose shape is as follows.
If it goes out with geista, it is good.
And if not, then administer its extraction with a subtle blind hook (forceps) a few times.
If it does not go out through that (the blind hook), then make a tube from metal and insert the end of the tube into the ear opening a lot and seal what is around the tube with softened wax so that there is no way for the wind to pass except by the tube: then pull it out with your strong force.
It often goes out (the stone) with what we have said. If it does not go out in this way: then take from helkalimbath or vinegar (acetic acid), that is, prepared gluten, which birds are caught with, a small amount of it: and put it on the end of a radius when you have placed the cup correctly over it: then insert it into the ear opening gently, after you have everted the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not emerge with all that I have mentioned, then hurry to cut, before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
The method of lancing is that the bloodletting instrument (phlebotome) should first be applied to the sick person, and then blood drawn from him according to its strength. Then make the sick person sit with his hands in yours, and turn his ear towards upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fatty part of it, depressed to that place; let the incision be lunar shaped, until you reach the stone (earring); then remove it along with it, if possible using your instruments.
Then let the incision heal by itself and take care of it until it heals.
If something falling into the ear is one of the grains that grow and swell, then administer its removal.
But if it does not obey to come out by itself, then take a thin, fine probe of this shape.
And administer with it the removal of this kind of grains that fall into the ear and do not do it when you think that the grain is already damp from the moisture of the ear, until you put many pieces (of cotton) on it; then remove them with forceps, or with a fine probe, or by suction as we have said, for its removal will be relieved.
In water that enters the ear, the sick person should cough with it first; and his ear has already filled with some cotton of old age; and it lies on top of that ear where the water is. If therefore it comes out through this (the probe), it is good.
And if not, then take many small, soft, and warm stones about the length of a finger; heat them slightly with fire; and make the sick person insert one from those into the ear canal; and let him throw salt on his foot from that side and strike with another stone on the stone in the ear. Therefore, it should not cease to do that with stone and stone until all water comes out.
And the water now comes out in such a way that you take one from a brazier or from a reed and insert one end into the ear; and light the other end with fire until it is burnt as much as possible. Then take another reed and do this many times until all water comes out; and withdraw it with a cannula as described above in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into it (if it is a small body, like a louse, and similar), care for it as I said in the division.
But if it is of a large body that appears to the senses: then administer the extraction of it with forceps and with hooks; and its removal is easier for all who hold it in the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you care for it as I said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and your care does not help: then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun. Therefore, if something appears from worms there, then withdraw it with forceps or with fine hooks.
But if nothing appears there, then take a cannula, whose shape is narrow below and wide above; and insert the fine end into the ear according to the size that the sick one can bear; then suck with strong suction. Do this many times until all worms come out.
But if they do not obey you to go out, then wrap the cannula with hops, as I said in the stone.
But if they do not come out with what I said: then administer the distillations that ancient people have been experienced in the treatment of worms; and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your flow [be] that you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this tool, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or bronze, narrow below, with a small hole at the bottom and wide above.
So, let what is within the concavity of the tube [be] made of bronze, well-made. And if you wish, take the radium and wrap its end with a suitable winding; then pour oil or juice, or whatever medicine you desire into the tube; let it be in the ear; then insert the radium with the heated rod on top and squeeze it with moderate pressure until the oil is forced into the concavity of the ear, so that the sick person may feel it inside; and what is poured into the ear, let it already be slightly heated with a little fire; and beware not to pour anything that distills in it extremely cold, for medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
[Title] Treatment of Ear Blockage.
When certain infants emerge from their mothers' wombs not pierced.
It also happens to some people that ear blockage comes from a wound or flesh born in the ear.
This blockage sometimes occurs in the deep opening of the ear that is not visible to the eye; and sometimes it occurs near the external opening of the ear that can be seen.
Therefore, that which occurs in the deep part of the ear and is not perceived by the eye, is difficult to cure in many positions.
And in the one that is visible to the eye, it is necessary to place the sick person's ear on the sun and look into it; then if you see the blockage appearing, open it with a fine spatula whose shape is as follows: its end should have a small notch, part of which is acute; and the rest of the spatula should be made of two flat sides to avoid damaging the ear.
If therefore the abscess arises from the flesh within the ear: then hold it with a fine hook and cut it out easily and forcibly until all the flesh is removed.
If therefore the abscess is deep within the ear: then take a fine and slender probe, heat it slightly with fire, and then send it into the ear.
If you should feel an abscess with the symptom that the person is weak and afflicted with hearing loss, make an incision of it easily: and beware lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place linen in the ear according to the size of the opening you have made and wrap it with Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed.
Or take linen and soak it in rosewater, grind cinnamon into powder over it, and use it.
If you see the ear already suppurating: then you must remove the linen and allow it to be covered with another linen soaked in a pot made with rose oil, until the suppuration becomes warm; then take care of it until it is healed.
If, however, there is bleeding: then immerse sponges or cloths in cold water and place it on the ear; and use the remaining treatment that stops the described bleeding by distillation.
Chapter of Altheus on the Treatment of Eyelids.
Chapter VIII.
Those who occur in the eyelids of the eyes are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore you must hold them with tweezers or with a hook and cut them from their roots. Then place cinnamon powder over the site.
If however blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a subtle lentil-shaped cautery.
To cauterize them is better after the incision. For many times they return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, the roots are burned and do not return.
[Section on Treatment of Tumors of the Eyelids]
Section IX:
Often something happens in the eyelids resembling sand in its hardness and stubbornness, and for this reason it is called grain; and it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower one.
Therefore, the operation for this is to examine whether it is a grain coming out from the eyelid that appears, and to move everything around it, and its removal is easy.
Find then a crack over it in width. Then scrape it from every side with ease until it comes out. Then hang it with a hook and cut (or remove) it.
But if its removal is not prepared for you unless after you have penetrated the eyelid with a slight cut, then it hurts the weak in some way.
If the crack is wide: Then sew it up with suture; and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. Oil indeed restores it and fills (or heals) it.
And if the grain is turned towards the inside of the ear and faces the inner surface, then turn the eyelid inside out, hang the grain with a hook; beyond that, you will need an incision, and press it from every side.
If the eyelid is stretched by an incision, then no harm will come to you from it.
Then wash the eye after the removal of the grain with salt water; and care for the place with it so that it heals, until the weak one is healed.
Chapter on the care of eyelids.
Chapter X.
Chapter X. On the care of eyelids. Axirnath is a crust that is generated in the upper eyelid; and it mostly happens to children; and it weighs down their eyes, and they get cataracts at dawn, and they cannot see the light of the sun, because tears flow towards them, and therefore you see them always lying on their faces, and on these they sleep, and their eyelids are always wet under the eyebrows, which have already swollen; and indeed, the appearance of Axirnath is visible to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath among them.
The method of his operation is that the sick man places his head in your bosom.
Then take a piece of clean cloth and prepare a bandage on it. And make from this cloth a circle according to the size that contains Axirnath in all parts. Place it on top of it and press with your fingers from all sides, so that Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in its center the moisture with a spathule penetrating fissures through its length, and let the fissure not be larger than that which occurs in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary that you find the entire skin until you reach Axirnath, for in many positions Axirnath comes out from the fissure according to the shape of a white butterfly's wing.
Therefore extract it with the cloth which you have soaked between your fingers to the outside. And you turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed, and be careful not to add in the fissure, lest you come with a spathule to the eye, and injure it.
If, however, Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, you shall add a little in the fissure with ease, until Axirnath comes forth. Then extract it as we have said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the site, and bind it with small stones.
And among men there are those who grind salt and put it into the hollow of the fissure to dissolve what remains from that moisture.
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, an abscess hot occurs at the site, then care for it with soothing plasters until it heals.
On the ways of the weakened eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft and it weeps as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow in the eyelids beyond the normal course of natural hair growth and turn grey: then they harm the eye and cause illnesses such as constant weeping, softening of the eyelids, white spots (albuginea), until it leads to the destruction of the eye.
And indeed the weakened eye is treated according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire. Or with sharp medicine, according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cautery. Or the weakened eye is treated by incision and stitching. Or with reeds, according to what I shall say (i.e., as described in the following text).
The head of the weakened eye should be placed in your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is turned (i.e., if the eyelid can be moved), that is good. If not, move the other eye so and if it cannot be moved, insert the point into it (i.e., the eyelid), where there is a thread below the lower part of the eyelid, and let the point penetrate through the thread from above, so that it is close to the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and pull the thread towards the upper part of the eyelid, and turn it with a spatula.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid, below the additional hairs, with the spatula penetrating from the greater tear duct to the lesser tear duct (i.e., across the eyelid).
Then pull out the thread, and place a small ball of wool or cloth under the eyelid; then mark the eyelid with hot wax, as if in the shape of a myrtle leaf (i.e., making a dot).
It is necessary that the figure be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid; since it varies greatly among men.
From these [cases], there are those who need to be cut according to the large size of the eyelid, according to the softening that occurs in it.
Then, when you find the space between two lines which you marked, and begin from the greater lacrimal [canal] to the lesser one, and let there be a cleft nearby the natural hairs, as in the thickness of a radius.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape it all [the area]. Then sew together the two lips with thread and a fine needle of wool; remove the blood and make the excess from the threads adhere to the eyebrows, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not care for it.
Then release the suture and the threads for three or four days; afterwards, take care of it.
And if you wish, let the wound heal without stitching, and take care of it as it dries and contracts. Since the eyelid is elevated during the sealing of the wound and its suturing, but it will be better in the future.
This method of healing was taught by the ancients (Atrebas).
However, there is concern about the patient in this method, and it is from a good procedure, but there is no fear in it.
And another method is also found in Atrebas: it is to mark a figure on the eyelid like the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have said before.
Then elevate the eyelid with three separated or combined hooks according to the following shape, then cut off what is excessive with small scissors according to this shape, with equal cuts.
If it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not match that [description]: then take a probe with thread, and insert it into the middle of the figure; and insert another thread near the larger tear, and insert a second thread near the smaller tear; and gather the threads equally between your fingers.
Then move your hand evenly with equal elevation; and raise the skin over which the incision is marked, as we have said.
Then gather together the two edges of the wound with a stitch; and care for it until it heals.
If, however, an abscess occurs at your incision or tear: sew the abscess with linen and similar materials from ointments that soothe.
And sometimes even eyelashes may turn over.
Therefore, you must use the method that I have said for the incision; but stitching is more artificial [requires greater skill]. [Section] On the care of the axilla with dogs.
And it should be turned over that eyelash, and you should make an incision in the tear that is inside, as I have said. Then make two dogs or two thin sticks of the same length as that of the eyelid, and their width shall be less than that of a thumbnail; and you have already made an incision at both ends on both sides where you hold the threads.
Then gather both together with delicacy on top of the excess skin from the eyelid, and stitch the two sticks tightly on either side with a strong suture, and leave it for several days. For a constricted skin will die and darken and rot until it falls away by itself.
If it is delayed [in healing], then cut it with scissors. Then take care of her, until she gets well.
When it solidifies, raise the eyelid; do not pluck the hairs.
And this is the shape of two scoops, which you should make according to this figure, and their length and width.
Chapter 12.
On plucking hairs sticking in the eye with a needle.
The operation is to take a sharp thin needle and insert a fine silk thread gently into it. Then tie the ends of it and knot them both with a very thin knot; let the length of the threads be one palm (about 5 inches).
Then prepare another fine thread under it briefly and knot its ends if you wish.
Then the sick person should place his head in your lap and be near the sun so that the operation may be seen; because this is a delicate or minor operation.
Then insert the needle with the silk thread into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you draw out the natural hair from above.
Then pull out the hair over the silk thread; and insert the hair into the silk thread; if it is one, or two, or three, do not more than that.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the silk thread from the eyelid along with the natural hair.
If, however, the silk thread is pulled out and the hair does not come out with it; pull the silk thread downwards with the thread you have prepared in it, until the silk thread comes out from the upper opening, and you see it with the eye; then pull the silk thread and the thread, and extract both, and close the eye; and leave the closed one for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place, and a flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either combine it with a long hair from natural hairs and lift it together; or leave it until it grows out some space, and then lift it.
Chapter Thirteen.
When this Alzheimer's occurs in the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Alzheimer's can be either natural or accidental.
Therefore, it becomes accidental from the congelation of wounds, cuts, burns, and similar things.
The method of treatment is to find that congelation and to separate the lips of it, and to place a linen cloth between them and tie it until it heals.
It is not necessary to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict; for if you do so, the Alzheimer's worsens rather than heals: but rather use softening things, such as flaxseed oil; and a syrup made with vinegar, in which althea has been cooked, along with flax seeds; and an ointment of dyaquilon, which has been melted with some oil; and apply a cloth soaked in it, and treat it with it.
And the storehouse of your treatment is to make every effort not for it to become congeled again, according to its original shape.
Indeed, the operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of Alzheimer's, so that it does not return to its original shape.
On the treatment of Alzheimer's occurring in the lower eyelid, which is a swelling or contraction upward towards right and left.
Chapter Fourteen.
The Alzheimer's occurring below is the one that is truly called Alzheimer's. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
From wound, or fissure, or cautery, and similar things, it becomes accidental.
The method of operation in this is that you take the needle, which should have a double thread, and moisten it with flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches the two ends of the skin.
Then stretch the skin upwards with a needle and cut it with a flat knife. If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns as required, it is good.
And if it does not, take the probe, and put it into the fissure, and turn the eyelid along with it; and cut two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and their ends should be from the two corners of the incision, until they converge and form an angle: until when they join together, this shape is formed, and it is a laudable Greek letter.
Then remove that skin to the extent of its lower sharp part, following the eyelid. Then bring together the separated parts: or bind them with a wool thread.
Then care for those (parts) with what I said, from soothing medicines and linens, until they heal.
If al-Khater occurs from the fissure, and suture, or cautery: then it is necessary to cut a flat scar under the eyelashes, even as before. Then separate between two lips with a linen cloth, as I said.
The summary of the discourse on the care of al-Khater, whether it is above or below, is that the operation should be carried out on it according to the preparation for the shape of al-Khater.
The artisan, being prudent, prepares his skill with whatever method is possible for him, until he makes the figure return to a natural form or one that is close to it, and himself being ill, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid with conjunctiva, or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, it is necessary that you insert the end of a radius under the eyelid and lift it up; or stretch it with a hook; then cut the adhesion with a subtle spatula, not with the sharpness of spatulas, but slightly blunted; so as not to disturb the sick person during the operation, and remove the spatula, and harm the eye with its sharpness; and let your incision be like you are excoriating that adhesion easily, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the adhesion is healed completely.
Then pour salty water into the eye and rinse it; or drip it onto him from seives made of linen soaked with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a linen cloth; and place wool soaked with white of egg on the eye; and use seives made of linen and solidified materials for three days until it is healed.
On the incision of nails and protrusions of skin around the eyes.
Chapter XVI.
You should know that a nail is according to two modes. Or is nerve-like: and it is similar to the hoof, tough, delicate. Or is not nerve-like, similar to frozen white moisture: which, when touched with iron, or when you try to grasp it with a nail, it breaks off and the nail does not take hold of it.
And both kinds do not begin, unless from the greater tear, until it slowly approaches the sight, and stops the light, and hinders the movement of the eye.
And the method of operation for cutting it is: that the weak one places his head in your armpit. Then open the eyes of the one, and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then grasp the nail with a pair of nails and extend it upwards. Then take the awl and insert it into her with a horse hair or oxen or sheep hair; let it be a thread, and bend the tip of the needle slightly, and pierce it in the middle of the nail and sew the nail with the thread and extend it upwards; and scrape with the hair the side of the nail following the pupil, as if you are squeezing it with the hair until the end of its socket.
Then cut the remaining part in the root of the tear with a thin spatula or small forks; and let the natural flesh of the tear escape, so that it does not happen from the cutting of it a constant flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is extended with the nail alone; or with the thread, as we have said. Then it is scraped with a soft spatula in this form:
And beware that the spatula does not touch the corn layer and causes a crack in it and pierces the pupil.
After the incision, throw something crushed salt into the eye, or made from zinc, and leave it for another day. Then take care of it as necessary, until it heals.
If the nail is not nerve-rich and you cannot insert a probe into it nor set a wedge under it, then this type of nail should be repeatedly treated with these remedies and healed as I described in the division.
If you want to cut it (the nail), then open the eye of the patient and take a fine, soft, weakly sharpened probe, shaped like this. And file the nail from above with fineness. If you see that it is becoming rough and breaks, and if you grind it with the file, then distill hour by hour from zinc made from zinc ore or red pigment, or ground salt into the eye until another day.
Then repeat this procedure until the whole thing is removed. Unless it is a hot abscess in the eye: then leave it alone and treat the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat this procedure on it with a file until it heals.
But if the growth of flesh near the tear duct is harmful to the eye and causes great injury, it should be suspended with a wedge, and cut off that part of it; not at the end, so as not to interfere with the flow of tears.
Then distill red pigment or zinc made from zinc ore into the tear duct until it heals.
Chapter on Albucasis' incision and tissue born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
A red mass composed or placed on certain human eyes is sometimes born, which covers the pupil, approaches it, presses against the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward; resembling a rose bush.
And there is also an operation for placing the sick person's head in your armpit. Then open the eyes and collect all the tissue with suitable forceps; hold it with one forceps or a clamp.
Then cut the flesh first until it is completely finished with the scalpel. Be careful not to injure the eye during the operation; make your cut such that you cut the flesh only, or with a spatula as we described in the chapter on the nail incision, or with small forceps, as used for collecting asbestos, according to the shape it will have after this chapter.
When your cut is completed and all the alguardenici (fatty tissue) has been removed, then fill the eye with salt powder, or drip red powder or similar corrosive medicines into it; place over the outside of the eye a piece of cotton with white of the egg: to protect it from a hot infection.
If there remains some alguardenici or if you have a hot bleeding, and you fear a hot infection, then leave the eye alone, and treat it with whatever soothes an abscess.
Then repeat the operation over it until it heals.
And do similarly with the flesh that occurs in the eye of this kind.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to let strangers treat any weak eye from a natural or accidental way, by working with iron; do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that the limb can bear this operation.
Chapter on collecting asbestos from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Asbestos are red veins that cover the eye and prevent the operation from being seen; they weaken the eye with the passing of days.
It is necessary for you, firstly, to consider whether the eye where Sebel is, is strong, and if there is no illness in it besides Sebel; then gather Sebel from it.
And you should instruct the weak to place their head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one or two needles according to your discretion; let the needle be subtle and doubled in this shape, or let there be two needles graduated in the same body according to this shape.
Then collect those veins with subtle forceps and remove the blood by the hour; until you see those veins separated from the eye and resolved; take care not to harm the eye with the ends of the forceps.
Let your work be at midday before the sun, and let you be very firm during your operation; so that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye either green or red; so that its acidity may corrode what remains of Sebel.
If however it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then plaster the eye with it, which relieves the pain of the eye; and leave it for some days until the pain subsides; and secure it with warm compresses; then repeat over it according to the same method until it heals.
And this is the form of the forceps.
Chapter on the reduction of Arissatum to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
The physician Arisatha treats a Fistula, which he cures with a cautionery or with a medicine burning sharply, according to the narrative that preceded it.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it; except that you may incise above the abscess at its birthplace, and extract all moisture that is in it and pus, until the bone appears.
When therefore the bone appears, and you see in it corruption or blackness, then grind it with this instrument, whose form is as follows:
And it is called Asperi Capitis (Head Grinder).
Make it from iron indo, and let its head be round like an azir, which is pierced with the marking of a file, or the piercing of aliskilfer with its subtle piercing; and place it over the corrupted bone.
Then turn it with your fingers, and you press your hand slightly, until you know that the corruption is already ground down; and do this several times.
Then restore the place with the most astringent ointments.
If the place consolidates, and flesh grows there, and the flow of pus is cut off; and it remains for forty days, and is not renewed, and there is no abscess, and no accident occurs in it; then you know that it has been healed.
And if not, then there is no skill in it, except to reduce the fistula to the opening of the nose, according to this shape:
And it is, to expose the bone of the second with iron, or with a sharp medicine; and when the bone has been exposed, then take a trepan according to this shape, with an iron end, triangular: and the handle of it should be a pyramid extended until the end, as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself; and let it be near the tear duct: and extend your hand slightly away from the eye. Then turn your hand with the lancet until it penetrates the bone and feels weak; by this you will find air coming out of it when you hold your hand over his nose.
Then restore the place with healing ointments drying up, as I have taught you.
When the flesh is born and the place hardens; then that which was flowing out to the outside returns to the nose; it is therefore lighter over the weak.
Chapter on the reduction of eyelid swelling.
Chapter XX (twenty).
When the eye bulges entirely and no harm or reduction occurs in sight: then it is necessary to dissolve the afflicted one; afterwards apply leeches to him; finally place warm poultices on his neck without incision, but with suction.
Then apply a salve to the eye which is made from acacia, aloes, frankincense, and colophony. Then bind the eye tightly on top with many plasters.
And the method of the plasters is: that you take soft cloths, many, and let each cloth be divided over four; make many from them; then place one on another according to the amount that the eye needs; then bind strongly over them with a stiff cloth.
And repeat the warm poultices with suction without incision.
Then remove the warm poultices and release the bound eye day and night.
If, however, the binding softens again, then it is necessary to bind it very tightly; afterwards remove the binding after a day and night, as we have said.
If therefore you see the eye return to its natural state (covering), that is good; and if not, then repeat the salve, plasters, binding, and warm poultices until it heals.
Chapter on Incision of the Eye Covering.
Chapter 21.
Chapter 21: When there is a rupture in the eye covering, it then bulges and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of sand, and defiles the human form because of this, and desire to cut it; then the operation on him is as follows: insert a pointed instrument at the base of the eye from bottom to top.
Then insert another pointed instrument with a doubled thread from the lacrimal part and let it penetrate; release the first instrument according to its position.
Then cut a place for the double thread, and tie it with the part of the vein in the round (or circumference) with a needle; and tighten it strongly.
Then draw out the needle, and place infused wool on the white part of the eye; and leave it until the thread falls with the vein.
Then care for the eye so that it recovers, until the wound heals.
And sometimes, tie the vein from all sides with a circle made of cloth until the eye protrudes greatly.
Then it is pierced with a thin spatula that reaches to the depth of the eye, and the albuginea moistens, and the eye descends, and immediately enters; then tie it, until it heals.
[Title: On the treatment of Alcomant.]
Chapter XXII.
This disease called Alcomant is not anything other than pus that accumulates in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not the same as the eye itself.
And the method of operation for this is that you make the sick person sit on a prepared seat or directly.
Then take his head with your two hands, and move it until you see the pus reach the lower parts of your eyes. Then it is shaped, and does not descend, and the sight is purified; and the sick person sees as he saw before; if it does not descend further, know that it is water.
If, however, the descent of pus is not prepared as we have said, then make the sick person sit between your hands. Then take a thin spatula and cut it with it on the corn layer slightly near the junction of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the corona (or crown), until the pus comes out.
When it comes out, then pour warm water into the eye in which you have mixed honey; or hot water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey; then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
On the treatment of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have already discussed the types of water in division, and what is suitable for piercing when it is declared and explained in speech, then receive the same thing according to health.
Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands square, facing the light, near the sun; and bind the healthy eye and squeeze it strongly; then with your right hand close the eyelid of the eye in which there is water, or with your left hand if the eye is on the right.
Then take your right hand, if the eye is left: or take your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the edge of your right hand near the crown of the eye, on the apparent side of the smaller lacrimal duct within the white part of the eye: then push your right hand with force: and you pull your hand with it, until it penetrates into the white part of the eye: and you feel that your right hand has reached an empty place.
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey of the hand to depth is the measurement of space from the pupil to the end of the darkening: and this is the crown of the eye. For indeed you will see it in the same pupil vision of the eye, because of the clarity of the cornea layer.
Then place your hand up to where there is water. Then press it repeatedly with one blow after another.
If water then immediately flows out, then the sick person immediately sees what is above and opens his sight, and the hand in his eye.
Then remain still for a little while. If water then flows out, then put it aside, but leave the hand to come out.
When it is tightened and does not rise up: then pull out the hand easily: and you slowly withdraw your hand.
Then dissolve something from salt in clear water: and wash the eye inside with it. Then place over the entire eye a piece of wool soaked in rose oil and white thread: and bind the healthy eye with it.
We and those who are of our time place over him camomile powder with white thread of the eye.
If the hand does not obey you to enter the eye because of its hardness, since it is a man whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you take Spatule, which is called Alberid, and this is its form.
Perforate therefore only the joint itself and not the tendon; and do not insert your finger into the hole; it is only to make a way to a subtle place.
Insert almagda (an instrument), as we have said previously.
For the completion of your work, prepare for the sick person a suitable sleeping place well made, in which he will lie on his back in a dark house; and let him be prevented from any movement, and from coughing; and place food for him that soothes his nature; and do not move his head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage be according to its composition until the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark house, and test his sight; and make him see things. Then return the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not appropriate to do this at the time of treatment or immediately after cutting; rather, it should be given by others because water rises quickly through a strong wound.
If, however, there arises a hot abscess: then it is necessary to dissolve the eye before the seventh day; and correct this with what soothes the abscess until it subsides; then without his sight, and place on his oral cavity that which regulates his vision for several days, while he remains in that dark house.
Then gradually leave the house, and change into his cases.
And know that a student is not excused from viewing a dissection at times; then he dares to perform an operation.
Now indeed a certain one of those from Alayrach has come to us who said that it was perforated with a large opening in Alayrach, through which water flows.
Therefore, I have not seen anyone in your land who has done that; nor have I read it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
These are the forms of species from Magda, so that they may stand above him who knows them not.
Make them out of bronze; and let their extremities be with the same subtlety triangular and pointed.
Chapter XXIII.
[Section] On the care of a newborn's flesh on the nose.
When there are born in the nose diverse growths, of which some resemble many-footed scorpions; and from it is cancerous flesh, stone-like, dark colored; and from it is soft flesh, not dark colored.
In the soft flesh, not fraudulent, nor cancerous, it is necessary that you make the patient sit facing the sun with his nose opposite it, and open its nostrils, and throw a hook into those growths; then draw them out to the outside, and cut what you have grasped from them with a thin, sharp spatula until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
If something remains from that which cannot be removed: then shave it off with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until nothing remains from it. If blood dominates you, or a hot abscess happens: then apply whatever is necessary; or if it is from malignant abscesses, then hasten to cauterize him until the blood is removed, and all flesh is taken away.
Then pour vinegar, water, or wine into the nose after the incision. If the nostril opens and moisture comes out to the palate, then you know that he is now well.
If moisture does not penetrate as required, then you know that within it is flesh born in the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary to introduce a thread of linen with some thickness and many knots; place between each knot a quantity equal to or less than a finger; make the patient weak, so that he sends out one end of the thread into the nose with the probe, or as possible for him after he has done this, similar to the case of Azer; draw out its smell until it reaches the cavity, and exits above the throat.
And indeed, many times boys make similar to this what Attomus does in schools; and it is easy for him who desires so.
Then place two ends of the thread, one that exits above the nose, and the other that remains in the nose. Then, with scissors, cut the flesh along with the knots that are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with the knots of the thread.
Then draw out the thread; place in the nose after the withdrawal of blood linen which you have soaked in Egyptian ointment; do this for three days or more until the ointment has completely eaten away the remaining flesh.
Then, at the end, put a tube of lead into the nose for some days until it heals.
If it requires a cure that dries, use it.
To make the nose cure with what is distilled from olive oil and other medicines into the nose, make it of silver or copper; it should be similar to a small lamp, open like a snail shell, and its passage similarly.
And if you want to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And make the instrument for the head-lance completion, be it full, exposed: to which have a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when you heat oil or what you wish from juices and flexible things in it.
Chapter 25.
Often a boil arises at the end of the nose called Thelul, and it becomes larger and increases in size with days until its appearance is repulsive.
And because of that, it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning of its appearance and remove the entire thing. Then place on that location, either a cautery or a medicine burning in its place.
If its cutting is delayed until it becomes larger, then consider if it is made of stone, hard, dark in color and few senses: then do not touch it with iron, because it is a cancerous boil.
For often I have seen that someone cut an abscess with iron and great harm befell the one who had it.
And if the boil is soft when touched, not dark in color, and you see that it is possible to cut the entire thing, then evacuate the weak, and cut it without fear or hesitation; and take care of the place with it that drains and constricts until it heals.
Chapter 26.
Chapter on sewing the nose, the lip, and the ear.
Know that when there is a separation of the continuity of one of these cartilages, an operation does not have much effect unless in certain people.
Therefore, when something happens to anyone from it, you should consider if it is a recent wound with its own blood: and then apply double stitches on the wound with suturing; then take care of it until it heals.
If the continuity of the solution has already been separated and each part is now healthy: then it is necessary to cure every part from its apparent skin until it bleeds. Then join the two lips with suturing and sew them together, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood over it along with pulverized opopanax; and place a piece of plaster containing diafinicon on top of the powders, as well as some other consolidated plasters; and leave it bound for two or three days. Then dissolve it, and change the medicine; and let it remain until the sutures have dissolved by themselves. Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
The method of suturing is to join the continuity of the solution or with needles, as we have said in the suture of the abdomen; or join the solution with a thread, as I have taught you.
Chapter 27.
Chapter on the removal of lip tumors.
Many people have hard sores similar to grains of wheat growing on their inner lips; some of them are smaller and others larger.
Therefore, you must turn the lip over, and make an incision on every tumor of it; and hang it with a hook and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision with sulphur until the blood stops flowing.
Then it is scraped with vinegar and the place where the sore is, until the wounds heal.
Chapter 28.
Chapter on the incision of the born flesh on the gums.
Often a mass of flesh grows on the gum that ancient people called abuluss.
Therefore, you must hang it with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut it at the root, and let pus or blood flow out.
Then place over the sore area crushed pomegranate peel or other styptic powders, extractive.
If the flesh returns after treatment (which often happens), then cut it again and cauterize it; for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter 29.
Chapter on tooth extraction with iron.
When they (teeth) are gathered on the surfaces of teeth from both the inner and outer parts, and between gums and rough cortices, sometimes they turn yellowish or greenish, until that corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul due to it.
Therefore, you should make the patient sit between your hands and support his head in your lap, and grind the tooth and root where the cortex appears to you like sand: until nothing remains from it, and similarly do with blackness, greenness, yellowness, and others until they are cleaned.
If therefore what is within them (teeth) is removed at the beginning of reasoning, it is good: and if not, then you should repeat the grinding process on them day after day, second and third, until finally your efforts reach what you desire.
And know that the tooth needs razors of various shapes and forms, many kinds, according to what is prepared for your operation: because the rasp that grinds the tooth from below is different from the rasp that grinds between the teeth, according to other shapes.
These forms of razors should be prepared by you, which you see.
Chapter 30.
Chapter on the extraction of tooth pain.
It is necessary to cure the tooth from its pain with all your skill, and to be slow in its extraction. For its place will not be supplied when it is extracted: since it is a substance that rises: until there is no excuse for its extraction, then if the patient is forced to extract it himself, he must firmly decide and assure you of a tooth in pain.
For often the pain deceives the patient and he believes that there is saha (a poison) in the tooth and extracts it himself: then the pain does not go away until the diseased tooth is extracted.
We have indeed already seen that from the operation of phlebotomists.
When therefore it is certain that the tooth itself feels hard, then it is necessary to incise around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is something of virtue, until it dissolves the gums from all sides: then move it yourself with your fingers, or with subtle forceps first, little by little, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps there with good positioning, and hold the head of the weak between your knees: what you have already firmly grasped, so that it does not move: then pull out the tooth in a straight line, so as not to break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If the tooth is pierced or rotten: then it is necessary to fill that hole with a cloth and tighten it with the end of a subtle radius so as not to break it during your constriction on top of it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you are careful when incising around the gums from all sides a lot.
And keep your strength so as not to break it, and a part of it remains, and returns on the weak from that malice which is greater than its first pain.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant phlebotomists do in haste and their own audacity regarding its removal, except that they administer what I have mentioned.
For many times they bring upon men great weaknesses, the more difficult of which are to break and all its roots remain or some of them: or to extract it with certain bones of the jaw as we have often testified.
Then it is to be scraped after its excision with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If there occurs a bleeding from the places (for it often happens), then grind some alum and fill the place with it; and if not, cauterize it if you have no alum.
The handles of subtle forceps by which the hard tooth is moved should be long at one end, short at the other, thick, so that they do not split when pressed against the tooth; they should resemble the handles of large forceps, until when you press them with them, they do not bend themselves or split: short in length, and made of good iron or well-made steel, straight at their ends: and at their ends there should be teeth, some of which enter into some and tighten by proper constriction, strong.
And sometimes the ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called a ciconia and are strong in constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
Chapter on the extraction of teeth and breaking of fractured jawbones.
When a tooth remains after its extraction and breaks something, then one must put hot oil on the place for one or two days until the place becomes soft; then introduce alum or forceps into it, whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called a ciconia. The form of the forceps is as follows.
The ends of them should be shaped like a plane iron or an aliskilfe.
If it does not come out with these forceps, then you must cauterize the root, remove all the flesh and introduce an instrument called a small palanca, whose shape is as follows.
The extremity should be short and rather thick; and it should not be filled (or saturated), so that it does not break.
If the root comes out through that (incision), it is good; and if not, help with other instruments of similar form.
The first form is a triangle at the end, where there is some thickness.
The form of the subtle triangle (or pointed tip).
And with other instruments and tools which have come before (in the process of dental extraction).
Also help with this instrument resembling a large hook, with this form (triangular and twisted tip), having some thickness to avoid breaking; and it should not be filled.
And know that there are many dental instruments; similarly, the other instruments are not counted (or considered), and a skillful artisan, subtle in his craft, finds for himself the tool according to what the operation and the disease itself signify.
Because from diseases there are those for which no ancient instrument was made, due to the diversity of their forms.
If the bone breaks out from the jaw or from other bones of the face, or rots: then examine (or explore) on it in its place with that which suits it among the instruments and forceps I mentioned for root extraction, and help with what is being done, whose form is as follows.
Let there be some thickness gradually, in order to tighten or hold the bone with it so that it does not escape and move away until the bone comes out; and restore the place with appropriate medicines for that.
If there is a small rottenness (or decay) in the bone, then clean it from its own decay, and care for it until it heals.
De curatione alvii et de dentium extractione
On the serration of protruding teeth.
On the treatment of the jaw and tooth extraction. When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, it becomes foul due to that shape; especially when this happens in women and girls, namely, venereal.
It is necessary therefore to consider the following points. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and it does not settle or its serration or cutting is possible, then extract it; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose form is as follows.
It resembles a small beak, and is made from hard iron with an extremely sharp end.
And your cut should be such that you make the cut over many days due to the hardness of the tooth and so as not to disturb another tooth.
If it is protruding, exposed for serration; then smooth it with a rasp made of hard iron, whose form is as follows.
Let the entire instrument be made of hard iron and its handle have many small pointed teeth like a rasp with which to smooth the tooth gradually over many days with ease, so as not to disturb another tooth and let it fall; then soften it and finally grind it smooth with some rasps.
If the tooth breaks and injures the tongue; then it is necessary to rasp it until the roughness of the break is removed and it is made even; and to smooth it so as not to injure the tongue or corrupt speech.
De extractione dentium eosdemque remediationib
About the winding of teeth with threads of gold.
When there is shock and commotion of the anterior teeth due to impact or accident; and the weak person cannot bite down on what they eat so as not to let it fall; and you have treated them with medicines and bandages, but the treatment has not helped; then it is appropriate for them to be tied with a thread of gold; because silver becomes green and putrefies after days, but gold never changes.
The thread should be of a middle fineness and thickness according to its quantity that it may pass between the teeth.
The form of the rete is such that you take a thread and pass it twice between two healthy teeth; then you weave it with its two ends between moving teeth, either one or several, until you reach with the lance to the tooth of the other side. Then weave the fabric until you reach the part from where you started; and bind your hand with subtlety and wisdom until it is not moved entirely; and let your binding that binds the thread be at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not slip away.
Then cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors; gather both and turn them to each other; hide these under a healthy tooth and a moving tooth so as not to harm the tongue; then release it thus bound until it remains.
If it is loosened or cut, bind it with another thread and let it stand thus for the whole time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of the rete of two healthy teeth, and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that a tooth or teeth return after loss at their respective places and are retained as we have said and remain; this does not happen unless the skilled and experienced craftsman does it.
And sometimes a tooth is made from the bones of the cow; and it is made like the form of a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth is braced and bound as we have said; and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
When sometimes a ligament occurring under the tongue is either natural, with which a man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already healed.
And the procedure for it is to open the weak bone of its head in your pocket, and lift up its tongue; then cut that nerve ligament through its width until it is released from its constraint.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it is from the consolidation of a wound; then throw a hook into it, and break through it across its width, until you cut the ligament, and the knot is loosened.
And beware, lest there be a split in the deep flesh, and you cut the artery there, and blood flow ensues.
Then it is rubbed with water of rose, or with vinegar, or with cold water.
Then place linen cloth beneath the tongue, which holds the weak one all night; so that it does not heal again.
But if blood flow occurs, then put on the place crushed lupine seeds. But if blood prevails, then cauterize the place with a lentigo-like cautery, which is suitable for that; afterwards take care of it with the rest of the cure until it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes an aposteme occurs under the tongue which resembles a small ranula, preventing the tongue from its natural function; and perhaps it swells so much that it fills the bone.
And the procedure for it is to open the weak one's head facing the sun, and consider the aposteme.
If you see it of a dark or black color, hard, without any sensation to the weak one; then do not touch it, because it is a cancer.
If it is cut to the white part, where there is moisture, then throw in the hook and cut it with a sharp knife, and free it from all sides. If blood seeps out on your operation hour, then place a crushed zegi on it until the blood is cut off; afterwards return to your operation until you pull it out with its whole.
Then it should be washed with vinegar and salt; and care for it with an appropriate treatment until it heals.
Chapter on the treatment of double cheek amygdala.
Chapter 36.
Whenever glands similar to goiters occur near the throat, that is, the two amygdales: which, when treated as we have said, and do not heal, then consider.
If it is a hard aposteme of dark color with few senses, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and its root is thick, then do not touch it even with iron, fearing bleeding, rather let it be until it matures. Then either pierce it yourself or it will burst by itself.
And if it is white in color, round and its root is subtle, then it must be cut.
And the operation on it is that you consider before the operation whether its aposteme has quieted down with warm completion or decreased somewhat: then let the patient sit facing the sun, and his head in your lap; and open his mouth and let a servant hold it between his hands; and press the lower part of his tongue with an instrument, whose shape is as follows.
Let it be made of silver or brass, which is thin like a knife.
When you press the tongue with it and the aposteme is shown to you and falls on top of it, then take a hook, and fix it in the amygdale, and pull it out as far as possible, taking something along with it from the tunics.
Then cut it with an instrument, whose shape is as follows. It resembles tweezers; however, its ends should be curved so that the opening of each is directly opposite and sharp: therefore care should be taken that it is made of iron or aluminum treated with resin.
If this tool is not present, then cut it with a spatula, whose shape is as follows. Sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you cut one almond [tooth], cut the other one according to this same type of incision.
Then, after the incision, the sick person shall rinse with cold water or with vinegar and water.
If however there is a flow of blood, he shall rinse with water in which the bark of pomegranates has been boiled; or the leaves of myrtle and similar ones from other bitter plants, until the flow of blood stops: then take care of him until he is healed.
And sometimes boils other than the two molars arise in the throat. Therefore cut them equally according to what I said about the incision of the two molars.
And I myself have healed a woman from a boil that had arisen in her throat, which was drawing toward gangrene and had impaired her senses so that she could barely breathe through a narrow opening; and the woman had already been forbidden food and drink; and death was imminent if she had remained for one or two more days.
And the boil had risen so much that it had expelled two branches until they emerged through the two nostrils.
I therefore hastened and tied up one of them with a hook. Then I pulled it out, and a large portion came out with it.
Then I cut it off where it was taken from the nostril.
Then I did to it what came out of the other nostril.
Then I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue; then I tied a hook to the boil; then I cut off a piece of it, and only a little blood flowed out: the woman's throat was therefore healed, and she immediately began to drink water, then she received food.
I did not cease to cut from that ulcer many times over a long period of time: and the ulcer succeeded in the place which I was cutting, until it was prolonged too much and with it that.
I heated (or set fire to) therefore, and burnt the ulcer at the throat.
Therefore it stood firm after adding (something): then I went away from there, and I did not know what God had done with it after me.
Chapter on the incision of ulcers in the throat.
Chapter XXXVII.
When the catarrh descends to the throat and an ulcer forms that is long: then it is called the perpendicular; and if it is large and round in the lower part, then it is called a goitre.
When it is treated with what I said in the division, and the treatment does not work; and you see that the ulcer has become warm and soft: then it should be cut.
And what is gathered round from it, and is not long, and is bloody or dark red or black, and has no sensation: then it should be cut. For there is fear over the weak (person).
Therefore when you see it according to the way I said from whiteness, and its length, to make the weak person sit before the sun; and press his tongue with the tool whose use was previously described; then fix a hook in the throat, and pull it downward; and cut it with one of two tools which I mentioned in the incision of the two salivary glands.
And it should not be cut from it unless what is added exceeds its natural limit without additional treatment.
For if you cut from it too much, you will damage the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what was described in the incision of the two salivary glands; and care for it until it heals.
If the patient is afraid of incision: then it is necessary that you use your skill in cauterizing him without fear and cowardice.
The method of cauterization is not other than with sharp water: it is to place the head of the patient on your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument that I have mentioned. Then take from the water that I have told you in the chapter on cauterization, and make a non-extinguished lump of it, not thick, nor thin, and fill the depression of this instrument with it, which has this shape.
Let the end where the medicine is placed be concave like the concavity of a seashell's edge.
Place the instrument with the medicine on the wound itself: and let the patient lie down on his side so that saliva from his mouth runs out of his mouth with the internal medicine, so that something does not drop from it to his throat and hurt him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from above apply it to the wound in quantity equal to half an hour until you see it becoming blackened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish to take a hot iron, and wrap it on the end of the ray, and pour the hot iron with the medicine, and introduce the ray with the heated iron into the canal from above until the hot iron adheres to the wound.
Do that often until you achieve what you want in the cauterization of the wound. Then let it go: for it burns and falls away after three or four days.
If you need to repeat the medicine, do so: and after cauterization wipe the wound with a hot iron dipped in butter, and clean it with what is around the wound from the medicine: and wash it with cold water.
And it is treated externally with embrocisions, and internally with gargarisms, until it heals.
This kind of treatment is healthier than incision and farther from fear.
And sometimes the windpipe is also treated with something more subtle than cautery and incision: it is treated with suffusion in this manner. Take calamus, hyssop, origanum, ruta, asafoetida, chamomile, abrotanum and similar herbs from the field: gather them all together, or some of them in a pot, immerse them with vinegar, boil it: the pot should be well coated with clay: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which a concave instrument is placed in this manner.
It should be made of silver or copper: and the tip, where there is a grain, is inserted into the sick man's mouth until the vapor rises to the windpipe through the cannula, until the windpipe becomes greatly obstructed.
Then repeatedly over it several times, until it burns.
And be careful, not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess's arrival. For it is usually added to an abscess: and it should not be done except at the decline of the abscess's heat.
If this instrument is not present to you, then take a cannula and prepare the bark of an ox's horn at its tip: so that the sick man's bone is not burned: because the ox's horn bark prevents the vapor from burning the bone: and this is from good treatment with safety.
Chapter on the extraction of thorns and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38.
Often a bone or a fish's spine or something else adheres to the throat.
It is necessary therefore that you extract what appears visible on it where vision falls, after pressing the tongue with an instrument in the sun, and it is made clear to you that it is in the throat.
And what is not visible to you and concealed in the throat, it is necessary that you make vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps therefore it will come out the attached thing by vomiting.
Or the sick person should swallow a piece of nutmeg, or the root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; or he should take a piece of dried sponge (soft): and bind it with thread, then he should swallow it. When therefore it reaches the place where there are thorns or bone, and it is extracted, then it comes out.
If therefore it does not come out as I said; then use an instrument of lead in this form.
Let it be thicker than a finger joint, and at its end let there be a hollow, which he should introduce into his throat with ease; and let him have the head raised upward.
And let him be careful to avoid touching his epiglottis, so that he does not cough; and push the bone or thorn with it, or the physician may insert it with his hand.
But what the sick person inserts is better: because of his knowledge about the place of the attached thing; and he pushes it downward, or pulls his hand with the instrument upward, all of it according to its quantity that is prepared for him, until it comes out.
Section on Extraction of Leeches.
Chapter 39.
When a leech is treated with what I said in the division of cure with medicines, and it does not function; then consider in the throat of the sick person before the sun, or after pressing his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
If therefore your sight falls upon a leech, remove it with a small hook, or with forceps carefully handled.
If not possible with them (forceps or hook): then take a concave cane, insert it into the throat of the sick person up to its throat; afterwards insert the hot iron into the hollow of the cane. Do this often: and let the sick person abstain from water all day.
Then let him take an enema full of cold water, and open his mouth in it; and clean his face with it, and drink nothing from it; and move the water one hour after another with his hand. For a leech indeed drops off immediately when it feels the water.
If it does not drop off with what has been said, then fumigate the sick person with bed bugs or with sand in the fumigation of the throat (as described earlier).
Do this often, for it will drop off by itself.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot with live prunes and fire; and let the pot be covered with a lid, in the middle of which there should be a hole; and arrange the end of the instrument in that hole.
Then throw the fumigation, and let the sick person place his mouth at the end of the cane, and close it, so that the fumigation does not escape, until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech. For a leech immediately drops off.
If it does not drop off, then repeat the fumigation often.
Let the sick person endure thirst, and eat salt and other foods, but drink no water.
Therefore it is necessary for it to drop off with this treatment.
This is the form of the instrument with which a leech is removed from the throat when it falls upon the eyesight.
The instrument is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which enters the throat. And its tip resembles a bird's beak called stork, where there is the roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not let go of it entirely.
On the opening of abscesses, their incision, and treatment in general.
Chapter XL.
The species of abscesses are many, according to their recollection, that is, one and one within this book: and they differ in the perforation of them, and cutting of themselves by two methods.
Of these, one is a species of abscess within itself, and it is grasped from humidities.
The second method is due to the places where it occurs from the body.
Since a tumor occurring on the head is different from a tumor occurring in the anus: and a tumor occurring in a fleshy place is different from a tumor occurring in joints: and each of them has its own judgment according to the operation.
And from tumors there are those which should not be pierced unless after the ripening of pus in them, and the completion of it: and there are those which should be pierced while they are raw, and do not ripen according to the completion.
As tumors which are near joints.
Since a tumor which occurs near a joint, and prolongs itself until it rots what is around it possibly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, therefore it is the cause of the limitation of that member.
Or it is a tumor near the main member: since if you delay piercing it until it ripens, it will harm either that member or through the main member.
Or it is near the anus, then pierce it while immature: and it is not necessary to pierce a raw tumor, not completed digestion, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not rot deeply, and extends to the interior of the anus, and becomes a fistula, or becomes at its end which does not heal.
It is necessary that you know the hour of piercing the tumor, which has ripened according to completion: and it is in sedation of pain, retreat of fever, and decrease of redness, and pulsation, and acuity of headache of the tumor: and the remaining signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same incision in the lower place of the tumor, and more prominent: and the incision should be going in length of the body, if tumors are in parts of hands and feet, and places of arms, shoulders, cords, nerves, arteries, and finally in all places equal to those where there is no reflection.
In those (things) that are reflected, proceed with a perforation according to that member.
If the abscess is in fleshy places, it is better to delay the perforation until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said in fullness.
Because if you perforate it before that, the course of the virus from it is prolonged, and there are many filths and impurities, and perhaps its edges harden and its depth increases.
Some abscesses are to be perforated according to the width of the body in necessity, or according to that part where a member is needed.
And it is necessary that you administer small perforations to small abscesses, and large perforations to large abscesses, or many sections according to the similarity of the size of the abscesses.
And among abscesses, there are some in which the skin should be concaved: and cut when it has become like a cloth and made at the end that is already dead, as happens often with buboes and scrofula.
And among these (abscesses) there are some which are to be cut by a section having three angles. And from these (abscesses), one is to be cut like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Like an inguinal abscess.
And among these (abscesses), there are some in which a round incision is administered and a crescent-shaped incision, and similar ones from sections.
However, that which has no head, such as superficial lenticular abscesses, it is necessary to perforate it by a shallow perforation or only superficially.
And it is necessary that when the abscess is large and has collected a lot of pus, you perforate it so as not to expel all of the pus at once during that hour; rather, extract a part of it from it. Then open the boil until another day. Then draw out something from the pus again.
Do it often according to the degrees, until it is expelled: especially if the patient is weak or of poor vitality, or a woman who is pregnant, or a young child, or an old man in decay: for the animal spirit is many times resolved with the discharge of pus: and perhaps the sick person may die, and you will not benefit.
Be therefore very careful about this chapter.
And after your puncture, which you make on the boils, it is necessary to clean the wound: and reflect upon it. If the wound of the boil is small, or the incision is flat, then apply linen cloth or an old bandage. And if the boil is large, and there are many cracks or openings in it, then you should insert linen into every crack until they meet on the other side.
And if you have cut off a piece of skin from the boil, or hollowed out its surrounding area: then it is necessary to fill it with an old bandage, or as when fabric is woven, or shorn of linen wool without moisture: and tie it up for three days.
Then expel it, and care for it with what is necessary from the ointment, until it heals.
If however bleeding occurs during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after it has been absorbed by the cloth: and place it on the site of the bleeding many times.
If the bleeding continues, then it is necessary to administer treatment and care, and powders, as I have mentioned in many places of our book, and by division.
If it is winter time, and the site of the boil is near many nerves: then it is necessary to pour powders with wine and warm oil on them, and place them on the areas.
If it [the wound] is during summer and the places are fleshy: then it is necessary that you place lice soaked in water, or oil, or in wine and oil, and all of that cold. Until the third day, as we said before, then it is necessary to dissolve the abscess, and remove it, and administer for its healing what is suitable for it until it heals.
This is therefore what is universally necessary in the knowledge of abscess treatment.
In fact, regarding the method of distinguishing [the type of abscess], as I have said about every abscess, how the way to treat it is done step by step has been set out individually.
Chapter XL (40).
Chapter on incision of abscesses occurring on the skin of the head.
Small abscesses occur on the skin of the head, and are of the kind called knots, which are contained by the membranes that are sacs for them: they are as if they themselves were poulticed by chickens.
And their [the abscesses'] kinds are many.
Among them [the abscesses] are fat ones: and among them are those that contain a moisture similar to mud: and among them are those that contain a moisture similar to roasted and poulticed things: and similar to these, and among them are hard stone-like ones.
And in the incision of all [abscesses], and their removal there is no fear, as long as it does not make a contradiction with an artery at its incision.
And the operation in their [the abscesses'] incision is that you try it with the tool whose shape comes later, which is called "Intromissum", until you know what it contains.
For if it [the abscess] contains moisture, then cut it with a longitudinal incision according to the superficial section of this shape.
And begin with a cut along line b to line g. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, then scab over the cyst that contains that moisture, and do not allow anything to remain deeply within it.
For many times, if something remains in it, it will return.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with it and leave it until another day. For it eats away what remains from the cyst.
Then repeatedly apply Egyptian ointment on the wound twice, and thrice, and as much as needed, until you are sure that nothing remains from the cyst; then take care of the wound with the ointment until it is healed.
If the boil contains a thick knot: then cut it in this shape, with a cross-like incision; and insert probes between the folds of the incision, and scab over it from all sides; and strive for your strength in the extraction of the membrane that contains it.
If an artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you later.
And similarly do for a boil that is hard (or solid), through incision and the same treatment, as we have said.
Incision on a hard (or solid) boil is easier because there is little blood and moisture. Sometimes there are such boils on the head of some people where there is no deep moisture.
This is: because I have made an incision on a woman's old boil on the head, and found the boil to be as hard and solid as a stone, rough, white, which could not be broken; and if anyone struck it with force, he would wound himself.
In other cases of boils in the head, except for those boils that occur in children's heads and near the roots of ears, a section of all of them should be a surface cut.
Always make a perforation from below their part (boils) to alleviate the course of pus towards lower areas.
Then, care for this (the wound) with whatever is suitable for it in terms of treatment.
Section on the Strangulated Hernia in the neck.
Chapter XLII.
These boils often occur in the neck and under the buttocks, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
Above these (boils) that occur on the neck are one and many; they originate from one another; and every strangulated hernia among them is within its own sheath, as is the case with knots and boils of the head, as we have said.
And the types of these (strangulated hernias) are many. For among them there are those that are stone-like; and among them there are those that contain moisture; and among them there are malignant ones that do not obey treatment.
In the good one that you see among them, whose manifestly close to the skin color and moves in all directions, and is not attached with the neck muscles, nor with the buttocks, nor with the artery, nor deep; it is necessary to cut it through a surface cut from its upper part to its lower body part along the line b to the line g. And scrape it off from every side: and spread the two skin flaps with a scalpel or multiple scalpels if necessary, as we have said for boils of the head, and remove it gradually.
And it is advisable to be careful not to cut a vein or nerve.
And let the lancet not be very sharp: so that it does not cut your hand with the incision, or disturb the sick one, and you shall incise what is necessary.
If you cut a vein or an artery, or it prevents you from operating, then place in the wound alum powdered, or certain powders that absorb blood, and tie the wound, and leave it alone until the sharpness of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes soft: or if it begins to rot.
For the blood is withdrawn, cut off the tunica. Return then to your operation until you have finished.
Then examine with your index finger if there remains anything of the Strophulus (sutures) or small ones: therefore cut them and clean them.
If there is a large vein in the root of the suture: then it must not be cut from its root; instead it must be tied with a strong double thread and left until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old linen cloth that you have previously soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it (the wound).
If the suture is cut off completely, then the wound edges should be brought together: and sew it immediately, after you see that there is no superfluity remaining.
If you see that there remains superfluity due to the size of the suture, then it must be intended to cut off its root and extract it: and administer the suture as I have said.
And what contains humidity among the sutures, perforate it with a superficial perforation: so that the place of its maturity appears to you: and place the perforation from where it follows below the body, as I have said.
Then administer after perforation linseed with ointment, and similar ones, to corrode what remains from corruption, until when you see the wound already clean: then care for it with regenerative flesh ointment, until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
On section of Epiglottis due to gangrene occurring within the throat.
The ancients spoke of this section in the Epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; this is their writing.
However, in those with synanchema (a type of choking), it is necessary to avoid section of the Epiglottis: because no benefit arises from it, for all veins and lungs are weakened.
However, in those who have a hot gangrene in the mouth, or throat, or both molars, when there is no discomfort in the nasal cavity, it is necessary to use section of the Epiglottis to escape from the danger that arises due to suffocation.
Therefore, when we wish to do that (section of Epiglottis), it should be done under three or four rings of the Epiglottis, with a small section along its width, in the place between two rings by quantity, which is the section in sifac (a cartilage) not in cartilage: and this place is suitable for section because it lacks flesh, and the blood vessels from it are distant.
If the physician is afraid, then it is necessary that he stretches the throat skin with a spatula. Then divide the skin until you reach the nasal cavity: avoid blood vessels if you see anything from them.
Then cut the sifac as we mentioned: and it is signified by the phlegm that comes out of it, with what breaks open, and separation of the voice.
Let the open wound heal at some time.
When the hour is removed when fear of putrefaction exists, bring together two lips of the wound skin, and either that alone without cartilage.
Then administer medications that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
Says Albucasis. The sum of this discourse which I have told is an explanation only when it appears that one of these abscesses has already opened the throat of the sick: and he is raised up on death, and wishes to be cut; they go to the Epiglottis to breathe, so that the sick person may breathe over the place of the wound by a certain breathing, and be saved from death: and for this reason they commanded to let the open wound, until the malignancy of the disease is consumed, and the malignancy of it is for three days and almost as if itself: then therefore they commanded to sew up the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
And that which I saw myself is that a maidservant took a knife, and sent it into her own throat, and cut a part of the windpipe.
And I was called to treat her, and found her to moan, as is the moaning of the dead.
I then uncovered (the wound), and found blood that had come out from the wound to be little. Therefore I was reassured that she had not cut the vein nor artery: and wind came out from the wound.
I therefore approached and sewed up her wound, and cured it until she was well: and nothing happened to the maidservant, except a hoarseness in her voice: and she returned after days to a better state of health.
Therefore I say: that there is no fear in cutting the Epiglottis.
On the operation for hernia of the neck (of the intestine).
Chapter XLIIII.
This is called a hernia of the neck (gutturis), which is a large abscess, according to the color of the body; and it occurs in women much.
It follows two ways: for it is either natural or accidental.
In the natural, it certainly is not a congenital condition.
The accidental (one) is of two types: one of which resembles fatty nodes. And the second type, it is similar to an abscess which occurs due to the knotting of an artery. And there is fear (risk) involved in it, and it should not be presumed to cut it with a knife unless it is small; examine it and investigate it using a probe. If you find it similar to a fatty node and it is not suspended with any veins; then cut it off as knots are cut off, and extract it along with what contains it from the cyst, if there is one in the cyst; and if not, then explore the entire area thoroughly. Then care for the place (area) with what is required for healing, until it heals.
Chapter XLV.
Chapter on Surgery of Nodes.
There are many kinds of nodes, and I have already said all their species in division; it is necessary that I here explain the difference between a node and an abscess, as there may be doubt about it.
Therefore, when an abscess is present, there is heat, fever, and intense pain, until the boiling of excess fluid subsides and the putrefaction is completed; then the fever and heat subside.
A node, however, is not accompanied by heat or fever or pain; it contains them in a cyst or sac proper to them, which is of the color of the body; and it develops like a chickpea (cicer) or a pouch (batecha), and it can be large or small.
And they are according to two types: either fatty; or containing moisture. Colors of moisture are many, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a Node, it is necessary that you examine it first and investigate it with the instrument called Probe, according to its form which will be found in the chapter following this.
The method of investigation for boils and all nodes is that you take this instrument, and insert it into the moist place which you find in the boil: and you rotate your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then, place your hand on it according to the measurement of the size of the boil.
Then remove the Probe and observe what comes out with its trace.
If moisture flows out running with any color, then cut it off by a superficial incision as I said in the other boils.
If no moisture flows out with the trace of the Probe, then you will know that it is fatty; cut off above it with an incision in the shape of a cross as I taught you: and peel the skin from all sides with ease: and protect the box if possible on top of it to draw out the healthy one along with the Node.
If the box bursts during the operation and it is not possible to draw out the healthy one, then remove it in pieces until there remains something from it.
For if a little or much remains from it, the Node returns most frequently.
If it overpowers you and a little remains from it: then fill the wound at its completion with some corrosive sharp powders: and tie the wound, and place hot on top of it where the boil sits and cure it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If therefore it is a large knot, then its two folds (or lips), and take care of it along with what surrounds it as it becomes inflamed.
If it is a pulsating vein or non-pulsating vein for you: then approach (the area), fill the place with linen cloth, and leave it compressed for two or three days until the wound rots and the boiling of blood subsides; afterwards return to cut what remains from the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
§ On the tools for cutting and piercing (incision and perforation).
There are forms of probes, and there are three kinds.
Among them is the large one, among them is the medium-sized one, and among them is the small one.
Let them be made of iron in a square shape at the ends properly, so that they can quickly enter into the cavity (or incision).
And these are the forms of probes, and noses (or perforating tools): one of them is called a beris, which means piercing; they are three kinds.
Among them is the large one, among them is the medium-sized one, and among them is the small one.
They come together to be inserted into cavities (or incisions), and for emptying out boils and fistulas, and abscesses that are between the bones.
And others are round, smooth, and flexible, such as the large needles that are used for sewing; they are made of citron (wood), or brass, iron, or silver.
The better ones are those which are made from citron (wood).
And probes are also made of black lead, which come together to be inserted into the concave part of the fistulas so that they can be reflected with their smoothness along with those reflections.
They are again three kinds. Because among them are long ones, medium ones, and short ones, according to the quantity of the fistula's or constriction's width.
The forms of veins, and there are many species.
Because among them are simple ones, that is, those with one opening; and there are three species as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And among them are blind veins; and there are three species.
And among them are veins having two openings; and there are three species of these: and among them are veins having three openings; and there are three species of these; and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the shapes of scalpels, with which knots and swellings are cut and scraped; and there are three species: because among them is large, medium, and small.
The extremities by which the section is made are sharp, other extremities are not sharp; and they are not placed thus except for assistance in scraping knots near fear of vein or nerve incision; and so that the weak may be healed by it, and find temporary relief from the heat as found during the scraping of swellings.
They are made of copper and are similar to a syringe with which alcohol is made; and at the wide end there is a hidden hole called Spatumilis; and it runs inside or outside as desired, as you see.
The form of the Spatumiliums hidden among the fingers for perforating swellings; and these are not taken by the sick; and there are three species, large, medium, and small.
The shapes of the Ventosarum with which blood flow is cut off; and there are three species, large, medium, and small.
Make round ones from copper or brass, slightly shorter in length as you see, and let them be delicate.
These (species of) ventosas should be large and small with you, so that you can cut blood quickly in case of need, and then when there is no medicine present for you.
However, do not use them (ventosas) for the cutting of blood in every part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places: such as arms (lacerti cruris), thighs (coxae), arms (lacerti brachiorum), breasts (mammillarum), abdomen (uentris), groin (inguinum), and similar (places) from fleshy parts, wet.
And sometimes they (ventosas) are made into small instruments similar to the fists of boxers, according to their shape, with which blood is cut when it flows from the site of phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery; and sometimes they are made round in this shape.
Chapter XLVII. (47)
Chapter on the care of human breasts, which resemble the breasts of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell during sleep (that is, when they begin to become dirty in sleep), until they resemble the breasts of women and remain as foul wounds.
Whoever dislikes this (condition), let him cut the breasts with a lunar incision, according to this shape from line 'a' to line 'b', and then scrape off all the fat 'g'. Then fill the wound with a healing ointment. Then gather two lips of the wound with suture and take care of it until it heals.
If the breast has descended towards the lower part and softened due to its size, as happens with women; then it is necessary to open it in two upper sections like a lunar incision, each of which contains the other at their ends so that the larger line encloses the smaller, according to this shape from line 'a' to line 'b', and then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what has been said about suture and powders necessary for healing until it heals.
If however you do not close the incision as required because of the restlessness of the sick, or because of bleeding: then it is necessary that you fill the wound with a linen bandage soaked in a corrosive ointment, and leave it until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then care for it until it heals.
On the Perforation of an Aboarted Boil, which happens under the armpit.
Chapter XLVIII.
These aborted boils which occur under the armpit are of the type of cysts that contain coagula, and among them are those containing liquids.
Those which contain liquids should be opened by a lunar incision according to this form, from line b to line g. When everything within the abscess has been evacuated through draining, then fill it with an old linen cloth and leave it until the next day.
Then remove the linen cloth, and treat it with a suitable ointment until it heals.
If the abscess is of the type of knotty cysts, then cut it open as we said regarding incision on cysts equally.
If the wound extends so as to emit pus, then administer cautery to it, according to what we said regarding cautery in the preceding section.
Chapter XLIX.
On incision of an abscess which occurs due to an artery and vein.
When an artery bursts and the skin above it thickens, there often results an abscess; similarly, a vein can also break, causing an abscess and swelling to occur in it.
And the signs by which an abscess and swelling are recognized as being due to an artery or vein are: because when the abscess is due to an artery, it is long and aggregated in the depth of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, it feels like a grating sensation.
That which is for the Vein, is round in the evident body.
And the incision above this abscess is an error, and particularly so when it is under armpits, groins, neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very large. Therefore, care with the iron should be avoided from it, and what is also on its extremities, or in the head, should be avoided.
Therefore, over that which is due to the swelling of the artery opening, find an incision in the skin in length. Then open the incision with scissors, afterwards the artery; and free it from tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert the point beneath it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, according to what I taught you regarding the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place which is between two ligaments with a lancet until all the blood that is in it flows out, and the abscess is solved.
Then administer a treatment that generates pus until the ligaments fall; afterwards take care of it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the abscess is due to a vein incision, then you must hold with your hand what you can from the abscess with the skin. Then insert the point beneath the place you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread in it until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess with a good ligament; according to what I told you regarding a vein ligament, from two parts with two ends of the thread.
If you fear that the thread will be drawn out, then insert another point with another thread under the entire abscess near the incision; press and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut the aphthmoma (boil or abscess) in the middle of it, until what is inside comes out; then cut off the excess skin and release what is bound from it.
Then place upon it the louse which you have submerged in wine and oil. Then administer the treatment, which is made with linseed and ointments, until it heals.
Title: Chapter L.
Chapter on an aphthmoma (boil or abscess) that occurs from twisting of the nerves.
As an aphthmoma (boil or abscess) occurs in the artery and vein, similarly it occurs in nerves; this occurs by blow or excessive labor, and similar causes; and it happens most often in places of joints, such as the heel or any place where joints move; and the aphthmoma is severe.
It resembles the color of the rest of the body and is in several dispositions without pain; and when it is tightly pressed with great force, it feels weak, like numbness.
And the aphthmoma is not aggregated in the deep parts of the body, rather it is under the skin; and itself moves to all parts, and does not go to the front or anterior areas, nor to the rear or posterior areas.
What is present in the joints, therefore, should not be penetrated with iron. Perhaps it will occur that constriction (occurs).
In that which is present in the head or forehead, incise the skin with a lancet. If therefore the aphthmoma is small, then hold it with forceps and cut it off from its root.
If it is large, then suspend it with a hook and scrape it; then remove it, and make an ulcer with suture; and treat it until it heals.
De sectione apostematis, quod accidit
On the section of an abscess, which occurs in the belly.
Chapter LXI.
The root of them is subtle, and their head is coarse, and their lips are turned back. And there is something small among them, and there is something that is greatly magnified among them.
And I myself have seen a man, and within his belly there were two growths which resembled other fungi more than usual: they were not distinguished by any whiteness or small root; their lips turned back and closed up, and moisture ran out of them constantly.
I therefore cut them, and found that one weighed about 8 and 8 ounces, and the other about 6 ounces. The operation in cutting them is as follows: you should consider whether the person is weak and moist, and the growth is white, soft, with a subtle root: then you should cut it with a broad spatula, and have cauteries ready for use in your presence.
For many times blood is often expelled during the cutting of it: therefore be careful if you are overpowered by the blood, then cauterize it.
If you see a weak person who is afraid and timid about the cutting with iron, then take a well-made lead thread and bind it around the growth; the method for this is as we have said, and release it after two days.
Then add in the narrowing of the lead. Therefore do not cease to bind the lead around the growth as long as it presses against the growth until it is separated and falls off without effort.
If the growth has a thick root, then there is some fear and trembling in cutting it out; this is especially so when it is in the belly.
Nevertheless, it is possible to cut through the middle of it. Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then take care of it until the wound heals.
Beware not to incise a thelil (gland) of dark color, few senses, foul appearance; for it is a cancerous aposteme; and I will be with you in the remembrance of Cancer after this.
Chapter LII.
On the care of umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia occurs for many reasons. Or it arises from fissures (of the abdomen) that are above the belly; and (the hernia) comes out of it either an althub (intestine), or the intestines, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or it arises from blood that flows out of a vein, or an artery, according to what was stated before. Or it arises from a distended belly (obstruction) in it.
If, however, it is due to a fissure (of the abdomen) and an outlet for urine; then its color is similar to that of an aposteme; it is loose, without pain; and it appears in various positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position is, with what we have mentioned, of more violent diversity. When you press it with your fingers, it is hidden; then it returns and perhaps there is a sound; and it expands greatly at the entrance of the bath, and the pain is intense.
But if it is due to moisture, then it is flaccid; therefore, when you press it with your hand, it does not hide, nor does it tighten up, nor does it swell.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs appears an abscess darkening from the hernia.
But if it is due to a born flesh: then the abscess is heavy, large, hard, and punctured according to its size.
If it is due to windiness, then when touched it is flaccid.
And the operation on it is to consider then whether the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or vein, or windiness; then it is necessary to forbid its treatment. For in it there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I said that abscesses due to an artery and a vein.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to intestine, or hernia: then it is necessary to command the weak one, that he holds his breath and stands stretched out. Then mark with the brand around the entire navel. Then command him to lie on his back between your hands. Then surround with a broad band around the navel over the place which you have branded with fire. Then extend the middle of the abscess to above with a large hook. Then bind him around tightly with thread or cord from strong silk; and the knot of the ligament should be loosened.
Then open the extended middle part of the abscess above the ligament. If you find it (the foreign body) already caught by the ligament: then extract the cauterized one, and insert your finger into it, and push the intestine towards the inner part of the abdomen; if you find a stone, then take it with a hook, and cut off its superfluous part.
If, however, an artery or vein is encountered, then surround it much. Then return to your surgery (procedure). And take two needles and insert strong threads into them; and insert the needles into the stitch you made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you make pass through.
Then suture the abscess in four places with the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles and leave a gap until the rotten flesh extends itself and falls off on its own; or cut it when it becomes soft and rots.
Then take care of it with whatever is appropriate from the unguents until it heals.
If the projection of the navel is from the raw flesh or moisture in it, then it must be hollowed out, as we have said. And you extract blood or moisture that you find in it.
Then take care of it to heal the place.
Title LIII.
Chapter on the treatment of cancer.
We have already said about the species of Cancer in division, and how to cure it with medicines: and it should be avoided when curing it with iron, so as not to ulcerate: and we have said that Cancer is generated in the matrix, and warned against cauterization of its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes Cancer is in a place where its removal is possible; such as Cancer in breasts or hips, and similar limbs, to be removed completely: especially when it is just beginning small.
But when it becomes ancient, and is large, it should not be approached.
For I was not able to heal anyone from that; nor did I see anyone before me who succeeded in reaching it.
And the operation on it, when located as we said, is to precede and release a weak person from black cholera several times. Then, if you find phlebotomy itself with obvious congestion.
Then prepare the weak one with a preparation in which the operation is to be performed.
Then thrust the awls that fit into Cancer. Then hollow out Cancer from all sides with skin, according to the examination, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, rather press out the places, and remove all thick blood with your hand, or as possible there with instruments.
If on the other hand, a flow of thick blood from an incision in the artery or vein opposes you; then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then cure Cancer with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
[Chapter] On the care of Hydrophobia.
Chapter LIV. We now describe the division of Hydropisis species, and how water accumulation occurs; and all signs of each species, and its cure along with the medicines.
And that which is cured with iron, is only the species of asclitis; it does not approach with iron the species of timpanitis; nor deeply with the species of hyposarcae; for it is deadly.
When you have been treated for this species of Hydropisis with medicines and the treatment did not help: then consider it. For if the patient has already come to weakness or there is another illness with it besides Hydropisis, such as a cough, or diarrhea, and similar ones: then beware of treating him with iron; for it is dangerous.
But if you see a patient who is overflowing with strength and there is no other illness with it besides Hydropisis alone, and he is neither a child nor an old man: then the method of operation in him is that you lift up the patient standing between your hands, and the servant following behind him presses his abdomen with his hand to drive water towards the lower part of the chest.
Then take a pointed spatula, in this shape. Let it have two sharp parts, long, and pointed ends like a spatula. However, there should be something of shortness in it, so that you do not penetrate it during the operation up to the intestine and injure him.
Then consider it. For if the generation of Hydropisis is from the intestines, then it is necessary to extend with a section from the navel by the length of three fingers downwards over the chest.
But if the generation of Hydropisis is due to liver illness: then let your incision be on the left from the navel by three fingers.
If its generation is due to the spleen, then let the incision be on the right side: and it is not necessary that there should also be an incision on the side towards which the sick person is to lie, so that superfluidities do not run to that weak place.
Then pierce the skin with an instrument entirely. Then insert into that incision and separate your hand with a probe between the skin, and ligature, as if you were coring it; let the quantity that is being cored be of the size of a fingernail or approximately that.
Then bore the ligature (sifac), until the probe reaches an empty place; and that is a watery place. Then remove it (the spleen), and insert an instrument into the opening, of which this is its form. It is similar to a cannula; it is made of silver, brass or copper, linen, cleaned; at the lower part of it is a small opening, and on its sides there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other; and the end of it is slit, in the manner of an incision of a reed, as you see; at the upper end of it is a string.
For when the instrument reaches water, then it immediately descends upon the instrument, therefore evacuate from the water a half measure.
Since if you evacuate more than is necessary from it, perhaps the sick person may die from loss of his animal spirit; or he may experience a syncope that approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to its strength and according to the signs that indicate to you the dispositions of the sick person from the force of his pulse, and from the quality of it (the spleen).
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
That is because it (the water) is retained immediately because of the skin which retains the opening that is on the ligature; about this I told you to bore it in that manner.
Then repeat the operation on the second day, if you see the patient can bear it: and extract even a small quantity from water.
Repeat that procedure on several days without fear, and be careful to avoid error: until there remains only a small amount in water.
If you fear for the patient and let out a large amount from water: then care for him with warm sand, much sweating in a bath and sun, and watch for thirst; and care for him with drying medicines until he is cured: and cauterize over the stomach, spleen and liver, after the extraction of water: as I narrated in what preceded.
Chapter on the care of infants born in places where their bladder are not pierced.
Chapter LV. (Chapter fifty-fifth.)
When any infant comes out from his mother's womb and the head is not pierced with a lamb's bone, or the opening is narrowed or in an incorrect position.
Therefore, it is necessary to perforate it immediately upon birth with a thin spatula of Subtilis, according to this form.
Then put a fine nail of lead in the opening and tie it; hold it for three or four days.
When he wants to urinate, remove it and mix with it. Then return it.
And if you do not put lead, it is now possible that the urine flowing over the place does not allow it to close.
That one whose opening is narrowed is treated with lead, as we said, for many days until it is enlarged.
Those in whom the opening is in an incorrect position are injured. Because from those who are born, the opening is at the end of the spine: hence it cannot urinate towards the front until it raises the spine with its own hand towards higher parts. The generation is not in it, because the seed cannot reach the matrix according to rightness; and it is a very foul disease.
And the method of operation in him is, that the sick one lies on his back. Then extend the head of his penis with your left hand by a strong extension, and cut off the head of the penis' rod from its place at the priapus, with the point or the sharp spine; like cutting a reed or like you root something out, so that the middle comes similar to the head of the penis; and so that it falls through the hole in the middle as needed.
And beware of yourself during your operation from bleeding. For this often happens. Therefore, oppose to him with it what cuts blood, and take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter on Albather that happen on the foreskin and head of the penis, and decay, blackening, and sticking.
Chapter 66.
These Albather often happen in the penis, and it is a protuberance of foul flesh.
And from this one is malignant, and the other is not malignant.
Therefore, it is necessary to hang the non-malignant one with a fine hook and cut it off until you clean it all. Then put on it a shallow container immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of him afterwards with dyafinicon ointment until he heals.
If the Albather is malignant and of a foul color, then it is necessary to administer cautery after its incision and its reason.
If, however, the Albather is in the foreskin that has not been circumcised, and there is a part of the Albather inside and a part outside; then it is necessary to remove the Albather that is inside first, until it consolidates; then take care of him outside; because when you care for it simultaneously, the foreskin will not heal unless it swells.
And even occur in testicles, and darkening and corruption of the foreskin. Therefore, it is necessary that you hollow out everything that has become darkened, and what is about to be corrupted, or already corrupted.
Then apply a line over it after that with honey that has been beaten up with flour of quince, and sieved herbs of miller's straw.
Then take care of it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
If there should be bleeding, then apply cautery with lunar cautery in this form.
For cautery is useful for two conditions at the same time, namely for bleeding and a wound when it is corrupted.
If the head of the arrow is corrupted and destroyed completely within an hour: then it is necessary that you insert a cannula made of lead into the urethra, so that the sick one urinates over it.
In the case of an adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the arrow, and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is healthy and circumcision is not required on it: and sometimes adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess: therefore, it is necessary to remove it with a Spatulili obtuse until the ligament is loosened and the head of the arrow is released from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish it with great precision, then it is necessary to remove something from the head of the arrow and from the foreskin. Because the foreskin, when it is thin, is perhaps quickly perforated due to its thinness.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the arrow with a thin linen cloth that has been made in cold water, so that they do not adhere again.
Then it shall be treated with sticky wine until it hardens.
Chapter LVII.
On the purification of infants and treatment for error occurring to them.
Circumcision is not a solution to continuity, as with other wounds: however, since it is from our operation, by our will, and its use is specifically for boys, it is necessary that we mark in it a better procedure, and a lighter way leading to health.
I say therefore, that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their books: since they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
It is because I found the majority of artificers and phlebotomists to use purification by circumcision with a knife and with scissors: they use algued, ligature with thread, and incision with the nail.
And I have indeed tested all these methods, and did not find a better purification with scissors, and ligature with thread.
Since in circumcision with the knife, the skin often escapes. Since the foreskin has two skin layers: perhaps the upper skin is cut, and the lower layer is torn: it is therefore necessary to make another incision in order to cut the other one, and pain will result. And with the purification that is done by the algued, that is, the digital method, which tailors use, is not cut at the extremity of the masculine member: since perhaps it enters its opening.
However, in circumcision with the nail, perhaps iron slips out and spoils your operation: and indeed the skin of a boy is short by nature, and often they are born like that, not needing purification: and I have already seen this.
The purification with scissors and ligature with thread has shown to be a good experiment for me: because the blades are proportional to the incision: therefore, the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. When therefore you press your hand, two sharp edges correspond and cut according to one operation at the same time; a compression of similar shape is made, containing the skin of the staff from all sides, with which no error whatsoever can fall.
And the method of your operation is that you should make him examine, primarily a boy who understands something, if he is from those who understand briefly, which you do not do unless you tie the thread on his own staff only; and then you will release it for another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy in every way possible from you because he receives understanding of himself. Then make him stand between your prepared hands with the stature and let him not be seated; and hidden scissors in your hand or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand to his staff, and blow on the skin, and draw it upwards until the head of the staff comes out. Then cleanse it from this because dirt has gathered in it.
Then tie the marked place with a double thread. Then tie below it a little ligament at the same time. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligament in a good grip, and cut between two ligaments. Then peel the skin quickly upwards and take out the head of the staff. Then let the blood flow slowly (it is better) and put powder on top; and above the powder, a cloth in which the boiled lamb's fat has been spread with fresh rose oil; and let him be on it until another day; and take care of him with the rest of the treatment, until he is healed.
The form of the scissors for cleansing is as follows.
The two extremities are blunt, and they are incised: let not the branch of the nail go forth into them: and let the length of the two points be equal to the length of two handles equally.
The falling error in excision is because perhaps the entire inner skin escapes, or a part of it at the incision point.
Therefore, it is necessary to stretch it out from your side with your nail before the excision of the location, and cut it evenly.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with a tweezers and cut it.
If three days have passed and what is under the abscess remains inflated, excise it: then leave it until the abscess settles down and becomes warm, and peel off the scab easily and cut it as prepared for you: be careful not to cut the base of the abscess. For it will not harm him that.
Take care of that with him as it consolidates the wound with the powders we mentioned in the chapter on powders: and if it is cut deeper than the measure and reaches the superficial layers, it will not harm him even then.
Take care of that with him until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
Chapter on the extraction of a retained bladder in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder, occurs due to a blockage made from stone, frozen blood, pus, flesh born, and similar things from what we mentioned under methods of treatment in division.
If urine is not resolved and you see that its retention is due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary for him who is ill to be bent over his knees. Then place his feet on top of his back, and let him stretch out his abdomen from the upper part of his back, and he should compress his breath as much as possible for him. Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is compressed towards the back, the stone in the bladder is expelled; thus, urine is released.
If it is not resolved with what has been said and the patient is strong on the sick man: then it is necessary to administer extraction of it with an instrument called syringe, whose form is like this Sit from silver, and be subtle, flexible, concave as a feather quill in subtleness of radius, long in the likeness of one and a half palms: to which a small-bore tube should be attached at its head.
And the method of urine exit through it is to take a double thread, tie at its end wool or cotton, good binding: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe; and cut with scissors if there is any excess from the wool, but introduce into the tube with force, like squeezing.
Then grease the syringe with oil or butter, and lard, and egg white: let the sick man sit on a chair, and anoint the bladder, and his penis with moist oils, olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the vein with ease, until it reaches the root of the vein.
Then fold it twice above the navel.
Then push the syringe inside it until it reaches the bladder, and feel that it has already reached the empty space: this is not done according to this order unless because the channel through which it goes is where there is a twisting.
Then extend the thread slowly with wool. For it follows wool (as in the direction of).
Then pull it out and make the vein run through the urine way: and repeat the syringe, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied, and the weak person finds relief.
Chapter on the quality of clysters for the bladder with a clepsydras (water clock).
Chapter LIX (99 in Roman numerals).
When there is an ulcer or blood congeals or pus collects in the bladder and it desires to discharge waters and medications into it: then it should be done with an instrument called a clepsydras, and this is its form.
It is indeed deaf (or closed). And in it there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other side, as you see.
And the hollow place where that which pushes it is located should be of such a size that it can hold it without addition until when it is pulled out with something from the humidities it is attracted: and when it is pushed, with it it is expelled to a great distance: this is how a clepsydras works, by throwing naphta (or Greek fire) in the war of Mars.
Therefore when the desire is to throw the waters into the bladder, insert the end of the clepsydras into the water and pull it out with that which pushes it towards the upper parts: for the water is drawn into the hollow of the clepsydras.
Then insert its end into a rod, as we previously described in a syringe. Then push the moisture with it, because that moisture immediately reaches the bladder, so that it feels weak.
Make a thin suppository for bladder cleansing.
Make it from silver or gold: its head should be like a calk (a hollow cylinder) with a small hole in it, and under the hole there should be a space for the string to pass through.
Then take the bladder of a ram and place the moisture in it, which you wish to use for bladder cleansing. Then tie it with a strong ligature between two spaces using double thread, and heat the moisture slightly over fire.
Then insert the end of the suppository into a rod, then press your hand on the bladder with the moisture and tight stringer until it feels weak, because that moisture has already reached the bladder.
If the bladder is not present for you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it completely from its entire roundness. Then insert the thread forcefully into those holes as they are turned. Then roll up the circle like a scroll; when you put into it what you wish from the moistures, oils, and waters.
Then bind it with the tool; and do with it as you did with the bladder by pressure with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Chapter on stone extraction.
We have said about the division of a Stone's species, and its treatment with medicines; we have mentioned the difference between a Stone generated in kidneys, bladder, and signs of its entirety; we have said about a Stone operated upon by hand and section; it is a stone generated in the bladder properly speaking; it is that which forms in the urinary canal; I am telling this with a clear explanation and abbreviation.
A stone generated in the bladder most often happens to children.
And among its signs is that urine leaves the bladder like water in its subtlety; and there appears within it white sand, and a weak man rubs his urinary canal, and labors with it, and often hangs down. Then it rises up, and is expelled together with it in many of them (the cases).
The healing of children is easy as long as they do not reach the age of fourteen. It is difficult in old people. However, it is moderate in young men, because it is between that (difficult and easy); for the one whose stone is larger, healing is easier; but if it is small, the cure is more difficult.
When we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the sick person with an enema, which will remove all the feces that are in his intestines; indeed, at times it prevents the discovery of a stone during examination.
Then the sick person should be received with his feet, shaken and moved to the lower part; so that the stone descends to the depth of the bladder or rises from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands which are under his buttocks; so that the bladder becomes entirely empty towards lower parts.
Then examine (him) and touch him from outside.
If therefore you feel a stone [in your body], then hasten immediately with incision upon it.
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must lay the index finger of the left hand on it, if the patient is weak; or the middle finger if he is a full grown man; and introduce it into its [the stone's] own anus, and inquire about the stone, until it comes under your finger; and turn it gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger, and push it towards the outside against the place of section which you wish; and command the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and command another servant to extend the testicles of the right hand upwards; and let one servant remove the skin that is below the testicles in the part from the place where the incision is.
Then introduce the Spatula incising, whose shape is this [as depicted]. And find it which is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, on the left side of the natal opening; and let the incision be upon the stone, and your finger be in the anus; and let the incision be transverse, so that the incision be broad externally and narrow internally, according to as much as the exit of the stone from it is possible, not larger.
For perhaps the finger which is in the anus presses the stone at the incision, and exits without difficulty.
And know that from the stone are its angles and edges, wherefore the exit of it is difficult because of that [fact].
And it is smooth and round like a grape, and its exit is easy.
To him who has angles and edges, add [to the incision] in the fissure.
If it does not exit thus, then you must bore upon it; or you shall bind it with a well-placed ligature whose end is as the Moon, which binds above the stone and does not slip off from it; or you shall introduce beneath it a sharp instrument, curved at its end.
If however you cannot extend it over [him], then enlarge the opening slightly. If something from his blood beats you back, cut it off with the saw.
But if the stone is larger than one, then push the large one into the bladder first. Then cut upon it. Then push a smaller one after that; and do the same if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then ignorance is to cut through it with a great incision. Because it happens to the weak one of two things, either that he dies, or there is a continuous flow of urine; therefore because the place does not solidify at all.
But administer its expulsion, until it comes out; or force its fracture with forceps, until you extract it piece by piece.
When you have thus completed your operation, then fill the wound with turpentine, aloe, and dragon's blood; tie it up, and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose-oil, and cold water; so that an abscess may be seated warm.
Then turn the weak one on his back onto his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. When you release it [the wound], moisten the place with oil and much water.
Then treat it with diaphinicon ointment, and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
If an abscess hot and corrosive is added to the wound, and similar things; as if blood congeals in the bladder, and urine is prevented from it; and this is recognized by the outflow of blood with urine. Then insert your finger into the wound, and draw out the blood. If it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and apply any remedy suitable for its cure until it heals.
Moreover, during the entire period of treatment, it is necessary to bind two thighs together and press them, for the cause of the medicines placed on the spot.
If the stone is small and is in the neck of the bladder and causes obstruction to urine flow, then treat it with what I mentioned earlier before resorting to cutting. For many times you will be excused from the cutting in this treatment, since I have already proved that.
Also take the Perforatorium from iron altar, whose shape is triangular at the end and sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread, tie it to the penis under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the penis with ease until the Perforatorium reaches the stone; and rotate the Perforatorium by hand in the stone gradually; you will force the perforation of it until it pierces through from the other side.
Therefore, urine is expelled immediately.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outside part of the penis. It breaks and comes out with the urine, and heals the sick one.
If this treatment is not prepared for you due to some reason that prevents it; then tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Then cut across the stone on the penis between the two bindings. Then remove it (the stone). Afterwards, untie the binding and clean the congealed blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread under the stone, unless to prevent its return to the bladder: and another thread on top, unless when the thread is loosened after the stone's exit, the skin returns to its place, and seals the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you, when tying the upper thread, to raise the skin towards above, so that it returns at the completion and seals the wound, as we said.
Chapter LXI.
On the Extraction of Stones in Women.
The Stone is less generated in women.
If however it happens to any of them that a stone occurs, then the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden on account of many conditions.
One of these is: that the woman perhaps is a virgin.
And secondly, because you cannot find a woman who will expose herself to the doctor when she is chaste or married.
Thirdly, because you cannot find a woman well skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And fourthly, the distance from the place of the stone: why it requires deep incision, and there is fear in this.
If necessity compels to this, then it is necessary that you take a skilled woman; and one is hardly found.
If you lack this, then seek a chaste doctor, subtle and present obstetrician well-learned in women's matters, or a woman who is knowledgeable about this art: make her present, and especially tell her to do everything that you instruct her regarding the examination of the stone.
Firstly, to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary that you insert your finger into her anus and search for the stone.
If he finds it, then twist it with his finger and then tell the obstetrician to insert her finger into the weak vulva and examine the stone, after she places her left hand on the bladder and compresses it with good pressure.
If therefore a stone is found, then it is necessary that it be slowly moved from the opening of the bladder towards the lower parts with great care until it reaches the root of the hip with it.
Then it is to be cut above it at the opposite middle of the wound near the root of the hip, from whatever side it is prepared for him, and he feels the stone in that place; and his finger should not be removed from the stone, bent under it; and let the cut be small at first. Then a probe is inserted into that incision.
Then a probe is inserted into that incision. If he feels the stone, then add to the incision according to the size proportional to which the stone exits from there.
And know that there are many types of stones. For these reasons it is small, and large, smooth or rough, long, or round having branches.
Know its type so that it may be shown to you about the one that you wish.
If blood conquers you, then add in the place a burnt charcoal and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out; and make sure that you prepare yourself with the tools which I have said for the removal of stones in men, so as to assist you in your operation.
If the flow of blood conquers you and you know that the bleeding is from an artery that was cut; then place flour on the place and bind it with a fitting ligature; do not move that; and leave the stone alone, and do not remove it. Perhaps a weak woman may die. Then take care of the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood subsides after days and the place becomes corrupt, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
De modo in quo super herniam aquosam scindendum
On the incision of a hydrocele (hernia).
A hydrocele is not a tumor, but an accumulation of moisture inside the albovaginal (albocoelom) sac that contains the testicle and egg: and it is called the albovoaginal sac.
And sometimes it is within its own pannicle (fat) that nature has prepared for it near the testicle until it seems like an egg; and this is another egg, and it is between the albovaginal sac and the testicular skin which we mentioned earlier: and this does not occur frequently.
And indeed, the production of this growth is due to weakness that occurs in testicles; therefore, this material flows out into them. Sometimes it arises from a blow to the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. For its color is often sloping towards yellow, or it is reddish, or dark, or watery white, and this is the most common.
And the signs by which it can be known where the accumulation of moisture is, are these. For if it is in the albovaginal sac that we mentioned earlier, then it is an abscess round and somewhat larger than the shape of an egg; and the testicle cannot be seen because moisture keeps it contained from all sides.
And if the moisture is within its own pannicle (fat), then it is an abscess round with a part of the egg; and therefore man is troubled because it seems like another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the albovaginal sac, then it falls under suspicion.
When you desire to test the color of the moisture, then probe the color of the moisture in an abscess with a square probe, whose shape has been described earlier. Therefore, according to what comes out in the track of the probe, judge about that which is between it.
When we therefore come for treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you command the sick person, if possible for him, to be bled and see his body full.
Then he shall lie on his back upon a high place slightly, and put many cloths beneath him.
Then you sit on his left side, and command the attendant to sit at his right, who shall extend his arm to one of two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the flank of the abdomen.
Then take a broad lancet and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length, up to near the comb; and make the incision according to the straight line dividing the skin of the testicles, until reaching the white fat enclosing it; and scrape it off and observe it, or be careful not to sever it; and let your scraping be from the part that hangs more with the egg; and examine subtly with the scraping according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then pierce the white fat full of water through a wide perforation and extract all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with scissors and extend the white fat towards the top, and do not touch the skin of the testicles enclosing it; and cut the white fat in any way that is possible for you to cut it, either completely or piecemeal, especially the subtle side. For if you do not examine and scrutinize, there is no certainty that water will not return in the incision.
If however an egg appears externally from its skin during your operation; then when you complete the incision of the white fat, bring it back. Then join together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with suture.
Then take care of him as the other wounds, until he is healed.
If you find an egg corrupted by other blackness, then it is necessary to tie vessels that are suspension-related, fearing bleeding.
Then remove the testicle with its suspension, and extract the egg; afterwards take care of it as I said.
If water is gathered in two parts, then know that there are two branches; cut off the other part equally as you did on the other one.
And if it seems to you that the operation should be one, then do so; afterwards remove blood. Insert a thread submerged in oil or pink oil, and place another thread outside that was soaked in wine and oil; spread it over both testicles, inspect the intestines; place double cloths on top, which are called puluilli; tie them with a ligament that has six knots according to this shape.
Then take two cloths and wash them, fill them with carminated cotton according to this shape; make the ends which are pressed with wool or wet thread; attach them with a strap at the hips; one end should reach from anus to the back, and the second from the neck part; the two ends below should be attached to both thighs, and the other two ends to both groins; attach the whole strap at the hips.
Sometimes this branch is artificially treated with a cautery in place of the section with iron; you should take a subtle cautery knife and cut through the testicle skin with it; it should be lit as we described earlier until white albumen containing water appears; then take the cautery according to this shape.
Compared to Greek letters.
Then pierce it with that and burn it until all moisture comes out.
Then extend the sifac with forceps, and scrape it with a subtle cautery heated, and cut it as much as possible for you, until you remove the entire thing.
And be careful not to touch the egg, lest fire should do harm to it.
Know that this operation is safer and more distant from bleeding, and better than the operation with incision.
If, however, the operation opposes you at the time of incision, or at the time of cauterization an abscess is heated, or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary that you take care of what opposes you from that with a cure suitable for it, according to what has been mentioned above.
If, however, the patient is feeble and fearful, and does not await this operation on account of its horror: then administer a lancing according to what I have told you; and there it is.
When it is confirmed to you by what we have said about the meanings that it is a watery branch: then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then lance the abscess on its lower part with a wide cupping glass; and place the lancing along the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until all the water flows out.
Then place a warm cloth over the spot, and bind it, and allow it to flow out the remaining water; then take care of it until the wound heals.
If, however, an obstacle is present to the outflow of water at the time you lance it; and this is not because a white cloth opposes the opening of the wound and prevents the outflow of water: then it is necessary to introduce a feather or an instrument with which water is extracted from hydropic swellings, whose shape has been mentioned earlier; or add in the operation of the wound a small amount.
And know that water returns and accumulates after six months, or approximately that period. When it accumulates, then it is to be pounded in the same way and the sick days will pass through.
Chapter Sixty-third.
Chapter on the treatment of fleshy roots.
Know that in the incision upon this root [Rhizoma], there is danger of slipping into destruction in many positions. Therefore it seems to me that its abandonment [of the incision] would be beneficial.
And I am recalling the operation in it and the appearance of the cauterizations.
Therefore I say that many cauterizations occur in bodies from which testicles are composed; this happens for various reasons such as.
Or from an excess of acute or sharp fluid that flows towards the testicles. Or from a blow [causing an injury].
And the color of the cauterization corresponds to the color of the body and no pain is found; it is a grave cauterization.
Perhaps it is a stone-like cauterization, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
Sometimes it occurs from a swelling of the arteries and their inflation; as I have already reminded you before; or from the inflation of veins.
What is known from these as being due to an inflation of the arteries, is recognized by the disposition of the cauterization, when you compress it with your fingers. And one should not touch it completely [throughout].
However, that which occurs from the inflation of veins is not dispersed by compression with the fingers.
And now it is possible that an incision can be made upon this appearance and upon the remaining flesh; and it is that the skin of the testicles is to be incised. Then stretch the egg upward and extract it along with a white silken thread; free the suspender from the water and tie the vessels; and incise the suspender after you have released it from all parts of the egg.
If therefore an egg is hardened with those born flesh, then it is necessary that you pull out the egg, and cut it.
And if there is an attachment between something from the siphunculus, or within a vessel: then it is necessary that you release the entire attachment, and cut it with a round incision.
If however there is the growth of flesh at a place of attachment which is behind: then it is necessary that you cut the whole of it, and pull out the egg, as we said.
When therefore your operation is finished, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; afterwards care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
Chapter LXIII.
Chapter on the Care of Twigs, which is with Vines.
A tumor is enclosed by a certain enclosure resembling a bunch of grapes when the testicles are softened; and it becomes difficult for weak movement and exercise, and walking.
And in the treatment of this disease is fear due to the memory of what preceded it.
But it is necessary that we say the operation in it according to what the first ones did.
Therefore I say that you must make the weak sit on an elevated chair. Then push the suspenders of the testicles downward. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with the vessels that are near the thigh; and let another servant hold it and stretch it with a forceful extension.
Then cut with a broad, sharp crosswise section towards the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape off from every side, as we said to you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then tie a thread with a double point on it and bind it at the first places where vines appear; and bind it again at the last of them. Then cut it straight through the middle section according to the length of the body, and remove what accumulates from foul, corrupted moistures.
Take care of the wound along with the other wounds where pus is generated, so that the vessels which nourish one testicle fall out. It is not bad by that means.
If it happens that the vine grows on all the vessels, then they must be removed for this reason: so that the testicles are not deprived of nourishment by the incision, and it rots or burns and is no help to them.
Chapter LXV.
Chapter on the treatment of intestines.
The outlet of this intestine is from the incision which happens in the siphon stretched over the abdomen in the inguinal part of the stomach.
Because the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either in the siphon or its extension.
These two types of ruptures occur for various reasons: either by striking, jumping, shouting, lifting heavy objects or similar causes.
And the sign is when it is from the extension of the siphon. It happens gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly; it is an abscess equal to the turned-over deep [intestine]; because the siphon presses on the intestine.
And the sign of this [type of rupture] is when it is from a section of the siphon, because it causes intense pain from the beginning suddenly; it is an abscess different, appearing under the skin close by; and that is due to the outlet of the intestine and its course to the exterior of the siphon.
And sometimes it comes out with the intestine called "zirbum"; and this is called an intestinal ramus and "zirbia", and sometimes it occurs with ventosity (inflammation of the abdomen).
And sometimes fecal matter runs into the intestine and is retained there; it brings with it danger to the sick, because it causes pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this disease by iron there is fear; therefore care must be taken to avoid accident in it.
The method of operation is that you order the sick person to bring his intestine back with his own hand to the inner concavity of himself, if he obeys the return. Then he lies on his back on his neck between your hands; and elevate his legs.
Then stretch the skin that follows the skin towards the upper part and cut the skin of the testicles completely along the length. Then fix two hooks on the edges of the cut, according to what you need to open the cut with them; and the incision should be according to the amount that it is possible for an egg to come out from it.
Then scrape the sheep's bladder, and what is beneath the skin of the testicles until the albumen of the sheep's bladder becomes hard on all sides; then insert your thumb into the part that follows the testicle, into the part that is between the albumen of the sheep's bladder, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the folds, and without any adherence to it in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move with the right hand to the inner skin of the testicles and at the same time stretch the sheep's bladder albumen upward with the left hand; and lift the egg along with the albumen to the part of the incision, and command the attendant to stretch the egg upward; and you loosen the adherence that is behind the complete solution.
And examine with your fingers if there is nothing there from the intestine rolled up in hard albumen of the sheep's bladder. If you find something from it: then push it into the lower abdomen.
Then take the point, in which there is a thick thread made from linen of ten threads, and insert it at the last layer, that is, the tunica, which follows the skin of the testicles: then cut the ends that project from the thread until there are four threads. Then compose some of them on top of others in the shape of a cross and tie it with alsifach, which we mentioned earlier, as it is the strong ligament under the skin of the testicles: until no waste that nourishes them can send anything to them; so that a hot abscess does not occur there. And place the ligament again beyond the first ligament, at least two fingers away from it. And after these two ligaments, release from the alsifach, which is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity equal to the size of a finger: and cut the rest entirely in the round shape, and remove the egg.
Then cut the skin of the lower part of the testicles with a cut, from which blood and pus flows, as we said in that which was mentioned before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil and place it in the wound: and apply the ligament which we mentioned. And sometimes the alsifach is burned white, which we said, after its incision, fearing a flow of blood. Often this happens. And release the ligament until it falls by itself.
If the case persists, then fumigate with hot water: and place on it what we said until it falls.
Then take care of the wound with the rest of the treatment for wounds, until it is healed.
Head LXVI.
On swollen anus.
In this swollen anus, I have not seen anyone who dared to treat it with iron.
And first they said that it happens as we mentioned in the swollen anus that is accompanied by piles. What should be done is to tie the containers after cutting it below easily; then cut in the middle, and treat it later with what opens it itself, until the containers fall out; and treat the wound, as we said, until it heals.
Head LXVII.
On the rupture that occurs in the groins.
When rupture occurs in the groins, as we have said, and a place protrudes out, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles; and if it does descend, it is little and returns in all hours; but if this persists for a long time, a fissure is added in the scrotum until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And this happens due to extension of the scrotum, as we have said in the groins. Because the scrotum extends; then it is softened, and the place is pushed out.
And its treatment is with cautery, as we have previously said about it.
Sometimes it is treated with iron, according to this method: and it is to lie weak on his back between your hands. Then cut the place of rupture and protrusion, with a cut across its width, according to the length of three fingers.
Then tie up the scrotum and what is beneath the skin, until the white part of the scrotum, which is beneath the skin following it, is exposed.
Then take the cautery and place it on the protruding part of the scrotum and press it deeply into the abdomen.
Then sew together two protuberances on the end of the radius from the shaft, and then extract the extremity of the radius.
And do not cut the shaft at all, nor draw out the yolk, nor anything else, as I told you in the treatment of the intestinal branch.
Then treat that with a wound cure. When you cut the threads, clean it and restore the wound until it heals.
For sifach contracts and does not add to a rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to safety.
Chapter LXXVIII.
Chapter on the softening of the scrotal skin.
The scrotal skin is often softened in some men, because the flesh between it becomes soft and its appearance becomes foul.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who asks to be treated for it, that he makes the affected one lie on his back and cuts through all the softened skin to the normal skin.
Then sew together the two flaps with a suture: and if you wish, or rather, trim away the excess softened skin with three stitches, or four, and make a firm stitch.
Then cut in between the stitches.
Then treat with wound cure the other wounds until they heal and the threads fall out.
Chapter LXXIX.
Chapter on castration.
You know that castration is prohibited by our law, and therefore it would be permissible for me not to mention it in this book; but since there are two methods, it is necessary for me to remember it.
One of these is that it should be in the knowledge of the physician when asked about it: and that he knows the treatment for it which happens to him.
Another method is that we often need to castrate certain animals for our benefit through it, such as sheep, goats, and cats, and similar ones among animals.
Therefore, I say that castration is done in two ways. Or by attrition. Or by a cut and division.
In that which is done by attrition, the method of operation is as follows: that we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and become limp, and then hang it; afterwards, rub them with your hand until they dissolve and no longer appear under touch.
In the castration by a cut and division, it is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensorium, and cut above all the egg with a single section until when two eggs come out: then cut that after you have scoured both, and do not leave anything over it except a small amount of thin sifaket on the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by attrition because attrition possibly leaves something from the testicles, for which the animal desires coitus.
Then take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
Paragraph on the cure of a Hermaphroditus in two ways.
A Hermaphroditus is from men according to two ways. One of them is because there is a space or gap, or in the skin of the testicles, between the two testicles, which has the shape of a female vulva, in which there are hairs; and sometimes urine runs out from that which is in the skin of the testicles.
In women there is one kind and it is the woman's vulva on top of the crest like small testicles of a man, projecting to the outside; of which one is like Priapus in a man, and two like two testicles.
And the treatment of the three kinds, two from men and one from women, is as follows: Because it is necessary to cut into the added flesh until the impression disappears. Then treat them with the care of other wounds.
In the second kind for men from which urine originates, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment at all.
Chapter LXXI.
Chapter on the incision of tentigines and projecting flesh in the vulvas of women.
A tentigo is possibly added over a natural thing until it becomes disfigured and its appearance becomes disgusting: and sometimes it is enlarged to such an extent in certain women that it expands like in men, and reaches copulation.
Therefore, one must hold the excess of tentigo with the hand or with a hook and cut it: and not cut to the extreme, especially in deep roots, so that bleeding does not occur.
Then take care of the wound itself until it heals.
But the flesh that arises is the flesh born in the orifice of the matrix until it fills it: and perhaps it comes out to the exterior like the tail; and for this reason some call the disease caudated. Therefore, one must cut it as one cuts tentigo and treat it until it heals.
Chapter on the treatment of a woman's alratch, which is not perforated.
Chapter LXXII.
The alratch is the swelling of a woman's unperforated vulva or a small opening. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is when it results from an illness that has come before: and it itself is made either of flesh born added, or of sifach subtile, or spisso; and it is made either deep in the matrix, or in its sides, or on top of it, or below it: and it prevents coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps menstruation.
The recognition of this is made through the examination of an obstetrician if the opening appears to be nearby.
If it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers or with a rod.
If the opening is from sifach subtile and is near to two lips: then pull it and tear it apart.
And it is to place two lentils on top of the lips.
Then place your fingers of both hands together, and let the woman be on her back with her legs spread open. Then stretch out the two lips forcefully until the cervix is torn (or ruptured) slightly, and the opening is exposed.
Then take some wool and soak it in oil, and place it on the spot. Let the woman do this every day to prevent it from becoming sealed (or congealed) with something else.
If the cervix is thick or large, then it is necessary to remove it with a wide-blade spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
If the opening is of flesh origin, then hang it with hooks and cut it; have medicines on hand that stop blood flow without causing pain, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and wax mixed with cow's milk fat.
Then apply a wide cannula made of lead to prevent the wound from healing quickly, hold it for several days; then apply linen cloth, and treat the rest with the usual remedies until it heals.
And sometimes there is a birth of flesh other than the baby from the womb; it is necessary to cut them in this manner: do not let it become an abscess (or cancerous), as cutting a cancerous abscess in the womb will create an absolute contradiction with iron.
Chapter LXXIII (73).
Chapter on Hemorrhoids, by Athehelil and Bothor concerning women's ulcers.
Hemorrhoids are the openings of veins from which blood constantly flows in large amounts.
When hemorrhoids have been prolonged, they become thrombus; I have already said about their types and signs in the previous section, and here I will mention what is cured by them and what is not.
I say, therefore, that hemorrhoids which are in the vaginal opening and are not perceived by touch: then there is no cure with iron for it.
But those which are above the vaginal opening, concerning which sensation falls, are those which can be cured.
Therefore, it is necessary that you enter the woman into a cold house. Then stretch the anus with forceps or with rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle powder on them near the flow of blood from one cut without biting: like ashes of acom, dragon's blood, and frankincense, and similar to these.
Then press his feet against the wall for an hour. Then lay her down in cold water.
If the bleeding continues: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and the bark of pomegranates, and gall nuts, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and knead it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on his back.
If the blood is cut off with it, it is good: and if not, let adhesive winds and breasts, without scarification.
Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of thistle, or the juice of argus, or the juice of the leaves of alumroot, that is, agalantha, wine of Pontus, and let it stick to syrup.
When the abscess has ceased, then care for the place with ointments until it heals.
But Albath is red and resembles the head of an onion, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut what appears from it, according to what I said about thalil equally: and care for it until it heals.
De Perforatione Matricis et Ovarii, cum haec operatio
On perforation occurring in the womb (womb = uterus).
On perforation of the womb (uterus) and ovary: There are many kinds of ulcers that can happen in the womb, such as cancer, stone-like abscesses, sores, abulleti, alekilati (herpes), fistulas, hemorrhoids, ragadiae, and apostema calidum.
And I have indeed said all these diseases and their kinds, and the signs of each one, and their treatments, in division: it is necessary that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess that occurs in the matrix, when it is one of the abscesses that collect pus, and to know how its opening with iron is done.
Therefore, you should consider. (This is a translation of a later part of the sentence.) Then if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with striking, and burning, and fever; and you see it redden; if it falls upon the sense, then do not pierce it with perforation; and heal it with what helps for maturation, until when the acuteness of the occurrences subsides.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a chair with two arms, and recline, or lean against her back, and put her feet to the lower part of the belly; and her hips should be spread out, and she puts her arms under her knees, and binds both with a suitable ligament to that.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and administer the instrument for opening the matrix's orifice.
And it is necessary that when you are to administer this instrument, you fashion the point of the probe deep into the woman's matrix: so that what goes in from the instrument is not more than the depth of the matrix, and harms the weak.
If it is an instrument more than the depth of the matrix, then it is necessary that you place feathers on top of the deep part of the matrix: to prevent the whole instrument from entering into the depth of the matrix; and it is necessary that you place a twisting thread, which runs in the instrument, on the upper side; and to hold the instrument, and to turn the twisting thread by an assistant, until the deep part of the matrix is opened.
When therefore it appears to be cut out and is touched with the hand, and it is soft and tender, then it is necessary that you separate it from its head using a broad spatula.
When therefore pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you place a linen cloth dipped in rose oil on the wound, or green oil with some styptic substance; and place the linen cloth, and remove the incision in depth of the matrix.
And put on the outside over the matrix and on top of the comb, a clean wool dipped in water in which figs have been boiled.
Then it is to be treated with an ointment suitable for that purpose for two days until it heals.
And sometimes the matrix and wound are washed so that they are cleansed with water and honey; then with water in which the root of the garlic or long aristolochia has been boiled; then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden internally in the matrix, then it is necessary to prevent treatment with iron; instead cure it with what was said before for incisions.
Chapter LXXXV.
Instructions on obstetrics: how to treat living fetuses which have been born abnormally in shape.
It is necessary for an obstetrician to first know the shape of a normal birth.
Therefore the signs of this are that when you see a woman being pressed towards the lower parts, and she longs for air, and there is urging on her in childbirth, and the fetus eagerly desires to come out; then you will know that this birth is according to the natural shape, and it comes out at the head of its own and second one along with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press the womb in order that the fetus comes out quickly.
When it descends upon his head, the second one also descends with it, and it is to be cleaned from those superfluities with good cleansing.
But that which is beyond this delivery, is unnatural, inadmissible.
For sometimes the fetus emerges over its feet and the body of it comes out before its head and its feet and one hand, or one foot alone: or its head and one hand emerge: or the belly emerges, and perhaps it turns on its neck, and similar unadmissible figures.
Therefore it is necessary for the Midwife to be wise, skilful in all these matters, and to guard himself from error and deception; and I am showing every figure of them, and how the intelligence is in it, and it is indicated by that, and it will stand over him.
When the fetus emerges over its head in a natural delivery and becomes strong against the woman, and the delivery becomes difficult to her, and you see her virtue already weakened; then make her sit on a seat or women hold her: and warm her vagina with fennugreek water boiled and with moist oils.
Then the midwife introduces a small spatula between her fingers, and she splits the second one with it, and cuts it with her nail until what is in it from moisture runs out; and presses the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then it is necessary to enema the woman with fennugreek mucilage, with sesame oil.
Then command her after the enema to be pressed: and make her sneeze with pepper and hold her nose and mouth for an hour. For the fetus will come out immediately.
If two hands of the fetus emerge first, it is necessary to pull them back gently and gradually. If it does not yield upon entrance (of the fetus), then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet upward; then strike the seat on the ground; and hold the woman, so that she does not fall during the striking.
If the hands do not emerge and the fetus dies, then cut them off and extract the remaining fetus; tie his hand with cloth and extract him equally; for he will come out himself.
The exit of the embryo is over the feet. When the fetus emerges over his feet, then it is necessary to push them upward; then turn the fetus gradually; afterwards equalize him.
Then take one of his feet and stretch it out gradually.
When they come out up to the hips, then order him (the fetus) to be pressed and make her sneeze with the help of incense; for he will come out if God wishes it.
And if he does not come out as we have said, then pull the fetus back gradually until you place him in the natural position. For he will then come out with an easy birth.
If it is forbidden as we have said (to extract the fetus): then take some latex of aloe, and sesame oil, and dissolved gum; and grind all of them well with a good pestle; then apply linseed with it to the woman's womb, and below her intestines. Then make her sit in warm water until she is about to give birth.
When you see that her lower parts are now warm, then give her (to sniff) some myrrh and place it under her nose. When the hour has passed, then make her sit on a seat. Then make it sneeze: and tie its own mouth and nose: and press the lower part of the abdomen with easy compression. The feces will exit immediately.
Exit of the fetus above the knees and hands. When it exits in this manner, then insert your hand gradually. Then the woman will lie down on her neck, and let her feet hang towards the bottom: and she herself should be lying on the bed, and clasp her hands together. Then press above its abdomen gradually. Then extract what is under her feet from the anus, until it is prepared below. If the fetus does not come out, then take its feet and move them with strong movement. Then press what is above the pubis gradually, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then insert your hand and press the fetus gradually: and tell the woman to compress herself until the fetus comes out.
The exit of the fetus hanging laterally from the hands. Insert your hand for the reduction of its hand. If it cannot be reduced [the fetus], then lift the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed: and strike its legs with strong shock.
Then administer the ointment which you have prepared from mucilages.
If she takes it as childbirth, then make her sit on a seat. Then strive for the reduction of its hand, and press the fetus according to its natural shape: and make the woman sneeze, and tell her to compress herself until it comes out.
The exit of the fetus on its neck, with its hands spread apart, and its face towards the back of its mother. The obstetrician should hold the fetus and then gradually turn it with ease.
When it is turned equally, then place oil and mucilage upon the area mentioned earlier.
Then command him to move slowly. When you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and command her to lean towards the right side. Then command him to compress (it) and make her sneeze with powder.
The preparation of the fetus is for the side. When the second stage (of labor) descends to the mother's opening in this manner with the childbirth pouch, then cut open the childbirth pouch with your nail until it is evacuated by moisture.
If the fetus and its neck are hanging over the face, then cut it from the navel so that it is not retained and will die.
Then push the fetus towards the inside until you place it as needed; and command the woman to compress herself several times; for it will come out easily through the birth passage.
The delivery of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins often give birth and sometimes triplets and even quadruplets. However, such a thing is foreign and rarely occurs.
Five are indeed outside nature and do not live long; they are contained by the afterbirth though they multiply, for the afterbirth envelops them all at their navel; and they are separated by a siphac, distinguishing between them that is tied to each one's umbilicus.
And sometimes they come out just like a single fetus through the natural easy birth passage, and they come out in an unnatural way as we have described earlier.
If some of them have difficulties during childbirth and reach what we have described in the unnatural figures, then care for them as we have described; and let the midwife be skilled, and do what she does with ease and slowness, and adapt herself to every figure with the one that is prepared for her by her skill leading towards salvation.
Recollection of that which forms in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven and more than ten forms in the womb: and it has been verified by me that a woman has expelled seven, another fifteen, all formed.
That which was done by measurement of the wise man.
Therefore, this entire matter must be in the knowledge of the obstetrician. Perhaps it may come to a similar one of his: therefore, let him oppose it with what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you take care of a dead fetus along with what I said in the division of medicine and it does not come out, and you will have to operate with your hand, then you must consider.
If the woman is healthy and not with any accident from which it is feared that death may occur to her: then she must lie down on a bed on her back, and her head should be inclined downwards, and her legs raised: and a servant should hold her from both sides, or tie her to the bed, so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
Then the mouth of the womb should be moistened with olive oil mixed with gum arabic and fenugreek seeds and flax seed.
Then the obstetrician will wet his hand with these oils and gums: then he should insert it easily into the womb. Then he should ask where to place hooks on the fetus and where they are suitable for that.
Therefore consider then if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its head: then fix hooks in its eyes, or its neck, or its mouth, or its palate, or under its beard, or in its armpits, or near its ribs and under its hips.
If it is a descent below his feet, then incise on his chest, and in the middle of his ribs.
And it is necessary that he hold the hook with his right hand: and place his wound in that which is between the fingers of his left hand: and insert with his hand easily, and fix the hook in one of those places that we have said, until he reaches empty space.
Then fix another hook or third one, if necessary: so that the contraction is equal, and it does not lean to one side.
Then stretch with an equal extension, and let the extension not be only in a straight line, but move it to all sides, so that the outlet is relieved: as when using a tooth for its extraction.
It is necessary that between them there is softening of the extension. If a part is held back from it, then it is necessary that the midwife puts some fingers with oil and insert them on the side to turn what is held back along with them.
If then a part of the fetus is coming out, then the hooks are changed to another higher place: do this until the whole fetus comes out.
If then a hand is coming out before the others, and it cannot be returned because of its bending: then a cloth should be wound around it. Then pull it out completely until when the whole one comes out, cut it at the junction of the foot or the elbow: and so you must do with the other hand, and in both feet.
If the fetal head is large, or there is bending at its exit, or water has accumulated in its head: then it is necessary to insert a pointed spatula between the fingers and break the head with it, and pull out the water: or tear it apart with the instrument called Almisdac; whose shape comes after the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter following this.
Similarly, make an incision if the fetus is of large head nature, then it is necessary to separate the amniotic membrane: or pull him out with forceps, as we said. Then draw the bones with forceps.
If the head comes out and becomes stuck at the neck, then it is split open until the moisture that is in the chest is released.
If [the fetus] does not become entangled, nor yields to delivery: then make a shallow cut in the head as much as is possible for you.
If there is a protrusion lower in the abdomen or it has hydropsis: then it must be pierced until the moisture runs out of it.
If [the fetus] is above its feet, then pulling it out will be easy and directing it towards the maternal bone will be simple.
If it becomes stuck in the abdomen or chest: then it must be pulled out with a cloth you have wrapped around your hand, and the abdomen or chest should be opened until whatever is inside runs out.
If the remaining limbs are taken away and the head returns: then the midwife shall insert her left hand. If the maternal bone is open, then insert your hand deep into the womb and feel for the head with it and pull it out with your fingers up to the maternal bone: then insert a hook or hooks and pull it out with them.
If the maternal bone is stuck because of a hot abscess that has happened to it: then one should not exert pressure on it, rather one must administer a flow of liquid medicine and ointment, and sit in baths that soften and moisten.
If [the fetus] is on its side, it can be leveled out: then administer what was said for a living fetus.
If it is not possible to do that, then it should be cut piecemeal and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything inside the second part at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we said regarding the treatment of hot tumors that occur in the womb.
If there is bleeding, it should descend into warm waters of stiptics, and administer the remaining treatment.
I myself have seen a woman, whose womb contained a dead fetus; then she became pregnant again over the same one, after which another dead fetus also occurred. Therefore, after a long time an abscess occurred on her navel, which swelled until it was opened, and began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called for the treatment of this woman, and I treated her for a long time; but the wound did not heal.
I therefore placed on it some strong adhesives; and the bone came out from its place. Then a few days passed, and another bone came out. I was therefore amazed that there was no bone in her womb.
Therefore, since the fetuses were from bones.
I therefore cut the wound and extracted many bones when the woman was in good health; and she lived in such a way for a long time, and emitted little pus from its place.
I did not strengthen this foreign substance here, unless because there is knowledge and aid for it from the physician-artist when treating.
Chapter LXXVII.
Chapter on the forms of necessary instruments for extracting a fetus.
The form of the Spiral which opens the matrix.
Here below is the form of a Pincer, to which books are equal, having two equal spirals at the ends of two pieces of wood. Moreover, this Spiral should be finer than the Pincer: and it is made so, either from Ebony or from Boxwood.
And the width of all the wood is like two fingers: and the edge of each one is like a single finger, and the length of each is a palm (and half): and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additions of the same kind of wood, which have already been strengthened in both, whose length is half a palm and less: and the width of each is like two fingers or less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the matrix (to open it when you rotate the two Spirals).
Another form similar to this, finer and lighter.
Make it from Ebony or Boxwood, according to the likeness of the Pincers. Nevertheless, at the end of it there should be two additions as you see here above: and the length of each addition is a palm: and the width of each is like two fingers.
When you want to open the matrix with it, then have a woman sit on the bed, with her feet hanging down, with that which is between her thighs opened. Then insert these two additions connected together into the matrix: and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her hips. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with the Pincers, equally according to the amount you want by opening the mouth of the matrix, until the Midwife does what she wants.
Form of Dizziness Other Than That Which the Ancients Called Form of the Pushed Fetus.
The Form that breaks the large head: it resembles a pair of forceps, having teeth at its end, as you see.
And sometimes it becomes sloping, like forceps according to this form, as you see, having teeth like those of a saw, with which it cuts and crushes.
The Form having one spike.
The Form having two spikes.
The form of Spatulum (spoon-like instrument) having two ends for separating the head.
The form of two wide spatulas (spoon-like instruments).
These instruments are exercised, and the more numerous their kinds, and the more prepared they are by the craftsman, the quicker they are for the operation, and higher in the eyes of men, due to their quantity.
Therefore, do not despise any instrument from among them, but prepare it for yourself. Indeed, the necessity of them is unavoidable.
Chapter 78.
Chapter on the second extraction (cesarean section).
When the second (fetus) is retained during childbirth, then you must command the weak, to retain their breath. Then make her sneeze with a pinch and press your hand on her mouth and her own nose. If it then exits through this (incision), that is good.
If not: then take a pot and pierce a hole in the covering (of the incision), and put in them (herbs) opening the womb, such as camomile, root of rutabaga, fennel, chamomile, cassia wood, centaury. Take all these herbs or some of them, submerge them in water, and place them on fire.
Then place an embolus of reed upon the opening of the copotorium pot's hole, and another end into the bone of the matrix; hold it until the vapor reaches the concavity of the matrix.
Then make it sneeze, as we said. For secundina will come out easily.
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then command the midwife to immerse her hand in sesame oil or marshmallow (althea mucilage). Then insert into the vagina and search for the Secundina with it. When you find it (Secundina), then receive it and gradually stretch it out.
If it (Secundina) is attached deep within the matrix, then insert your hand as we said, until you find Secundina and pull it out gradually in a straight direction so that the matrix does not fall down due to strong attraction; indeed, it must be gently moved sideways right and left: then more should be added to counteract the attraction. It (Secundina) will then obey, and it is saved, and it goes out from the adhesion.
If the bone of the matrix is contracted as we have already said: treat it with sneezing and from the treatment of the pot with herbs.
If it (Secundina) does not come out with everything we said: then beware not to tire yourself by repeatedly trying the extraction.
But it must be bound to the woman's hip as it comes out from the bone of the matrix. Then cleanse her with the ointment called tetrapharmacon. For it (Secundina) will rot her after days and dissolve and go out.
But when it rots, the foul smell rises to the stomach and head and harms the weak. Therefore, it is necessary to administer suitable fumigations for that purpose.
Some of the ancients have already found out that fumigation with nasturtium and dried figs is effective.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate a woman during retention of second stage labor and menstruation.
Make it similar to an alcamea or a ceramic vessel, and let the broad end be over the fire; fumigation should be placed on plums (or prunes); hold it until the fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another one.
Chapter LXXIX.
Chapter on the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born, and the ani of theirs are not perforated, which the sifac subtle already has circumcised. Therefore, the midwife should perforate it (the circumcised boy) with her finger: and if not, she should perforate him with a sharp spatulum: and be careful not to touch the foreskin.
Then place over it (the circumcised boy) a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil. Then take care of him with ointments until he is healed.
If you are afraid that it may become infected, then put a leaden cannula into the opening and remove it when the boy wants to urinate.
And now it happens that circumcision of the anus also occurs from the hardening of the wound or abscess. Therefore, it must be cut away (the hardened tissue), then treated with what I said before using lead.
Chapter 80.
Chapter on the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower parts are Nodatio and Grossitudo that happen near the anus outside: or in the space of one part: and it is a Fistula one, or more than one.
Since the old Nodatio (abscess) opens up, watery white fluid or subtle pus flows out from it.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate through. Therefore, when the fistula is penetrating, it is recognized by what comes out during the discharge and windiness, when a person uses laxative; perhaps a worm might come out from them.
And there are fistulas when they are in the space that penetrates up to the bladder and up to the scrotum of the penis. And there are fistulas that penetrate up to the junction of the hip, and up to the sacrum.
From this it is known that the penetrating fistula up to the anus can also be recognized by inserting your index finger into the anus; and inserting a probe (slender instrument) into the fistula from outside (air or iron), when there is no twisting (tortuosity).
If there is twisting (tortuosity) in it, then insert a slender probe made of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it deeply and nothing comes out of the discharge from the opening, or there is no windiness, or worms as I mentioned; then you will know that it is not penetrating, so proceed to treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urine scrotum, its sign is the outflow of urine from it; and the prevention of this is that the location should be sealed with medicines.
If it penetrates to the junction of the hip or to the pelvis bone, then its sign is that a probe reaches there if there is no twisting up to the bone; and pain at the site, and pus always flows from it, and medication does not help in it, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
In these fistulas that penetrates, there is no cure at all; and the cure of them is pain and futility for him, upon whom it is formed by foolish physicians.
But the one that does not penetrate, and is not old, hopes for healing with a lancet: according to what I tell you, and I have already proven; and it is that he lies sick among your hands upon his back; and you raise his legs up to his hips, and his hips are inclined toward the belly of himself. Then insert a lead or air if there is twisting in the fistula, until you know where the probe has arrived.
If the sick person feels it around the anus, then it is necessary that you insert your finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe already penetrating by itself what has been detected with your finger, and between your finger and the anus or flesh; then certainly you know that it is penetrating; therefore do not labor on it, because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
They say that flesh heals in some people and the remedy by which they hope for help is to cauterize with a subtle iron, according to the size of the fistula, as has been said before, and then insert it into the fire, until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that twice, or thrice, until you know that all the added fleshes that have been filtered and are similar to the reed of a bird's feather, are burned.
Then care for that with linen wrapped in butter until the burned flesh comes out; then care for it with ointments that make and strengthen the flesh.
If it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it will never be cured with any other treatment.
If it goes out and does not reach your finger that is in the anus, and there is a thick membrane from flesh or sifac between the two; and you see a Fistula on what follows the skin surface, then cut the skin from the beginning of the Fistula, and you go cutting with the tenta (probe) what is in the fistula until the incision reaches the end of the tenta, and the tenta is released and falls.
Then clean those fleshy parts resembling the feathers of a bird's quill, so that there is nothing left from them.
If blood overwhelms you and loosens between yourself and the procedure so that these fleshy parts separate, then it is better and quicker to aid, to cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine.
Because cautery with fire brings good habits, burning of these fleshy parts added, and removal of blood, and drying of moisture.
Then treat that with linen wrapped in butter or boiled cabbages until the place emits pus, and those burned fleshy parts go into the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments that produce hard flesh; there are medicines in which there is styptic and drying.
For when they are restored, then it will be cured; do not fear the repetition.
If the fistula has already reached the depth of the anus and is stretched from the body's excess: then insert your finger into the anus, and feel with it.
If you therefore feel a membrane between yourself and it, which is from sifac or flesh, and it is near penetration: then there is no operation in that unless according to the way of trust and hope.
The substance is that it [the ulcer] is administered in one of three ways: either to cauterize it, as we have said; or to excise it, until you reach its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert a linen cloth and treatment from the adjacent area. And proceed not too much with the excision, so as not to cut into the skin containing the anus, and thus a harmful discharge occurs without consent. Then treat that [ulcer] with what I have said.
For perhaps it [the ulcer] will be cured: or remove the scab from it; and clean it after cutting it close to the anus, as we have said, or with a bag, or with some other sharp-tipped instrument. Then clean those fleshy parts filtered out during the incision, as far as you can with examination.
Then try the restoration of the whole wound with the incision and the upper opening where it is consolidated; and there remains an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be easier on the patient.
And sometimes a fistula is drained in this manner: and it is when you insert a bag into the fistula; and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and edge of the anus; then take a perforated-tip bag, which is like a needle, i.e., prepared from calfskin, in this shape. And insert into it [the fistula] a thread wound up from five threads and around that. Then insert the bag with the thread into the fistula, until you reach its concavity.
If it [the fistula] penetrates into the anus's margin internally, then extract the thread from that hole; so that you insert your finger into the anus and extract the end of the thread, and bind both ends together; and tie each one separately, and let it stay for one or two days; and the more the thread cuts into the flesh, tie it well, until those fleshy parts between the two ends of the thread fall off and disappear; then care for the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
If however the orifice of the Fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate in whatever way prepared for you, unless it is very deep. For you there is no need to do so, because not to cut the muscle itself.
Then perform as we have said, until it heals.
The form of a spiny spatula with which the Fistula is cut, whose sharpness is very acute on one side and the other side is not acute, so as not to cut what is not necessary, as you can see.
Chapter LXXXI.
On the suture of Hemorrhoids from which blood flows from their incision and care of fissures.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds. Or they are within the anus, similar to cherry-stones or raisins; or they seem to be like grains of wheat themselves. And some are small and large; and blood flows from them always, and there is one and many of them. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus, are for the most part moist, from which lemony water or a little blood flows continuously; and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of those that are within the anus is to command the patient to eat a laxative; and it is expressed until it appears through the anus, and the feces appear to you. Therefore also, tie them with tweezers; or hold them with your nails. Then cut them at their roots.
If they cannot be held in them with tweezers, due to their moisture and softening; then grasp them with a rough cloth or with a glove made of coarse wool, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them (the vessels), and sprinkle some warm powders over them after cutting for them to remain in the place of the cautery. Or cauterize them according to what has preceded in the chapter on cauterization. Then care for them with the rest of the treatment until they heal.
If the anus does not obey to the evacuation, then enema the sick person with a small purgative enema, so that it cleans what is in the anus, and let it obey to the evacuation quickly when the sick person evacuates.
If however they are foreign bodies outside the anus, then their matter is light, easy: and it is to be that you grasp them with your nail, or grasp them with a hook, and cut them. Then care for them as we have said, until they heal.
And whoever shrinks from cutting with iron, then it is necessary that you administer their suture in this way. Take thread wrapped around and insert it into the point (the wound). Then pull out the foreign bodies upward, and make it penetrate with the point into the root on the other side: and wrap the ends of the thread around the tip of the needle, and let them be wide: and sew the foreign bodies tightly with a strong stitch. Then tie the thread and pull out the needle.
Do this with all foreign bodies, and leave one of them: do not sew it, so that the excess blood may flow out from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch over the anus and put it on the anus: and order the sick person to rest. Then let him go until he falls asleep.
When foreign bodies fall out, care for them with ointments and the rest of the treatment, until they heal.
On the care of fissures. For they often occur due to drying out of feces and tightening of nature.
If they become old and medicine does not help: then it is necessary to shave them with a spatula or your nail until they become moist, and remove the upper bark which prevents their healing. Then care for them (the wounds) until they heal as required.
If they do not heal: then again treat them with a stronger solution than the first, until they bleed much, and then care for them until they are healed.
On the treatment of ulcers, both inverted (or round) and not inverted (or linear), and on scirrhus (or cancerous tumors) and Formicae (or ant-hills, a type of swelling).
Chapter LXXXII.
Know that Almirmar is not anything but a round node similar in color to the body, like a nail head; and it occurs throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers; and it happens that pain occurs during walking.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut what is around the nail, hold with forceps or with a hook, and uproot from its root.
Then care for that, and if you wish to cauterize it as previously mentioned in its chapter.
An ant-hill (scirrhus) from the dry part is a small elevation, rough, filtered, round on the surface of the body. And they often occur in the hands of children.
And its treatment is to stretch (the ant-hill), and cut it; or stitch it with silk thread; or with hair, until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine as previously mentioned; and now ant-hills (scirrhus) that are inverted and not inverted can be uprooted with the tool I will describe.
Formica is also a small, filtered elevation that is rough and deep-rooted; when cold is found on it, it feels like the bite of an ant; and it occurs throughout the body, but it is most often found in the hands.
The treatment is to take a cannula from the feather of a goose or strong vulture; and place it over the worm, until it contains a circle by its parts. Then turn your hand with the cannula until it withdraws what is around the worm; and you will place it in deep flesh, and you will pull out the worm by its root.
And if you wish, do this with an air or iron cannula, according to this shape.
Let the upper end of the cannula be pulled upwards, drawing the deaf and rolled one, so that it is released from its grasp and its reversal.
And if you wish to cauterize the worm as stated in the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on cautery.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Chapter on the shapes of instruments used for enemas in diseases of the anus, and the solution of the abdomen, and of the colon.
When an enema is made from silver, or brass, or copper fused, or beaten.
And sometimes it is made small, and large, according to those for whom it is administered.
Therefore that which is given for the cure of small children should be small; and for those with weak or painful anuses, so too should their enema.
Large enema.
The cannula of this, that is the upper part to which the uterus is tied, should be wide according to this method; and it should have a distinction so that the uterus can be tied as you see, and its lower end, which is introduced into the anus, should be deaf, that is not open, soft, very fine, pulling towards subtlety; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the size of the hole be according to the size of fingers, and it should not be too thick, and it should be a uterus in which the medicines are placed, which is from animal bladder; or from the skin of an egg, which should be similar in shape to that of a small onion; whose root should be one palm.
It should be pierced with many holes as it is rolled, and let the space between each hole be as thick as a finger. Then insert into it the thread, which is made of ten threads or approximately that, and bind it with a knot like an onion. When placed in it, the uterus should be tightened at the head by strong constriction with a purgative cord. Then purge it.
And this is the shape of the circle depicted here and the holes.
The quality of the purging with it is that you fill the uterus or bladder with a medicine which should be heated according to the tolerance of the sick person: and be careful not for it to be too hot or too cold.
Then the sick person lies on his back and raises his legs to higher positions: and place under him a cloth or skin on which people lie.
Then anoint the end of the purgative cord with oil, or with egg white, or with mucilage from fenugreek, or similar substances. Then insert it into the anus gently. Then receive the person holding the uterus with both hands and squeeze it vigorously until all that is in the purgative cord is expelled into the intestines.
Then remove the purgative cord, and the sick person raises his legs to a wall.
If the medicine forces him out, then hold as much as possible. And if he sleeps with her all night, it is more the last resort in treatment.
If you enema him in diseases of the belly with the solution, and he hastens its departure; then repeat the enema until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or sores in the anus, then let the enema be very subtle, soft, from enemas that children are given.
And this is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin is tightened.
Chapter 84.
I have said in the division on the treatment of wounds that it belongs to a book, and I will now say here the treatment of them with hands, and with medications according to completeness.
Therefore, wounds are distinguished according to the cause by which they occur, and according to the place on which the wound falls.
Therefore, as to the causes of wounds, they are like a blow from a stone; by cutting with a sword or knife; by thrusting with a spear, wood, or arrow; and similar things made of many other objects.
Wounds that occur according to the body's locations are, for example, a wound that falls on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, or back; and similar ones from those members.
And I am telling the treatment of some wounds, in order to set forth reasoning and rule for the rest of the wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, since the memory of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, (let us speak about) the treatment for simple head wounds If a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no bone fracture; consider then if it was caused by a blow from a stone or similar objects, and the skin has been broken but not deeply; and if the wound is large, and you fear that warm pus may develop; then proceed quickly and perform a phlebotomy of the head immediately, without delay; and extract from his blood according to its strength; if there is no prohibition against phlebotomy, particularly if the blood flowing from the wound is not much. And let phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part. Let the sick take care to abstain from overfilling himself, and from wine, and heavy foods.
If something forbids a decrease, then let it be decreased by food, not approaching meats or wine.
And place over the wound if it happens to him an abscess that is hot, hot broth infused in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is a styptic.
If you are free from a hot abscess, then place over the wound if it is recent with its own blood and has not changed the air around it; but if the air around it has already changed, then place some ointments on it until it heals.
If the wound is large or from a sword cut and similar: let not the lips of it be gathered together by small stitches; but rather gather them with suture as I will tell you about in wounds of the abdomen regarding their sutures.
If the wound has been found to be from bone and hangs, and there is no holding of it, except with a small sling: then cut it. Then care for the wound with medicines, and restore hard flesh to it where the skin is, and tell the sick to eat foods with thickness, such as heads and cooked wheat until it becomes soft; and similar things.
If you find corruption of the skin and it does not stick to the bone: then cut the corrupted part completely, and throw it away; then take care of that.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and it cannot be cut by medicines: then look for the artery above it. If you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula or bind it. If necessity compels and it does not meet what was said, then cauterize [the wound], until the blood is separated.
If these wounds are small and simple, the matter is easy and light: thus that powder should be sprinkled over them, because it consolidates them before they change to air.
Method of the Powder for Consolidation. Take one part of olibanum, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburnt lime: grind it all very well, sieve it: fill the wound with it and compress it well, until it adheres well to the top, and coagulate it with blood.
Then compress it on top with some powder, and let it be, do not loosen it until it remains, so that it does not come apart. For the medicine is not to be removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes lime alone does this, when you do not have olibanum and dragon's blood at hand, and it performs the same operation in many large wounds, when it is placed on them and compressed, and the wounds are recent with their own blood, which has not been altered by air.
If air has already altered it in some way, particularly when it is in the summertime, then this powder's purpose is not suitable: cure it with what was said, that is to say, place some digestive ointment on it, or place on it poultices made from barley flour, boiled with water and honey, until pus is emitted. Then cure the rest of it with the remaining treatment, until they are healed.
If it happens with a fractured wound in the bone, and it is small, then extract that with a probe, and I will now say the treatment for fractures of the skull, which will follow.
On wounds of the neck.
If a wound occurs on the neck, there is no difference in its treatment compared to a simple wound of the head.
If the nerve or artery of the neck is already cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no special skill in its treatment except to restrain its violent swelling as with scammony and helebore, and similar remedies. Since nerves are harmful and contract them.
And do not place anything cold at all over the wound: because the substance of nerves is cold and their continuation is with the brain, which is superior to the organs; let that which is used for treatment be made from soft medicines such as lime with sweet water infused several times with oil, or with rose oil, and turpentine, when it is washed even with sweet water; and other mineral stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then administer suture or raw linen strips with cotton wool. Then care for it until it heals.
If the wound is deep or a cavity forms at its lower part where pus has already gathered, then perforate it in a more depressed place.
If the artery is already cut in the wound and there is a flow of blood from it: then separate it or tie it off; or cauterize it if necessary.
If the windpipe (spondiles) is already perforated or completely severed and the patient has survived: then apply raw skin flaps with sutures over a reed for the throat, and do not touch the throat, but rather anoint it and reduce it to its natural shape. Then tie the wound with a suitable suture and let it heal for some days. Then treat the wound with ointments containing astringents and drying agents until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it; if there are fragments of bone within, remove all of them or as many as possible; and what cannot be prepared, let that alone until the wound decomposes, separates and the discharge subsides.
If the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder on it as I have mentioned earlier. If there appears to be bone in the wound and a fistula forms: then treat it as mentioned in its own chapter.
Chapter on wounds treated with spatulas.
If it is a wound from a lance or knife and you can see its depth, then examine it. If air is escaping from the wound when the person breathes weakly, then you know that the wound is mortal.
If there is no depth to the wound and it is recent with blood, then do not apply powder at first nor tie it up to prevent the blood from accumulating in its depth and causing death; but put on an attractive ointment and let it dissolve twice a day.
If you do not have ointment at hand, then place a piece of old cloth on the wound opening to dry what is coming out of it from moisture; and make the patient rest over the wound so that what accumulates in it may run off.
If three or more days have passed since the wound occurred and there is no spasm, no bad heart tremor, no shortness of breath, and the remaining signs are good, then you know that the wound is healed. Care for it (the patient) yourself and with liniments, and the rest of the treatment until it (the ailment) is healed.
If healing of it (the wound) has been cut off and an opening has now appeared, then you shall know that it has become a Fistula (an abnormal passageway between two organs or between the surface of the body and an organ). Treat it from its own place (the location where it is situated).
And if the wound is from sword or knife cut and it is simple on the surface of chest or back, then treat it with the procedure that has come before (which may be suturing or applying powder) depending on its size: either with suturing if large, or with powder if small.
If it has already made an impression on the bone and has cut out fragments from it: then examine the wound and hurry to extract those fragments if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them until the wound rots; for it is dangerous to extract them (the fragments).
As for other wounds occurring on the remaining limbs, judgment in their treatment is that which we have said (i.e., proper care and healing process).
Chapter on abdominal wounds and the outlet of the intestine, and their removal.
The rupture that occurs in the abdomen is great, medium, or small.
From a great rupture, sometimes the intestine or number of intestines comes out.
Therefore, insertion and suturing of them (the intestines) is necessary, and the suturing is more vigorous and difficult.
A small rupture is also difficult in another way. Therefore, it follows that the reduction of them (the intestines) is more difficult if you do not hurry in their insertion to their place; because it swells, opens, and becomes larger; which makes the insertion difficult.
Therefore, it is better to make a median dissection, because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in these two types.
Know that the suture of the vein is according to four modes.
Two common sutures meet in the suture of the abdomen, and in the suture of other wounds of the body: and two other sutures communicate specifically with the remaining wounds. However, they are more suitable for the suture of the abdomen: and I will tell you each one with its explanation and clarification.
Therefore, I say that when a wound is small and something comes out from the intestine, it is difficult to reduce it; then this is due to one of two modes. Or because of the smallness of the dissection, as we said before; or because there is inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
When it is like this, then it is necessary to heat that part, so that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in warm water only. Or cook in water soaked with squill, cumin, spike and myrrh, and the intestine until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes it does wine in which there is antsickness; and this is better than water alone in resolving the inflation.
When you see that the inflation has already been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which artemisia or mallow has been boiled. For this reason, it relieves the entrance of it with a small amount.
If, however, its return is expelled after this treatment, then seal the dissection with too little, with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared, than the section; and no pressure to cut should be forced after necessity and lack of instrument.
The part of it is twisted, sharp, and another part of it not sharp, and the tip should not be subtle like a needlepoint, but rather slightly blunt: and this resembles a cat-o'-nine-tails, as you see.
When the wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it should be reduced to its natural shape in its own place, if possible on top of it: since it is better.
But when the rupture is wide at the lower part of the abdomen: then one should make the patient lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen: then one should raise the patient's head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly, if there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the abdomen: then direct your attention and thought always to this, so that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other part.
And thus one must introduce this into large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds: place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make a devoted servant be present among your hands, who holds the entire rupture with his hand and presses the lips together. Then take from that which follows a thread for sewing, and this is the common method of sewing for one.
And it is to receive a needle or number of needles according to the width of the wound. Then from the end of the rupture take a quantity equal to a finger, that is, a physician's finger: and pierce the needle once through the skin at two ends, with two ends of the thread from underneath the skin on both sides until it passes through from the other side, and you have already pressed the edges of the skin together and the edges of the sifac: and four layers are formed.
Then sew with double thread around and insert a needle repeatedly from both sides until the two lips of the wound are properly gathered together by appropriate approximation.
Then release the thickness of the finger and insert another needle; next draw it straight with thread, as you did with the first needle. Therefore do not stop doing that with the necessary number of needles until you complete the entire closure of the wound.
Let the needles be of medium size, since thin needles penetrate the flesh quickly, and thick ones have a difficult entrance into the skin; therefore they should be medium-sized in both fineness and thickness.
Let the needle not be sharpened at both ends of the skin close together; in order that the flesh is not pierced quickly and the wound does not open before it has consolidated, nor do the sutures lengthen, thus preventing the wound from healing.
Then cut the end of the needle so as not to harm the weak while he is asleep; and put pieces of cloth on both sides that hold the ends of the needles, and leave them until you know that the wound has healed.
This kind of suture with such needles is more suitable for small wounds. Because it is sufficient to sew them with one or two needles, or about the same number.
The second kind of suture is common for gathering together the edges with sutures four: four skin edges and two fat layers in place of one, with a needle containing an equal amount of thread in both fineness and thickness.
Then when you penetrate with the needle these four edges, pull back the needle from the side where it entered so that the thread from above falls out of the wound; thus making the suture like a seam in cloth, and place between each stitch an amount of thickness equal to a finger's width.
Men know this stitch.
And with this stitch, I myself sewed the wound of a man in his belly, which had been wounded by a knife, and the wound was larger than one palm; and there had come out from the intestines about two palms from the middle intestine, and the rupture was in the middle of the abdomen.
I therefore brought it back after the intestine of his stayed outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound was consolidated in the space which had been about fifteen days; and I cured him, and he recovered; and he lived afterwards for many years, converted to his customs.
And physicians judged that it would not heal.
And it was a miracle that I did not cure it with an ointment. Because I was in a place where no ointment could be found nor anything from the drugs. I therefore put on the wound an old loaf of bread twice a day, and I washed it assiduously with water and honey until it healed.
I will tell of two kinds of stitches according to the account of speech.
And it is that you start with an acute stitch; and you insert the needle from the outside to the inside part.
When the needle goes through the skin and along the length and width of the whole body: release the end of the sinew at the side into which you inserted the needle, and let it penetrate to the end at the other side from the inside to the outside in the opposite side.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate in the same way at the same end but in the opposite side: and release the end of the sinew which is on that side, and let the needle penetrate to the end at the other side from the inside to the outside; and make it penetrate with your penetration, as you are making it penetrate into the end of the sinew, which is in that part, until it penetrates into him completely.
Then begin also from this same side, and remove it together with the extremity that is from the sifac on the other side, and extract the point that pierced through the skin.
Return it to the same skin, and remove it along with its extremity, which is on the other side of sifac, together with this extremity: extract it from the skin that is on the other side, and do so alternately, and in reverse order until you have removed all of it according to the example given.
And the sum of this suture is that you should sew the skin that encloses the skins, so that you sew together one edge of the skin with one extremity of the skin: and that you leave it on one side from the other, until you have completed it.
The second kind of surgery is the proprietary suture as Galen said.
This discourse is told to you in the manner of those who heal like this: that you bring together all parts to correspond with each other by nature; and apply the extremity of sifac to its other extremity, and the extremity of mirach to the other extremity of it. And this is done as I have told you.
It is necessary that you point the point to the extremity of mirach close to you from the outer part, and let it penetrate into the interior of it; and leave two extremities of sifac. Then turn the point, and let it penetrate from the outer part to the interior through both extremities of sifac, that is on each side.
Then turn both of them, and let both penetrate from the interior to the exterior through two extremities of mirach, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of surgery is better than the common and easy suture, and it is the suture which has been mentioned before.
This is thus the saying of Galen also.
And certain ones said. The stitching of the abdomen should be smoothed with two points. What is to be done is that you insert one thread into both: and begin with the introduction of the needle from the place that is with you, and make it pass through until the other side, according to the stitching of those who sew leather equally.
And know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the abdomen: then the stitching of it is more difficult than the rest of the places of the abdomen.
The judgment of the medicine for a wound is the judgment of other wounds.
What is to be done is that when you take a new wound with its blood before it changes with air, and reduce the intestines, and wash it, and fit it: then place it on top of powdered meat.
If air has already changed the wound: then place on it some ointments that are present with you, which make pus, and let them drop, and consolidate them with wax, and apply it. Then care for it thus as the care of other wounds, until it is healed.
If there are no medications present with you: then place on it immediately, when it begins to emit pus, old bread: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicine for multiple compositions, when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound communicates with the principal limbs in injury, then it is necessary that you immerse wool softened in warm oil or rose oil: and place it in the surrounding area of places that are between the groins and under the armpits.
If he feels pain or punctures or putrefaction in his intestines (for it often happens), then clisterize him with warm wine of pitch, black: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and an exit has been made penetrating into its concavity.
And know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal; and what is from the small intestines is more difficult to heal.
The intestine that is called Jejunum does not accept healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and the size of them, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
If what comes out from the wound is greenish and you seize it quickly: return it as you would return the intestines equally.
But if it has passed time and already become black or greenish: then you must tie it with thread above the place that has turned black from it, so that there is no bleeding. For in the greenish there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament and put two ends of hanging thread from the lower part of the wound outside it: to relieve you from the attraction of it and the extraction of the greenish at the place of the wound, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
Chapter on the wound that occurs in the intestine.
When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small: then it is possible for it to be restored in some men: therefore, because I have seen a man who was wounded in his stomach with the thrust of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old; and a fistula has been formed, and discharge and gas have come out from it.
I therefore gave treatment, until I was not confident in its healing; neither did I cease to examine it, until it was healed, and the place was consolidated.
Once I saw the place already consolidated, I feared an accident happening to the sick one in its belly; and no such accident happened to it from that source. And it remained in better conditions for itself, eating and drinking, urinating, and taking a bath, and exercised in its regimen.
And some of the experimenters said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied thus. And there is, to take large-headed ants. Then gather two lips of the wound, and place one ant with an open mouth on both lips of the wound. When the ant's head is upon them, and it closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it will stick, and will not be loosened.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease to make this with ants according to the size of the wound in total.
Then reduce it (the wound), and let it heal. For those heads remain attached in the intestine until it is eaten (the intestine), and healed, and no harm comes to the sick one deeply.
And it is now possible to tie the intestine even with a fine thread; this has been removed from the animal's intestine, attached with it when it is introduced into the needle.
And there is, to take the end of this thread from the intestine, and to be scraped off much. Then tie a fine linen thread at its end. Then introduce the thread into the needle, and let it with the thread go through the intestine. Then reduce it to dissection.
This method of suturing with worms and intestines is only by way of trust and hope.
Know that a large wound, broad, especially if it is one of the thin intestines: then skill is not ingenuity but subtlety, and there is no healing at all.
Chapter on the Care of Sores and Fistulas.
Know that every wound or boil, when it becomes old and decays, and turns into an ulcer and does not heal, and always discharges pus and does not abscess: then it is universally named in whatever member it is found a Fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
Indeed, a Fistula is correctly called a drained abscess, hard, white; without pain, having the shape of a bird's feather beak: and for that reason some call it Risatus, that is, beak-shaped.
And at times it is moist, which discharges pus. And perhaps the moisture is divided at certain times. And sometimes this moisture is abundant, and it is scarce; and it is thick, and it is thin.
And now I have already divided the wounds, when I said an ulcer that does not heal, does not produce new flesh in it, is not that except for one of nine causes.
Of which one is, either because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or because of its malice; or because hard flesh is between it and above its surface, preventing the growth of new flesh; or because there is much dirt and corruption; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter that is discharged from it is of poor quality; or because the treatment is unsuitable for its cure; or because falling decay in the region is a kind of plague, as happens in Caesaraugusta: where the digestion of diseases becomes difficult, and the healing of boils is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone, or a number of bones in it.
And now I have shown all these causes and their signs, and the cures for them with the medicines in the division; and here it is necessary that I make you know the cure for a Fistula (or Zuchemen), which is done by the way of operation with the hand.
Know, therefore, that a Fistula occurs in all members of the body. For these are Fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or tendons; or the intestine, or bladder, or some of the ribs; or some of the vertebrae in the back, or some of the joints composed of several bones, such as hands, feet: and there are those that approach the proximity of the main member and similar ones.
That which is this Fistula according to this manner, is difficult for healing, and does not receive treatment, and the occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If it is some of the Fistulas whose depth does not reach to those places that I mentioned and you hope and trust in its treatment, and wish to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe made of copper or iron, if the Fistula points in a straight direction, and search for it with the same.
If, however, there is a twist in the Fistula, then investigate it with a probe made of fine lead. Because lead, due to its softness, yields and bends around the twist.
If the Fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to sign upon it with a probe. Cauterize therefore, from among its openings, one opening.
Because the moisture with which you cauterize it, flows away towards other openings and runs out of them.
Then examine and inquire according to the manner that is possible for you: so that you know whether there is a bone or nerve, and the Fistula has a deep hollow, far away or near; or if it is a single Fistula with many openings, standing on all of it, with your utmost strength: with your questioning, which you ask of the sick person, and by feeling for pain in compression with your hand upon the place, and similar signs and causes of injury.
When therefore you have stood over all those matters in the correct position, then proceed to treatment according to confidence: and it is that you should consider then, if it is a Fistula nearby appearing, or in a safe place distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or an artery, or vein, or one of the places which I told you: then cut the Fistula according to what was stated in my narrative, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupted flesh, what is born in its opening from flesh or ulcer, and similar things: and take care of it until it heals.
If the Fistula is deep, and it is as stated: then it is necessary to cut it deeply as much as possible for you. Then clean it from all corrupted flesh of it.
Then administer a linen cloth dipped in sharp medicines: and insert it up to the hollow of the Fistula which you have grasped with iron: do this several times, until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the hollow of the Fistula due to corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh, until it heals.
If it does not heal through this, then cauterize it according to what was stated before.
If the cause of the Fistula is bone, and you are sure about it: then investigate it, and cut it according to what I told you: if it does not prohibit you from anything from a vein, or nerve, or major member, as was said before.
If a bone is exposed to you, and there is something corrupted and black in it: then file it until the corruption is completely removed. Then take care of it with that which causes it to heal, until it heals.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as it was doing: then you know, that you have not reached complete eradication of the corruption.
Excise it again on the second occasion, and investigate its cause and cleanse it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If then it heals, that is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not been able to reach. You have no skill in that matter, except to let it be by nature.
If a small bone is corrupted and it is possible for you, pull it out with delicate forceps that fit the case.
If there are many bones, then investigate how to pull out all of them and do not leave anything behind with your strength.
If however it presents an obstacle to you from some moisture, and there is no fear or error in the incision: then cut those moist areas and flesh, if they are present, and release the bones.
If however you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then place something on the wound that will rot it, and let it go until it rots due to the flesh and moisture around those bones.
And keep the wound so that it does not heal. And tighten the incision that you made during your operation. Rather place on it if you fear it, a piece of charcoal softened with ground sulfur and oil; or a piece of charcoal soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any green ointments.
For when those moist areas rot and separate the bones, cleaning them away will be easier, and pulling out the bones themselves will be facilitated.
If there is a large bone, such as the thighbone or hip bone, and what is corrupted from it is a major part: then shave it with a final file until the blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
If what is within it (the bone) has decayed and a large part is already rotten to the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw that (bone) and cut through it all to the place where the decay has reached: then treat it until it heals.
And I tell you this secret, which happens to a man in his leg: place it as an example and aid for your operation.
A young man of about thirty years had pain in his leg, caused by something that moved upon him within the body (from inside), until it reached the leg and an abscess was formed with a large size: and there was no external cause for him.
Time passed while the man was in error with the physicians until the abscess was opened, and much matter gathered around him. And the treatment of his leg was delayed until it became fistulous and many openings were made in it, from which pus and bodily moisture flowed out.
Many physicians treated him for about two years and there was no skilled hand in him until I was called, and saw his leg, and the matter that flowed from those openings with a great flow: even the whole body of the man was already rotten and his skin had become yellowish.
I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached the bone.
Then I examined all the openings: and found them to reach each other from all parts of the leg.
I approached and sawed through one of the openings until I exposed part of the bone: and I found it rotten; which had already been corroded, decayed, decomposed, perforated until it had penetrated to the marrow.
Prepare therefore what has been detected for me, and prepare it from corrupted bone.
And I ordered that it should not be on the bone unless that corruption, which had been removed, was to be sawed off. And I had already uprooted it.
Then I placed the wound's restoration with strengthening medicines at a long distance. And it is not strengthened.
Then I tried again and probed over the bone a second time above the first detection; and I found continuous corruption with the bone; and I sawed off what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I attempted its restoration. And it is not restored.
I then probed it again and did not cease to cut the bone in parts, trying for its restoration; and it was not restored until I had cut out a palm's breadth from the bone, and extracted that along with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it was quickly strengthened and healed; and this repetition in the operation and section of it was not necessary except because of the arrangement of weakness, the frailty of the patient, his poor tolerance, and my fear of death for him; since he often fell into syncopal evacuations during all hours on account of excessive bleeding.
Thus he was completely healed; and a hard piece of meat grew at the place of the bone, and it turned out well for his body, and his strength returned to him; and he regained his constitution, and he suffered no harm from walking at all.
If however the prominent bone at a place in the body is already fractured, then it must be sawed off in this manner: and that is, to take a ligament, tie it at the end of the protruding bone; and command someone to extend it upward; and place another thicker cord from wool first. Then bind that [the wound] on the bone which is flesh: and extend its end, so that you draw the flesh towards the lower parts: and you expose the flesh over the place where you wish to cut with the saw, so that the saw does not cut into the flesh.
Place a stick or a board under the bone below properly: because when you do that, it is not forbidden to cut rotten flesh.
And it is necessary that the saw be above the rotten place a little bit, so that there is no rotting in the hollow of the bone: and it does not appear to the sense in its appearance, and compel another to serve in its place.
If the bone is rotten and not prominent, on the contrary it is joined to another part: and the rotting is in the middle of it or in a part of it: then expose the flesh from all parts completely. Then place a stick below.
Afterwards saw from the first side where there is rotting, until the saw is joined to another part: and let the saw be according to its length a little bit away from the rotting, as we said.
If the rotting is at a joint, cut the joint which is rotten and saw the bone where it is joined from another part.
But if the rotting is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no skill in that except by abrasion.
If the rotting is in the beak of the hand or foot: then the matter is very difficult in that. But it is necessary to examine how the rotting appears to you. And abrade it, and cleanse it according to whatever position is possible for you, and with whatever skill it can be corrected for you: when it does not create opposition for you from the Vein or Nerve.
And know that there are many saws and knives for cutting these bones, according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their subtlety, their size, their smallness or greatness, their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary that one prepares a suitable instrument for every kind of operation.
And know this: these operations indicate to you the type of instrument required of you, when your study is prolonged. And knowledge of the methods of this art is evidence of the methods of diseases; then you will find for yourself that which suits it among the instruments for every illness.
And I am confirming for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments, which you will place as examples on which to cut, and proof of the test on others.
Form of another Saw.
Form of a Scissors for Joints. The head of this Scissors should be like the head of a star-shaped nail; and its points should be like those of an elongated fork.
It is not suitable unless it rubs against the heads of the joints when they are broken, or a large and thick bone.
Form of a Larger Scissors.
Form of a Wide Scissors.
Form of a Scissors with a hollow inside.
Form of another Fine Scissors.
Form of another Scissors with a curved end.
Form of a Small and Fine Scissors with a pointed tip.
This resembles a Saw, and its end is like a Razor: it is used in many places due to the reason of bones.
The shape that suits for cutting through bone is similar to that of a Razor.
Its end is triangular, and its edges are sharp.
It is made from India. And similarly, everything that we have said should be made of Razors, Knives, and Saws.
Chapter on the incision of extremities, and the sawing of bones.
Rotten extremities are either due to an external cause, or an internal one.
When you have treated the corruption with medicines and it does not improve, and you see that the corruption is spreading into a limb which has not been affected: then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to where the corruption extends, so that it may pass through it from death, or from some greater evil due to the loss of the member.
And the sign that this happens is when the limb turns black, until it is thought to be dead; or when fire has burned it, or it has rotted after turning black: until the rot spreads up to where it follows the limb, and it creeps through the whole body.
Therefore, when making the incision and similarly if the cause of corruption is due to the bite of some venomous creatures such as marine scorpions, weasels, adders, and similar ones.
If corruption or a bite occurs on the extremity of a finger, then amputate the finger and do not leave space for the rot to spread, so that it may creep up to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then amputate it at the root of the wrist and do not leave space for the rot to spread, until it reaches the arm bone.
And if it invades him (the wound), then cut the arm at the elbow joint.
If the corruption goes through about the elbow: then there is death for the weak man (patient). And what is given beyond that for treatment, is the amount of virtue.
And likewise do the same with the foot, when the corruption invades the toe; then cut it at one of the joints (toes); and if it reaches the front part of the foot, then cut off the whole foot. And if it goes up to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
But if the corruption has already come above the knee, then there is no skill (remedy) in it, except to release and abandon the weak man to death.
And the method of cutting (amputating) a member or binding it is that you tighten the ligament below the place where you wish to cut and tighten another ligament above. And extend one minister (attendant) to below, and extend another attendant ligament upward. You separate the flesh that is between two ligaments with a broad spatula until the whole flesh is exposed. Then it is cut or bound (amputated).
And it is necessary that you put a linen cloth on all sides (the wound), and the saw must not touch healthy parts; and the weak man suffers additional injury, and hot abscess.
And if there is bleeding internally while you are working, then quickly cauterize the place or put some absorbing powders on it to stop the bleeding. Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with an appropriate ligament and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you what happens to a man in his foot; this is the same thing that I tell you (happens).
What happens is that a blackening occurs in his foot due to a burning similar to fire combustion; and the corruption primarily begins with his toe until it affects the entire foot.
He fell sick from himself, after observing that the corruption was happening in a limb with intense pain which he perceived from the pain, and due to his burning; and he wounded himself at the junction, and he was cured.
And after a long period of time had passed, the same corruption occurred in the index finger of his own hand.
Therefore he came to me and I attempted to recover the loss with him by placing medicines over his hand after cleansing his body; but the loss was not recovered, and it started spreading to another finger until the corruption began affecting the whole hand.
He then called for me to cut off his hand; but I refused, hoping for a recovery of the loss from my side; and I also feared death due to the cutting of his hand. Because the man's strength was above his fall.
And when he had given up hope on me, he returned to his own land; but then he came back to me because he fell sick and cut off his whole hand; and he was cured.
I did not bring this narrative except as help for that which falls under the type of this illness; and as a signification to indicate how it should be handled.
Section on the care of sinuses, and the quality of purgatives with medicines.
When an apostema occurs in some fleshy parts and the length of the apostema continues until it causes collection of pus; then it bursts or is perforated, and what is inside it exits through the pus, leaving a vacant place as if it were a vessel; and the skin that is over it becomes thin like a cloth that has been woven; and it does not come to an end in its corruption, nor press on the bone, nor the nerve, nor the ligament; it deserves to be named Sinus; and it is not called Fistula; however if the length of it continues until the corruption affects one of these organs, then it is called Fistula or ulcer.
The care of it is that you should cut the entire skin as rolled [over]; and especially when it has been finely minced and made like cloth; and trust that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
If you expect the skin to stick, and this does not follow from its corruption: and if there is a thickening of the flesh in the skin, then care for it with Clisterium: and it is that you should consider towards the Sinew.
Then if it is large and there is pus that is emitted from it which has a foul smell: then clisterize it with the Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and honey, parts receiving equal amounts, to be mixed in a vessel: and boil it over fire until the medicine turns red: and may it become of the consistency of honey.
Then take from it what is necessary for you: and dissolve it with water and honey, and clisterize the Sinew with it: and tie up its opening, and let the medicine remain in it for the amount of two hours.
Then extract it with pressure: do this for days until the Sinew is purified and the foul smell is removed.
And sometimes it is clisterized with water and ashes when this medicine is not present for you: and it is that you should take ashes of vine wood, or ashes from oak trees: and throw water upon it. Then boil it, and clisterize with it until you are confident that the Sinew has been washed clean.
If the weak patient is not able to tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water and ashes, then clisterize it with water and honey, into which something of crushed honey has already been mixed. Or clisterize it with honey and wine mixed, since the property of honey is to purify and wash: and wine makes the Sinew stick, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness in the wine.
Whenever you perform that [procedure], and believe that the corruption of the sinus has already been removed: then purge it with an enema, together with what causes flesh to grow therein.
And [it is] to receive from the plaster dyafinicon, and to dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic wine, or to purge it with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
If the opening of the sinus is narrow, and the enema cannot enter through it: then enlarge it slightly with an iron; or place linen wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or Basilicon ointment inside until it becomes wider.
And similarly, if the opening is also wide, then gather its lips with a suture; and allow the enema to enter the quantity to which it can enter without being added to.
And similarly, if the opening from which pus flows is elevated above: then cut it at a lower location that is within it, so that the pus may run out below; because when pus becomes obstructed in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated therein.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus near its base as you wish: then try to prepare a limb in such a way that the pus can run out from there with ease, according to how it is prepared for you. Try not to retain anything of the pus whatsoever within it; and receive consolidating medicines that are applied to the mark, suitable for what you wish. Spread them out on a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such size that there is communication with the entire sinus. Then make an incision with forceps in a straight line on the opening of the sinus, larger than the opening of the sinus itself. Then extend from soft unguents on a different cloth, according to the size of the hole: and place it over it with long distance from the orifice Sinus, so that the discharge of pus from it is relieved: and do not remove the large cloth, unless after several days instead.
The one who is over the orifice of Sinus, that is the one you should remove at every hour, so that what accumulates in it due to pus may come out: and so that you know whether what is flowing from it is much, little, digested, or undigested.
And when you have again examined the place of Sinus itself, whether it feels pain to its master or not, and whether there is pain in it, and if there is an abscess in it, or not.
When therefore your treatment is so extended, and you see the matter which comes out on the orifice of Sinus, then you will know that Sinus has already adhered or approaches adhesion: then soluble it in the morning, or in the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change the cloth, and renew the unguent.
If however pus flows out of Sinus after a long time, then do not despair of its adhesion, for healing is approaching, since there are people who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and from them there are those who act contrary to this.
If however pus flows out of Sinus for many days undigested, then you will know that Sinus is not adhering.
If therefore adhesion of Sinus is delayed and prolonged: then increase in the drying treatment, but let the physicians make sure that the medicines are moist in substance and dry in effectiveness, like unguentum dyafinicon, when excess addition from zegi is added to it.
And from the last (step) which is treated, it is, that you receive an ointment called dyafinicon, and it should be dissolved with rose oil, and it should be rubbed over it an equal amount of ancient wine in substance.
Then mix (it) with that, and use (it).
And now it makes a similar action when you do not have the ointment dyafinicon, honey, when you cook it until it thickens, and you use it. Or receive myrrh, aloe, and frankincense: grind everything, and powder it over honey while it is over the fire. Then spread linen over it (the wound), and sew it over a bladder: and spread the honey that you cooked, until it thickens, and powder its species, and put it over the linen, and sew it.
And at times aristolochia longa, the roots of celestial lily, and its bulb are administered in that (situation), and wheat flour, and centaury. Use them (the simple ingredients or the combined ones), grind them, and sift them: and powder it over the honey that I mentioned, and use it.
If this (the bladder) prolongs and is not cured by this treatment: then you know that there is corruption in its depth; or it makes an impression on the bones, or on the hard members, or ligaments: then cure it with fistula treatment, according to what was mentioned earlier.
¶ On the care of paronychia and eroded nail, and incision of the finger added, and amputation.
Panaritium is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or foot; and perhaps it arises in other fingers.
When this (the abscess) prolongs and is neglected in its treatment, and it is opened with a hot incision: or it ruptures and releases pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it ruptures it completely, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone, until there is a foetid smell: and the tip of the finger becomes broad, and its color becomes dark.
When therefore you treat it (the nail), with what we said concerning division, and your treatment does not improve it: then it is necessary that you cut with iron the entire superfluity which remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For cautery is very helpful (or beneficial).
If however the bone is healthy and the nail also is healthy, and empty additions of the nail already press the flesh towards the interior, and begin to prick it and wound it: then it is necessary that you place subtle radium under the angle of the nail which wounds the flesh, and push it up: and cut the flesh with ease, and place on top of what remains of the flesh from medicines which burn, corrosives, until it is completely removed. Then treat that with ointments, until it heals.
If however the corruption already presses on the bone, then it is necessary that you cut that bone and remove it: for it will never heal as long as a corrupted bone remains in it.
If you see corrosion and corruption creeping towards the finger, then cut it off at a joint, according to what was mentioned regarding its remembrance. Then treat that, until it heals.
If however the nail is rubbed or hit, and pain occurs which is very strong, then it is necessary that you use a leech first. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula cut from above to below.
And be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh which is under the nail, for you will cause severe pain to occur below it, and this will be a cause of the addition of new flesh in the place.
Then treat the place with what soothes the pains.
The finger which is born in some human hands, perhaps it is entirely of flesh: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them are born at the joint of the root, or the birthplace of one of them is in some of the joints of the finger. The one who is born with knots on a finger, does not move; and the one who is born at the juncture of a finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, for the fleshy part that is among them, its incision is easy. It is, to cut it at the root with a wide spatula.
The cure for one who is born at the juncture of the root is difficult. Therefore, refrain from cutting it.
But concerning the one who is born on a finger at the end of the knots, then you should first cut through its flesh with a round incision to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws suitable for that. Then care for it until it heals.
Consolidation however that occurs in fingers, often happens either from the birth of a man, that is, being born with it, or from consolidation of a wound, or burn of fire, and similar conditions.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut off the consolidation, until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place linen or cloth soaked in rose oil between them to prevent consolidation quickly and separate them; or place a thin lead plate between them until the location consolidates according to what is necessary.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers with the palm, then cut off the consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
Chapter on Incision Defects.
Chapter XCII. Uites are swollen veins, large, full of melancholic excesses that occur in many parts of the body; and their most frequent occurrence is in the legs, especially in those traveling or working, and in carriers.
It is necessary that you administer the incision of the body from black cholera several times with a strong incision.
Then, let the patient's vein be opened (phlebotomized) with the basilica vein.
The treatment of these (wounds or conditions), with iron, is according to two methods. One method is that they are opened and black blood is drawn out. A different method is, to elevate the Vein and extract it completely.
The incision of this (vein) is in accordance with this method. Pour a plentiful amount of warm water on the leg first, until the thick and foul blood is dissolved. Then bind the weakened leg from its upper part of the hip, down to its lower part of the thigh with a bandage. Then cut the vein at one, or two, or three wide sections.
Then draw blood, that is, extract blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, and it is necessary that a phlebotomist treats the weakened first. Then cut the nail down to its base until you see a quantity of blood that seems sufficient and that the strength of the weakened person can bear.
Then tie it up and order him to abstain from foods producing black bile; and repeat the purges and bloodletting when the veins are full, for that will harm the weakened one.
The bleeding of this kind is as follows: Shave the leg of the sick one, if there are many hairs on it. Then introduce him into the bath: or plunge him in his leg with hot water until it turns red and veins appear; or exercise with strong movement, if there is no bath present, until the limb warms up.
Then cut the skin along the vein in a straight line: or at the end of it near the knee, or at the lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with scissors and scrape off the vein from every side until it is felt: and at its appearance, what you see will turn from red to darker shades. When it reaches the skin, you see it white like a cord.
Then insert the lancet beneath it until it rises and comes out of the skin: hang it with a blunt scissor.
Then make another incision near that incision with three fingers. Then scrape the skin from the upper side of the vein until it appears. Then lift it with lancets as you did before, and hang it with another scissor as you did at first.
Then make another incision or multiple incisions if needed for that purpose. Then scrape it and make the last incision at the heel.
Then pull out the vein to the incision that is above it.
And do this until you have pulled out the vein from the above incision or all the incisions, until it comes out completely; then cut it.
If it does not obey you to pull it out and lift it: then insert the sharp awl with a strong thread and tie it, and pull it out; or insert the lancet beneath it: and move your hand in every direction until it comes out. And avoid cutting (it). If it is cut, it becomes very difficult for you to drain it, and harm occurs to the patient from it.
When you remove it entirely, then place a wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil, over the wound site and care for (it) until it heals.
If it is a vein that is contracted, having a curvature with coiling in parts, and not as we have said according to straightness: then it is necessary for you to make an incision over all its curvatures, and the places of its coiling.
Then suspend it with forceps until you drain it entirely: and avoid cutting the vein or wounding (it) at your incision; for it will be difficult for you to drain or extract it. Therefore, conserve your caution.
The form of the incision that heals a vein.
The form of the incision for a blind vein.
It is not its coarseness like the other veins, nor is it sharp at the ends to harm the vein; and it is of a curved thickness, but lenient; because if it were subtle, the vein would be cut by its subtlety; on the contrary, let it have excessive thickness, as we said.
On the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the legs of hot lands, as Alizegi (says), and the land of Arabs, and in dry, hot lands with little softness, that is, where no grass grows nor trees.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
Its generation is certainly from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, as happens within the bodies of snakes and intestinal worms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
The sign of the commencement of this Vein's course is that it happens with a vehement inflammation in the leg. Then, the area is excavated. Then, the vein begins to emerge from the place of that excavation, as if it were the root of a tree or an animal.
When its end appears from there, then it is necessary to roll over the lead on top of it, whose weight should be one keil of a drachma, until two drachms and a node; and let the suspended lead go from the leg.
Whenever something comes out of it to the outside, roll that over in lead and tie it. If it extends greatly, then cut off a part of it, and roll over the rest. And do not cut it off by its root before it has come out entirely. Because if you cut it off, it contracts and goes into the flesh; it causes an abscess to appear, and pus and a bad ulcer at the place.
Therefore, it should be treated gently and pulled out gradually until it comes out entirely, and nothing remains of it in the body; and from this vein, in some people, there comes out something that is five fingers long and ten. And now it has come to me, because a man of twenty fingers has come out of it.
If it is cut during your treatment, then insert a ray into its hole and perforate it with a long hole as the body goes out until everything that is inside it from matter comes out; and apply the putrefaction of the place with medicines for some days. Then, treat it with the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot, or even in the foot itself; and there are many openings for it, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Treat it accordingly, as we said in the division, and with what was previously mentioned.
On the section of worms generated beneath the skin, and it is called Bouina disease.
This disease is called Bouina disease in a certain land among us: because it often occurs to cows, and there is a small worm that is born between the skin and the flesh.
It moves throughout the entire body, ascending and descending; and it is felt by the senses during its movement from limb to limb until it bursts at any point where it bursts on the skin and comes out.
And its generation is from the decay of certain fluids. As worms and snakes, that is, earthworms and roundworms occur in the belly.
It is feared from its mischief. Because when it moves within the body and rises to the head, and arrives at a place; then perhaps it opens there and comes out, and destroys an eye; and this often happens.
Therefore, when one wishes to cure it and extract it, this is not done except during its movement and appearance to the senses.
It is necessary therefore that you tighten what is above it, and what is below it with a strong binding. Then cut above it, and extract it.
If it sinks into the flesh and you do not find it; then place a cautery on the place with fire until it dies.
And the greater danger is its corruption, which destroys an eye, as we said.
If you see it has already reached the head near the eye; then tighten under it with a good forehead binding. Then cut above it, and extract it.
The sick person should use mundification (cleansing) of his body with medications dissolving bad and corrupt humors.
Let him avoid foods causing putrefaction.
Chapter on surgery concerning Nakir's disease.
This disease is called Nakir on our land: it is a pain that occurs in some members, then changes from one member to another.
And I myself have seen this, as I am telling you. I was called to a sick woman in some villages. And she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm.
After staying for an hour, I saw the swelling move with a worm-like motion, rapidly advancing to her shoulder, like quicksilver running from one place to another.
Therefore, the pain left that place and was fixed in her shoulder.
Then, it remained seated for an hour, and it ran through the rest of her body until it reached another arm.
Then she told me that it turned around in her entire body, as I saw.
I was amazed at the swiftness of its change from one member to another. And I, before this incident, had not seen this disease appear in such a manner with my eyes. Nevertheless, I have seen many who find pain changing from one member to another; but I had not seen it as in the woman.
And I do not think that it was anything other than the fact that the woman was one of those in the dry villages with detected veins; hence, this shows that the feeling of putridity had changed.
It is necessary that, according to this reason, hidden veins do not appear in those who are delicate and in moist bodies.
When you have the intention of healing it and the patient feels that pain, then if it appears to you as we said, then press above it and quickly beneath it; cut above it until that windiness contracts; and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it by pressing the body and what expels windiness, and crush them with fetid pills and pills of resin and similar things.
Chapter on the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to their kinds and the places where they fall on the body.
Their diversity is because there are some that have large tips and small ones; concave and blunt ones. And among them are those that have three corners. And of those with tongues (barbed arrows). And of those with stars (multi-pointed arrows).
Those that are on the limbs where they fall, are according to two modes. Or limbs are from the main concave members such as brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder and similar. When it falls into one of these members and you see signs of death that I will tell you later, then it is necessary to devote the extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows it where it is, in many dispositions. And when those signs are not visible to you and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it, and care for the wound.
For the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the bone and exits from what is above the brain are: because hot sweats occur from it, and blindness, and dizziness, and redness in the eyes, and swelling, and redness of the tongue, and spasm, and confusion of mind, and vomiting of cholera. And perhaps blood comes out from the nose or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and voice destroyed. And there comes out from the wound place whiteness like plaster. And it comes out similar to watery flesh.
If those signs are visible to you, then refrain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not come out.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not in a soft one. And perhaps there is movement similar to pulse movement, and blood runs black from the wound. And this follows coldness of limbs, cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore, that death clearly recedes.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is the issuance of frothy blood from the wound; and the vessels following the neck should be removed, and the color [of the patient] becomes weak. And it breathes out a great, deep breath, and seeks cold air's attraction.
If the arrow falls into the pleura, which is in the chest; then it is near the small ribs; and a great panting with very intense pain, with sighing, occurs, and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
If the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested comes out from the wound.
If an arrow falls into the abdomen and sticks there, something like feces comes out from the wound, or pus, or already ruptured intestine. Therefore, there is no hope for its cure, nor in the removal of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and exits urine; and something goes out from it to the outside, and the pain is greater over the weak one; then you know that it is mortal.
The rest of the limbs, such as the face, and the neck, and throat, and spatula, and assistant, and dorsal vertebrae, and furculum, and hip, and leg, and similar members are saved according to many positions; when the arrow does not find an artery or nerve, and it is not a poisoned arrow.
And I tell you that of these arrows, as a sign for your treatment.
That is, because a man had an arrow shot into his tear duct of the eye, at the root of the nose. Therefore, I removed it myself from the other side, under the ear fat of his; and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the Jew, which fell into his eye fat beneath the lower eyelid; and already the arrow was hidden, and I did not succeed in obtaining it except for its small end, with which it adhered to its wooden shaft; and the arrow was large among the arrows of the Turks, with a soft iron tip, in which there were no ears.
The Jew was healed, and no further harm occurred to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and it had ears. I cut therefore across the middle (of the wound): and already it was sunken into his throat. So I made it thin with a file until I extracted it; and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who it had fallen into his abdomen; and we thought that he would die from it.
After he had passed thirty days and nothing changed in his condition, I made an incision over the arrow; and I opened it up, and extracted it; and he was healed, and no further harm occurred to him.
And I saw a man whose arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound had become hardened over it. After seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
I saw a woman whose arrow had fallen into her abdomen, and the wound had become hardened over it, and the arrow remained within her; and nothing changed in her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm from her natural operations.
I saw another man whose arrow had fallen into his face; and the wound became hardened, and remained, causing him little pain; and there were many similar cases.
And I removed an arrow from a man among the princes of the King, which had fallen into his nose middle, and already it was slightly sinking towards the right side; and the entire arrow was hidden.
I was therefore called to treat him after the loss of the arrow for three days. Then I found the arrow wound very narrow.
Then I inserted it with a fine probe and did not feel it; but himself indeed discovered a puncture and pain on his right ear side. Therefore I hoped that this puncture was from the end of the arrow.
I therefore anointed the place with an ointment containing attracting and digestive properties, confident that the wound would heal and reveal the sign of the arrow so that I could cut above it; but this did not happen in the wound which indicated that the arrow had reached its destination.
I therefore attended him with the ointment for many days; but this did not happen as expected, and the wound healed meanwhile; and he remained weak from the extraction of it until he felt the arrow one day within his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I therefore put strong and corrosive medicine on that wound for many days until it opened; and when I probed it with a fine probe, I felt the tip of the arrow which was attached to wood.
Then I added the same strong and corrosive medicine to the opening of the wound until we could see clearly the tip of the arrow; and he passed away with me after an interval of about four months.
Then when the wound had healed and I was able to insert forceps into it and move it without resistance, I did not cease to examine it and try various means until on one day I began with well-made forceps, according to the shape described at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I therefore restored it [the wound], and the wound was healed, and the patient recovered completely in good health: nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows: so that you may set down the rule and significance on what I have not said.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended with the narrative; nor does the book contain it, and a skillful craftsman compares little with much; and with what is present, regarding what is absent; and he discovers a new operation, and a new instrument for descending foreign matters of this art when they occur.
Therefore, I say that arrows do not exit from the members to which they are fixed except in two ways. Or through the attraction of the place from which it entered. Or, on the contrary, by the part opposite [the one] where it entered.
And that which exits from where it entered is either a bullet proceeding into a fleshy place; and it is attracted and exits.
If it does not obey to exit from the side where it fell: then it is necessary that you leave it for some days, until the flesh surrounding it becomes putrid; and its attraction subsides, and its exit occurs.
And similarly, if it is fixed in bone, and does not obey to your effort to make it exit; then leave it for some days also; and move it every day with its attraction and motion until it exits.
If it does not obey to your effort to make it exit after days, then it is necessary that you bore around the arrow in the bone from every side with a fine lancet until the arrow enlarges. Then pull it out, and extract it.
If the arrow has already been hidden in a part of the body and is covered up and concealed from feeling: then look for it with probing (exploration). If you feel the arrow, then pull it out with some tools suitable for its extraction.
If you cannot get on top of it (arrow) due to the narrowness of the wound and because the arrow is long and deep; and there is no bone, nerve or vein there: then mark it over and wait until the wound expands and becomes possible to extract the arrow.
If there are ears attached to it (the arrow), then release the flesh fixed in them from all sides with all your strength and means that you can; and if you cannot get at the flesh by lifting it due to a fracture of the ears or twisting them, then wait until they come out.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow, wherever it is, then use your hand's twisting motion with forks to all sides, until it comes out; and use subtle instruments with utmost subtlety so that the arrow does not break, and its pulling and extraction become difficult for you.
If you cannot open it within an hour, then leave it for some days until what is around it putrefies. Then proceed with it: the garment will be alleviated. If however it causes a flow of blood contrary to you, then administer what was said in the cure chapter, and guard your strength from cutting a vein, or nerve, or tendon.
And administer ingenuity in every possible way for the evacuation of the Arrowhead: and let it be with ease, calmness, or slowness, firmness as I told you.
It is necessary that when pulling the Arrow, it becomes weak in the shape it was at the time of the Arrow's fall upon itself. Since it is more useful (for the patient). If however this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
The arrow that emerges from the opposite part or has already advanced towards the exterior: or it makes a hump at the end of the Arrow through sensation from the upper part of the skin near, and you see it protruding: then cut above it, and make the cut according to the size so that forceps can grasp it.
Then draw it out: for it becomes easy to come out.
If however it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the Arrow impresses on the bone and expands for itself: then draw it out.
And if not: leave it for some days; then proceed with it until it comes out.
If the wood of the Arrow is in it, then push it along with it.
If however the wood fell out and you wish to administer the impulse: then insert a concave instrument into it so that it enters the concavity of the Arrowhead; then push it along with it.
If however the arrow is concave, then push it with the instrument entering into it. The arrow is pulled out by that (instrument).
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you scrape all the concave flesh where the poison is; if it is possible for you to do so. Then treat it with what suits for that (purpose).
If the arrow falls in the chest, or in the stomach, or in the bladder, or in the side; and it is near where you touch with a probe, and it is possible for you to cut over it: then cut, and be careful not to cut a vein or a nerve, and extract it.
Then suture the wound, if you see (it), and treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are extracted.
The ends should resemble a bird's beak, which have been made like iron: when they grip the arrow, they do not release it.
And they are made in various shapes, large, small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, its smallness, and the width and constriction of the wound.
The shape of a concave probe.
And the shape of a deaf probe.
This is the shape of a blunt end like a radius to pull into a concave arrow and push it with it.
Chapter on Phlebotomy of Veins.
Veins for bloodletting, whose practice has become common in the body, are thirty.
From the head, there are sixteen: two pulsating veins that are behind the ears, called two Herbs; and two arteries that appear at both temples; and two veins that are at both lacrimals of the two eyes, which are called Watchers; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose. And two great veins, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are the veins called Algecherich. And two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins that are bloodletted in the arms, are five in each arm.
One of them is the Brachial, and it is from the side of the forest; and the common people call it the vein of the head. And Black. And Middle. It is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Brachial; and the common people call it the vein of the body. And Basilica, and it is placed on the domestic side; and it is also called Titillicaris. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And the Sinew of the arm, and it is placed on the elbow; and it is the one that is bloodletted, and it is the one that appears above the thumb in a visible way.
And Saluatella: it is the vein that is between the ankles; and it has two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot, there are three veins. One of them is a curvature under the nail on the side of the little finger. And the second one is Saphena (Tendon): and its place is at the heel, on the inside domestic side. And vein of Nessus: and its place is at the heel, on the outside wild side.
And in the other thigh there are three veins similar to these (ones mentioned before).
Section on venesection of two veins after Ears.
However, the venesection of two veins that are after the Ears (the auricles), is beneficial for old catarrhs, and hemigraine, and sores on the head, old ones.
And the quality of performing venesection is as I explained (before). And it is to be shaved the head of the sick: and rub his neck in the place of two veins with a rough cloth for good friction. Then the sick person shall tighten his neck with a bandage until the two veins appear. And their places are behind the ears, in two depressed places of the head. Search for them with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark that place with a hot iron (encaustum).
Then take a surgical knife called an Incisor (Incidens) for venesection. Then insert the knife under the vein into the skin until the venesector reaches the bone. Then pull your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut the vein with a cutting motion of the knife. And let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers joined or about that much: and make as much blood come out as you wish.
Then tie it with threads (ligatures) and let it heal.
And now we have reached the end of the book's section on incision and cauterization of these (veins).
The phlebotomy of the two arteries that are beneficial in two times is for the treatment of ancient migraine and sodam praua, and optalmia assidua, and for the discharge of acute superfluities towards the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomy them (the arteries) is as I have told you. The sick person should tighten his neck very much until two veins appear to the perception with clear evidence and their pulse is shown under your finger. Then signs (are made) with hot iron (encaustic).
Then the skin is incised above the vein with your index finger and a lancet inserted below, and the vein is incised towards the top. And cut it (the vein) as you did with two other veins; and make the blood flow according to your need.
Then loosen the constriction of the sick person and place your finger on one side (of the vein). Then put a cloth and cotton over it, and tighten it from above with a strong constriction; and let it be until it is healed.
And now the remembrance of them (the veins), their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book has passed away.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the forehead vein is after the phlebotomy of the Cephalic (vein), for ancient facial ailments: and for migraine, redness, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of its (the forehead vein's) phlebotomy is as I have told you. Tie up tightly the neck of the sick man with a linen cloth until the vein appears. Then take the tool named Fossorium (Forceps).
Place the pointed end at the top of the Fossorium on the vein and strike it with a hammer or other tool in this way; then let the blood flow according to the amount you wish. Then release the incision of the sick man and tie it up until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad-bladed leech (surgeon). However, it is not necessary that the surgeon have a sharp-pointed blade, like other surgeons do; instead, he should have one with a broad tip. And the surgeon shall make the incision obliquely, since the bone is close by; and perhaps the surgeon may break it if he is too sharp.
The remedy for the two veins that are in the two Lacrimal Ducts of both eyes is for inflammation and redness of the eye; and it is used on the eye itself, and for diseases of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy of these veins is that the sick man ties his neck with a linen cloth (bandage). Then make the incision of the vein; you should stand over its head.
And make the incision obliquely in a short length with a small knife, for there is no flesh at that location. If the surgeon has a sharp-pointed blade, he may break it.
Then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you. Place a cloth over them and tie them up at night and release them in the morning.
The phlebotomy of the veins of the nose is useful for treating acute fever, severe itching, and facial ailments such as migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that it tightens a weak neck. Then hold the nose with your left hand and take a subtle and long phlebotomy needle, and place it in the middle of the nostril, between that which divides the nose according to its straightness. Since the vein is not visible to the senses there and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you hold the phlebotomy tool with your fingertips and let blood flow as needed. Then tie it up at night. It recovers quickly.
The phlebotomy of the veins of the neck has two beneficial effects: it helps to relieve coughing and prevent leprosy, melancholic ailments, impetigo and ulcers, as well as corrosive conditions such as herpes simplex.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that it tightens a weak neck with a band, and the worker should stand over the head of the sick person, who should be seated on a chair.
Then the phlebotomy needle should be inserted into the vein to a length slightly greater than that of the phlebotomy. Then extract an appropriate amount of blood, or according to what you see as necessary for this purpose. Then do the same with another vein.
Then untie the band and tighten two veins slightly so that the sick person does not faint. Let it (the wound) alone until morning. The wound heals.
On the phlebotomy of veins (Albucasis). The phlebotomy of veins by Albucasis is beneficial for the following: to prevent alcohol in the mouth, corruption of teeth and bad ulcers on lips, bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is as follows: make the sick person sit before you and tighten his neck with a bandage. Then turn his lip and look at two veins; one is on the right of the lip, and the second is on the left of it; and the demonstration of both is by showing their blackness. That is true because around them are small, dark veins. Therefore, make an incision on both of them with a cutting instrument.
If there is doubt concerning you and you do not know which one (vein) it is, then turn to the larger vein (incision), and its manifestation.
And similarly, do the same with the two veins that are on the upper lip; and it is most commonly used (phlebotomy) with this one; and make an incision in the two veins that are on the lower lip.
On phlebotomy of the vein under the tongue, after the phlebotomy of the jugular (cephalic) vein. But the phlebotomy of the two veins that are under the tongue is beneficial for: because the phlebotomy of the jugular (cephalic) vein is for afflictions that are in the throat, and diseases of the voice, and diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is as follows: make the sick person sit between your hands facing the sun; and lift his tongue, and look under the tongue at one vein on one side, and one vein on the other side; and observe that the color of both declines towards blackness.
Phlebotomy therefore both (of them): and guard, so that you do not injure your hand while performing phlebotomy. For there are arteries under it, and perhaps blood will flow from these arteries.
The three veins which are to be cut open at the elbow are those on which the practice of bloodletting is customary among all men.
And bloodletting of these is done in two ways. Either by pricking with a broad-bladed leech, or by oiling to the point of dripping, or by cutting with a sharp knife, and this is known as Alnaschar. And this is its form. (Note: The following passage describes the formation of the three veins
And from these are broad and narrow forms according to the size and tightness of the veins. The form of a broad-bladed leech is broad, as you see. And it is suitable for opening concave, full, protruding, thick veins that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this leech is narrower and more delicate at its extremity.
And it is suitable for bloodletting of the subtle veins that contain thin, yellowish blood.
The bloodletting of one of these three veins is beneficial for the basilica (large central hall or courtyard in a Roman bath complex). Because it draws blood from illnesses that are below the throat and neck, as they follow the chest and stomach, it is beneficial for the bloodletter to cut this vein, but he must be careful because there is an artery underneath it. If therefore he mistakes (it) and adds in the puncture of phlebotomy, he will cut the artery and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore it is necessary that (he) not phlebotomize her with the phlebotomist; rather he should be cutting with Alnesil.
If the Basilica does not appear by a manifest appearance, then it is necessary that (you) remove her and change (to) another, or seek some branch of it; or use a rope of its arm in place of the phlebotomist. For it (the Basilica) is manifest and cut her with phlebotomist Anesil, as we have said.
If however you wish to perform a phlebotomy on this one, then it is necessary before the constriction of the arm, that (you) touch the place, until (you) recognize the place of the pulse. Then mark a sign on the place with encaustum (pitch), afterwards the arm and cut the vein with a concave section of the phlebotomist Alnesil, as we have said. And beware that the blow does not fall into the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see that as you tighten the ligament, swelling at the place which you have marked with encaustum, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery; avoid it (the vein) therefore.
If you see blood rise up at the phlebotomy, like the urine of a child and it is thin, red: then know that it is from the blood of the artery. Then therefore hurry up and place your finger on it in a long space, afterwards remove your finger. If blood is cut off (many times it is cut off), then tighten the arm and release it; and let the weak avoid movement of it; let it be in fear of it.
And it should not move itself for some days, until it heals.
If the blood does not flow out and it chokes you; and there is no medicine present for you at the moment, then cut an artery, if it appears to you. For its ends contract, and blood flows out.
Either take the bark of a fig tree and wrap it; take one half, tie it over the place of the narrowed vein with a ligature and plasters until another day.
Then if blood flows out, it is good. And if not: then take care of it with the one who preceded it, remembering the place from which powder is removed for blood flow; and the removal of blood from it is not difficult in many dispositions, due to the small size of the wound, and the possibility of a ligature from the arm.
However, the benefit of venesection in the blue vein is that it draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower body; because it is composed of a branch of the Basilica vein, and the branch of the Cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is suitable for the venesectionist that it be above fear of venesection from it, because under it is a nerve. If therefore the venesectionist adds in the puncture and finds a nerve, a stupor occurs, and its healing becomes difficult, and it may not heal completely.
And this nerve often appears to the sense. If it is hidden in some people and is subtle and not shown; then you should put your venesection where you can perform venesection with the Alnesil knife and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If a vein is between two nerves, then tie off the vein in length.
On the Vein of the Head. The vein of the head (Phlebotomia) is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and causes diseases of the eyes.
And it is proper in this vein (Phlebotomia) that if you wish, the phlebotomist should prick it with a lancet made of oil or myrtle, because it is the most pure of all veins, since it is neither an artery nor a nerve.
However, it is fitting for you at the phlebotomy (process of drawing blood), to show your head and arm only to the phlebotomist, and ask him to find a less painful place: and it will not harm him if he does not find the vein with the first blow, but he should try again on the same spot several times.
However, it may appear as a boil in some people when they are not bled with the first blow, but it does no harm to him.
On the utility of phlebotomy (bloodletting) and the precautions to be observed. The quality of the phlebotomy (bloodletting), and its accompanying circumstances, of which you should think about how to correct it.
First of all, you should know that phlebotomy is not administered unless for the conservation of health, persistence of it, and precautions against the onset of diseases.
And that a phlebotomy should be performed in one of the three veins which are in the elbow, namely the Head (Cephalica), Dark (Fusca), and Basilic. And that a phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring during fasting, in spring and summer; and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And let phlebotomy be performed on the first day or third day, after three hours have passed.
Phlebotomy administered in illnesses does not have a determined hour: but when necessity and suitability require it, it may be done at night or day, and in every hour, and at any time.
And it is not necessary to perform phlebotomy on boys until they reach fourteen years of age. Phlebotomy should not be performed on a pregnant woman except from the fourth to the seventh month. Phlebotomy should not be performed on the elderly who have already passed sixty years.
When anyone wishes to undergo phlebotomy for any reason, it is necessary that he cleanses his intestines before phlebotomy with a lenient enema if there is much retained feces in them: so that no putrid superfluities from the intestines attract veins during phlebotomy and harm the main organs.
Phlebotomy should not be performed on a patient who is vomiting, that is, suffering from nausea or satiety; nor on one who has drunk excessively and is still intoxicated, until that condition has been removed from them. Phlebotomy should not be performed on a sick person with dropsy.
Phlebotomy should be avoided again after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, multiplication of sexual activity, labor, exercise, sleeplessness, fasting, and any other factor that weakens the strength of the body or an animal.
Then consider with subtlety the humors beforehand if the blood is thick due to food, drink, and medicine: if it is possible for him to do so.
Then enter a bath, if nothing prevents him from doing so; or exercise in some way to thin the blood.
Place phlebotomy on the chest, on the third day, as we said; and try to let it evacuate his chest that day from all the bad conditions of animals: such as tightness, anger, fear; and from all bodily conditions, such as labor, punishment, superfluity, and similar ones.
Let him place before himself the necessary items that human custom has run with, from which the practice of aromatics, fragrances, joy and similar things are present by the amount possible.
Then let the phlebotomist sit on the pulvinar, which shall be higher than the pulvinar for phlebotomy; afterwards he should pull out his arm, and the phlebotomist should rub it with his hand twice or thrice. Then tie the ligature with the cord and wind it around twice.
And let the incision be moderate, since an uneven incision, or excess in the incision, then prevents the flow of blood; or in healing, even then it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then after the incision, it is necessary that the person being bled rub his hands together until the veins swell and are felt.
Then the phlebotomist shall wash the place of bleeding with a little oil, his own.
Then he shall place his index finger of the left hand on the same vein at that spot where he wishes to make the incision, slightly; so that the vein does not run away, and the blow is not wasted. Because from the veins you find one running away like a cord during bleeding; and there is one that is full of windiness; and when you place an incision on it, it contracts under the person who is bleeding, and the person bleeding is deceived, and the cut does not open the vein; and if it opens it, it is closed; for this reason, therefore, the person bleeding must be firm and careful about all these matters.
Then let the blood-letter (phlebotomist) withdraw. If it is opened from one vein, then it is good. And if not, then do it again in another vein at the same place or above it with haste; but do not proceed if the spot is not punctured.
If the wound heals or the patient frightens, then let him go home for a day or two; and do not tighten the bandage. For perhaps it will draw an abscess (attrahit = it draws) which is hot. Do not enter the bath.
Then perform phlebotomy again if necessary.
If the opening is small or the blood runs subtly; fear that the quantity of blood that you wish will not exit; then perform phlebotomy again in the same hole correctly, and add slightly more in the procedure.
Do it quickly before the wound heals, for a healed wound is dangerous in many people during minor procedures.
If you see that the abscess has already healed, then do not perform any procedure on it at all; for it will not release anything from you. Place something made of oil cloth over it; because it softens the flow of blood. It is better in this place than olive oil itself and other types of oil.
And similarly administer the oil cloth in every phlebotomy of yours where you perform phlebotomy against the flow of blood; and this is done by Tyriacans, Alfarachs, and Sagzenes when placed on a spot.
For the blood becomes thin and dissolves when it is thick.
If a large abscess arises at the site of phlebotomy (accidat = happens), which often occurs, especially to those who are not skilled phlebotomists except for that vein or have a small opening of a vein; then hurry and place on the spot a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated slightly; and tighten it for one hour; because it dissolves.
And it is necessary that you do that after the outflow of blood from the vein itself, when its completion occurs, or from another vein.
If something remains in the place after several days that is dark or greenish, it does not harm it; and if you wish, put on top of it some aloe or myrrh dissolved; or something from the juice of mint, that is, camphor or similar to that.
And indeed often boils and eruptions occur near the venuepuncturing in the Basilica.
Then place your hand on it; then if you find softness under your pressure on it, then that eruption is bad. Be careful, therefore, not to put anything on it from what I said. For perhaps blood from an artery will flow out of it.
But make a plaster for him with the substance where there is stiffness, so that the place hardens. Then take care of him with the rest of the treatment until he is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from every man according to the quantity of its virtue. And what appears as a color spreading over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see that it is thick, then let it go until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it is sharp, let it go until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting once to have an increased bloodletting from the vein, and let him be a skilled bloodletter; but in the case of the weak one, let it be otherwise.
And it is necessary to extract it from the veins and that the opening be narrow; and it is better what is administered in bloodletting from the vein that it is a cross section, not a puncture.
This method of bloodletting is beneficial in preventing blood flow and nerve cutting; it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection along both width and length.
Whoever is accustomed to faint during bloodletting should eat a little bread soaked in water with ground almonds before the bloodletting; or sekanjabin, if he is heated up: and extract from his blood three or four times.
If the patient's temperament is cold, then before bloodletting, he should receive bread soaked in honey-based syrup, or in a syrup flavored with honey and spices, or in scented aromatic syrup.
If fainting occurs during bloodletting and the cause is excessive blood flow, then it is necessary that he drinks water with meat juice and subtle scented syrup; uses aromatic substances with algalia and has his chest wrapped with it; and uses the remaining as we have said in the division of fainting due to evacuation (in chapter on fainting).
Whoever wants to let down his arm and release his blood through the second method should do so for a patient whose bloodletting is due to excessive evacuation and whose strength is weak. He should let out his blood gradually according to his strength for continuous days.
But whoever wants to let down his arm and release his blood through the second method and his body is full: then he should do that after seven or nine hours from his first bloodletting.
But whoever wants to draw blood from his body against the affected part: it should be done on the second or third day.
In a patient whose blood is already heated and sharpening and causing fever: it is necessary that his blood comes out once, and a large amount is taken out; and the incision should be enlarged until fainting occurs; after you have ensured all conditions of bloodletting; and you place your hand on his pulse near the course of blood, so that death does not occur due to fainting. "It often happens when the phlebotomator is ignorant, and falls due to negligence.
"It should not be done to solve the arm and release blood when the opening of the vein is already closed and the outflow of blood becomes difficult, so that pressure is applied strongly on it with force, and it is quickly stretched. "For this is very bad indeed; on the contrary, let it be left until it can be bled again.
"Or remove with sharpness the clot that has formed from blood in the vein opening and place something of salt dissolved in water on it. "And put something from turmeric, alfalfa, or sage over it and apply gentle pressure until the blood flows out.
"But if the vein is already healed, then let it be and do not cover it until the healing of the wound has set in.
"If necessity requires the release of blood again and there is no excuse, then either bleed that same place again or bleed from another vein in the other arm.
"However, the arm is bled at the place of the 'Fuscum' and 'Basilicum', since they are not found and are hidden, because it consists of them.
"And the quality of bleeding is such that a weak hand is inserted into warm water until it turns red, and the vein appears clearly.
"Then tie it over with a cord of moderate tightness. "Then the blood is bled transversely gradually, neither longitudinally nor broadly; and the opening should be wide and your bleeding on the juncture of the hand slightly.
"But if the outflow of blood is forbidden, then immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you meet your need.
If you are during the days of summer, then you may excuse yourself from the repetition of hands in hot water. Much is put upon the course of blood in hot water during wintertime.
And this vein's phlebotomy is safer than all the veins because it is not beneath a pulsating vein, nor a nerve.
Indeed, this vein's phlebotomy of the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that you bind a leach to the hand with thread or with your own hand after inserting it into hot water until the vein swells and becomes very apparent. Then perform the phlebotomy by cutting across. And if you cut it completely, it will not harm him in any way.
Keep it dry to avoid injuring your hand with the leech. Indeed, there are nerves of the fingers exposed under it (the vein).
Then immerse the hand again in hot water and allow the blood to flow from it. For if you do not immerse it in hot water again, the blood will clot at the vein's opening and hinder its flow.
When you have drawn the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not clot quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary to do so with every constricted branch (vein).
On the contrary, the aid of this vein's phlebotomy comes from the left hand, because it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen; and similarly, do so in the phlebotomy of this vein as you did in the second one equally.
The aid of saphenous vein phlebotomy is for diseases located in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases, retention of menstruation, kidney weaknesses, old ulcers of hips and legs, and similar diseases.
The quality of phlebotomy is such that the sick person should insert his foot into warm water, and perform friction upon it until the veins swell; then tie above the joint of the foot with ligature. The vein location is at the calcaneum [heel bone], appearing towards the thumb; and they branch out from there into many branches on the face of the foot.
Therefore, phlebotomy should be done in a larger branch [of the vein] or at its confluence with the heel, because it is better and safer.
If phlebotomy is done on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy instrument at an angle, as if you wish to cut it; and the phlebotomist is Nesil.
If the exit of blood is forbidden, then immerse his foot in warm water; and let the blood flow into it until it has evacuated.
If the phlebotomist has missed a vein in the first attempt, then return to the same place with the phlebotomy but a little higher up, because the location is safe and there is no fear of harm from it, as long as you beware of the nerves, just as we have said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
The location of the sciatic vein, as we have said, is at the heel on the side of the forest [the medial side].
And a remedy for the pain caused by phlebotomy is to apply warmth when it is due to hot blood.
The quality of phlebotomy is such that the sick person should enter the bath and hasten; and tie his leg from the side of the ankle to above the heel with a thin, long bandage; for it does not appear unless for this reason.
When it appears, then make an incision on it as your skill allows, either transversely; and it is better, or cut it with a cut, or sever it with a section. Its place is safer, and it is very well hidden in many people.
Its place is safer, and it is very well hidden in many people. If you cannot find it and it does not appear to the senses at all; then make an incision of one of its branches, and there is one that appears on the back of the foot and turned towards the ear; beware of the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow as you wish.
Then dissolve the constriction, and place skin over the incision site, and tighten it. It heals quickly.
On Ventosation, and the quality of its use.
They are made from horns, copper, and glass.
Ventosation is done in two ways. With scarification and bloodletting; the other is ventosation without scarification.
And this type of ventosation which is without scarification, is done in two ways. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the locations of ventosation which are administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen on the body. One is the Ventosation of Alnocratis, and it is at the back of the head; Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; ventosations of Alhagdahim, and there are two plates on the neck from both sides simultaneously; ventosations of the brain, and it is below the jaw on the lower part of the mouth; ventosations of the two spatulas; ventosations of Alachosos above the end of the tail; ventosations of the two pectoral glands, and they are in the middle of both arms; ventosations of the two legs; ventosations of the two kidneys.
And Ventosatio does not draw blood from you from the fine veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore its power does not fall out of them, as is the case with that incident from phlebotomy. It is not necessary to administer Ventosatio with fire, or without fire for any illness caused by congestion, until the entire body has been evacuated.
If necessity requires Ventosation due to illness or custom, we administer it at the beginning, middle, and end of every month, and at any other time when necessary.
Because there is a man who, when his blood is multiplied in him and he does not require its extraction through Ventosation, finds pain and swelling in his head.
And among them is one who finds congestion and redness on his face, his head, and his neck. And among them is one who finds itching on his face and forehead, and darkness and dullness in his eyes.
And there is one among them who scratches the place of his Ventosation. And among them is one whose laughter increases. And there is one among them who finds a taste of blood in his mouth: or the tongue is loosened and the blood is spat out. And among them is one whose sleep increases. And there is one among them who sees blood and redness in his sleep, as well as the dead, wounds, and things similar to those.
When we see something among them, especially if it is during the third quarter of the month: we then prescribe Ventosation to be performed after two or three hours have passed.
The benefit of Ventosation for the neck is that it alleviates heaviness in the head, and what is expelled is directed towards the eyes. It is necessary for it to be after evacuation of the entire body.
This [procedure] indeed is a ventose in place of cephalic phlebotomy.
It is not allowed for one with cold constitution to use it or in someone who has catarrh. For it does great harm to him [or her].
It is not proper for the elderly or someone with cold-related headaches to use it.
He who makes frequent use of it generates forgetfulness in him [or her].
Therefore, it is necessary for you to instruct the ventosator [operator] to withdraw his hand slightly downwards during venting to avoid generating forgetfulness.
Ventosation or Alkehel is in place of phlebotomy Fusca and basilica, and it causes coughing, constricted breathing, shortness of breath due to instrument splitting, coughing, stuffiness, and filling [of the body with air].
And it should be pushed slightly upwards during ventosation of Alkehel because if placed lower down, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Ventosation alhagdahim causes headaches, migraines, eye pain, and tooth pain: it is in place of basilica phlebotomy.
You must instruct the ventosator not to press his hand during scarification to avoid cutting an artery and causing bleeding.
Ventosation under the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of gums, and similar symptoms such as those that occur in the mouth: it is in place of other forms of phlebotomy which are located on the two lips.
Ventosation with a spatula causes alchafacha, which comes from tension and heat.
Interior parts' ventosation provides help for phlebotomy of the three veins, Basilica, Fusca, and Cephalica: because it draws blood from all those small veins that are in flesh; and these small veins draw blood from larger ones until attraction reaches the three veins.
It is necessary that you warn the Ventosator not to proceed too much in scarification: because the place is bare of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The ventosa which is used for ventosation on anus, provides help for hemorrhoids of anus, and for lower ulcers.
It is necessary that you warn the Ventosator to have the ventosa large, and of air: because the place needs strong suction, and perhaps small ventosas break; and it should be scarified with a large scarifier.
The ventosae of legs diminish in a manifestly clear manner: because they draw blood from the whole body, and they provide old pains in kidneys, uterus, and bladder; they provoke menstruation, and they provide bothor, and ademenul; and they stand at the place of phlebotomy for two saphenas, and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause fainting to occur in many men.
And the help of ventosa alhorcobeni is close to the help of ventosa for two legs.
The quality of the position of ventosae is that you place the ventosa first in an empty area, and suck with moderate suction; and do not prolong the position of ventosae, but put them quickly, and remove them quickly, so that humors come to the place of arrival equally: and do not cease to repeat it and continue until you see the place already redden and swell, and the redness appears to be blood; then scarify, and gradually continue suction. Then consider in the arrangement of bodies.
For one who is from soft flesh and rare pores, it is necessary to make a single incision, not more: so that the place does not ulcerate.
And order the Wind-finder to enlarge the incision and not too deeply: and regulate the suction in ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is a thickening in the blood, then it is necessary to make an incision twice. In the first vein (artery), an opening is made for the subtle blood and its moisture; and in the second scrutiny for the extraction of thick blood.
If indeed the blood is very foul, then make an incision a third time: that it may follow the final one.
And at last, when we want to extract blood gradually or slightly, a single incision is sufficient for us. If we wish to extract much blood, make the incisions with multiple incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make a deep incision: and the end equal in the incision is the depth of the skin.
What is that which must be administered with oils for the position of the Wind-finder, and what must the Wind-finder avoid?
In the one whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and the pores of which are narrow, it is necessary to anoint the places of the Wind-finder with oils that are opening, softening, resolving: if it is in summer, such as aloe oil, or olive oil, or oil from sweet almonds, or oil from squash seeds.
And if it is in winter, then use narcissus oil, or oil of the lily, or chamomile oil, or saffron: and similar to these.
If the swelling is large and cold, then use bitter almond oil, or balsam oil, or sweet almond oil, or sesame oil and similar ones.
If the swelling is small and soft, then oil should be prohibited. It is necessary that they rinse the affected areas with rose water after swelling has occurred, or with cold water, or with sea water, or with pumpkin juice, or with purslane water, and similar ones.
He whose blood is of great moisture, let him rinse the swellings with vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and sumac; and similar ones.
For whom the swellings are large, let him rinse his swellings with old wine, or with water of fennel, or with anise decoction, or chamomile; and similar ones.
It is necessary to avoid swelling in the bath or near the bath, rather it should be administered after leaving the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
It is not necessary that anyone sleeps after swelling.
[Paragraph: What should be done to control swelling or bleeding before swelling occurs.]
And after that, it is necessary to consider first: then if the swelling or bleeding person is choleric and his acuity and inflammation overpowers his blood, then it is necessary for him to receive cooling agents, such as mulberry; also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and cucumber, and yarrow; and similar ones.
And let his food be chickens, and cooked sheep's meat, and condiments with sourness; and similar ones.
And for whom the complexion is cold, it is necessary to take syrup in drink made from honey, or almond, or yarrow seed; and drink medium-aged wine, which is between old and new; and it is ordered that he use sparingly food. Place his food with the young birds, and let him eat them: and swallow them, that is to say, small birds: and let him eat the young pigeons.
It is necessary that the drink on the day of venesection and phlebotomy be more than the food: and it is necessary that in some people in the hours of tyriaca alfaroch or medicine from musk, that is, muscat oil, or aleselithe be given before venesection: and before phlebotomy, or after: to strengthen the principal members, and to make the blood thin. And it is not necessary that they drink it heated.
Chapter on Venesection without Scarification. The venesections that are without scarification, are the venesections that are placed on the liver, and spleen, and podagra, and on the abdomen, navel, and places of kidneys, and bladder: because these members do not bear scarification upon them.
And it is not sought through them, except by the attraction of blood from one member to another: as we place the venesection on the breasts in the illness of nasal bleeding. And we use them to remove the cold venosity unappealing in one member from another: as we place the venesection on the abdomen and navel. For it dries the member, and warms it up, and removes pain because it has removed that venosity.
It is also placed on the kidneys when there is an obstruction, or a stone. By its virtue of attraction perhaps it opens up obstruction, or eradicates the stone from its place.
And similarly it does when placed on the liver and spleen for the venosity to be removed in both.
And the Ventosae are administered empty when cut only. And at times they are administered with fire.
And at times they are filled with warm water for pleurisy conditions; and this is to fill the Ventosa, and it should be large, with only hot water, or water in which cooked herbs that agree have been steeped.
Form of the Ventosa administered with fire.
The width of its opening should be two fingers open, as we have made; and the depth should be half the size of a palm; and on its side in the place that is approximately midway through it, there shall be a small hole, according to the size that can enter it with an awl; it should be made of bronze or citrine, smooth, equal edges, polished; so as not to harm the limb at its position above it; and in the middle of it there shall be a cross bar transverse from bronze or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And now this Ventosa is made large, larger than what we have described, but not much smaller, according to the conditions and age of the one who uses it.
For indeed, the Ventosa for children and weak ones are different from the Ventosa for men and robust bodies.
The quality of placing this Ventosa with fire on a limb is to burn linen cloth or a small candle from wax and place it on the middle cross bar that is in the center of the Ventosa; so that the fire is below the lower part of the Ventosa, so as not to burn the weak body.
Then it is placed on a limb; and the finger should be on the hole that I said, until we hold the Ventosa; when we need to, remove the finger, and the vapor will exit through the hole, and the Ventosa will break immediately.
Then heat the linen cloth according to its kind, and repeat if necessary.
In the plaster that is administered in case of pleurisy with water, there is no transverse rod nor hole: and it is not applied except because it is filled with water and placed only on the member.
And this is its form.
And this plaster is better when it is larger so that it can hold more water.
Chapter on Suspension of Sanguisugarum (Sugarcane).
Sugarcane juice is not administered in many places except where it is impossible to position fumigating vapors due to their smallness, such as lips, gums, and similar places. Or on a naked member like the finger or nose, and similar places.
And the quality of using them is: to come from sugarcane that are in sweet, clean waters free from decay.
Then they are left day and night in sweet water until they become hungry and there remains nothing in their stomachs. Afterwards, the body should be evacuated first with bloodletting and with fumigating vapors. Then clean the sick member until it turns red. Afterwards, they are placed upon it.
When they are filled and fall, and it is possible to suck the place with fumigating vapors, then it is more effective in helping: and if not, then clean the place with vinegar. Afterwards, when much water is added, it is rubbed and pressed out.
If the course of blood continues after the use of sugarcane, and it needs to be sweated out, then immerse a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the perspiration stops.
If blood is multiplied, then sprinkle on it powdered zegi that has been crushed, or gall, and similar things from spices: until the blood is cut off.
Or place pieces of peeled beans there: and allow them to remain until the beans stick to the place, for the blood is cut off when this happens.
And it is necessary that, if the use of Sanguisugum is required, they should be changed when possible.
But if Sanguisugae are forbidden from suspension, then the place with fresh blood is washed. Or insert a lancet into the places until something comes out of the blood. Then they should be placed, for they themselves will immediately stick when they sense something from the blood.
When it is desired that they fall, sprinkle something from crushed aloes onto them, or salt, or ashes: and they will immediately fall.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of medicine and is the restoration of a fracture or dislocation of bones.
Know that foolish physicians and the common people boast about this chapter, and those who have never examined an ancient book or read a letter from it.
And for this reason, because this method has been deprived among the learned in our land. I myself have never been familiar with this method in any way, nor have I gained knowledge of it except through the length of reading ancient books and my devotion to understanding them until I extracted that knowledge from them.
Then I clung to experience and prolonged life.
I have already described to you all that my knowledge contains within this Chapter: and beyond what my experience has reached, after I abbreviated it for you, and released it from the prolongation of occupation, and abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation, and showed it at the end of declination; and I formed in it many shapes of instruments used within it, since it is through addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary that we state in the preface of this Chapter, the main points and headings, to which the understanding of the craftsman is first required regarding their truth; namely that you, and those who are quick, should know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
Therefore, I say that when any fracture, dislocation, twisting, or accident happens, then it is necessary to rush at once to bleed him and solve the problem, or both at the same time; unless something forbids it, such as weakness of strength; or he who has it is a child, an old man weakened, or there is a time of intense heat, or very intense cold.
Then let him be content with his food, cold vegetables, and turnips, and beans; and let wine, heavy meats, and filling foods from every kind of food that fills the veins with blood be prohibited. Until you are secure from hot fever and not fearful of the emission of matter to the limb; then let the sick person return first to his own diet with which his custom is accustomed.
When the broken bone begins to heal, it is then necessary that the sick person be fed with nourishing foods in abundance, thick, heavy, containing viscosity; such as food made from cooked wheat with water, rice, and heads, and feet, and entrails of cattle, and eggs, and fresh fish; and thick wine, and similar things. When this regimen is applied, the healing of the fracture occurs more quickly and better.
And know that broken bones, in men who are in the first old age and are weakened, cannot always be united and consolidated according to their nature, due to drying out of their members; and they consolidate and unite what is from them at the end of softness, such as the bones of small children.
Nevertheless, nature annexes something resembling glue to the broken bone from all sides, in which there is thickness, with which it adheres and tightens it until they are consolidated against each other and bound together until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until it does not prohibit anything from its operations; and for this reason it is necessary that you place nourishment for the sick with heavy foods, containing viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of the members; because a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head: and a fracture of the bone of the chest is different from a fracture of the bone of the back: and similarly all other members are different from each other; and I come with a reminder of every type of fracture exposed in its own chapter. The species of bone fracture are diversified even within themselves.
Since the fracture of it is curved, what happen in it are also stars (or studs). And sometimes the fracture of it happens along the length of the bone; and there are fractures called stars (or studs), that is, studs, and additions coming forth, as in a reed when a knife is prepared for writing. And not proceeding; and it is a fracture with wound and rupture at the head; and it is a small cleft fracture.
And each species has its skill, or proper tool for its restoration, according to which its memory will come, distinguished in their places.
And from that which the bone fracture is known, there is its curvature, and its prominence; and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
When therefore the curvature is not appearing in place, nor a sound when you touch it with pressure on the bone, nor does it find a large pain; then there is no fracture there, indeed it is possible that it is a curvature or a small cleft fracture; therefore, do not move it with your hand and compression at all, but rather put some medicine over it where its memory is, after the appropriate time has passed; then compress the bandage with subtle tension.
And know that when the place is curved and split into two, except for studs (or stars), remove all parts from their natural position; then it will be necessary for you to begin at your hour for its correction, equalizing it before a hot abscess occurs.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs, then let it be for several days until the abscess subsides. Then, cut it evenly according to whatever method can be done with kindness and skill.
And know that the restoration of it, and its alignment, is easier than bone, in which complications may occur.
Then tie it, as your memory recalls it.
If there are complications in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this fractured limb from both parts, whether it be a hand or foot; or with your hand, if the member is small; or with two ropes, or with a rope and your hand.
Let the position in which you place the limb be on an equal plane, according to its natural shape, until the parts of the fractured member are extended; then try to bring back those additions with all your skill, and according to whatever method you can do it in their places: and take care not to cause pain or injury due to your operation; and try, according to your strength, to apply one bone to its companion, according to the best forms.
It is necessary in that hour for you to test and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and align it by the quantity of your skill.
And beware of excessive stretching and strong compression, as many foolish people do. For many times they cause abscesses or contractions to occur in the member through their operation; as we have already seen it happen many times through their operations.
Then join after the alignment and proper operation, and binding and rest of this member, and peace and calmness; and warn the weak person about it. And make him be careful not to move it in the hour of his waking, and sleep, and turning, and restlessness, and all his movements, with all his strength. And so that it may be avoided, let there not be a position of a member with which follows pain. When he feels pain or injury while in the position of a member: then it is necessary to move him to another position from which he does not feel pain.
And so let that be avoided, that his position is uneven or twisted: lest there occur a twist in the member when he is to be restored.
The quality of the binding for a broken member is as I have described.
Know that broken members are differentiated by their size, and the extent of their breakage, and their shape.
Those which are small, such as the arm, and finger, and shin-bone, and similar to these, then it is necessary that there be a rolling of soft, fine cloth over them. But those which are large, such as the hip and thigh, it is necessary that there be a broad, hard rolling over them.
Because a wide band joins a large member and binds it all around with an equally tight binding so that no stain penetrates it.
Then after your evacuation, place an appropriate linen on it, in soft woolen over the place of the break itself. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the place of the break itself three or four times, according to what the member deserves; and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
Then go to the upper part away from the place of the break and bind it less than your previous binding that you applied to the broken place. Then withdraw with the bandage from the place of the break slightly and soften the binding gradually until you have taken a large amount from a healthy place.
Then take another dressing and wrap it again over the broken place with bandages. After moving with the incline towards the lower part from the fracture. And your operation shall be in the stricture of the incline and its softening, according to what we said in the first higher incline.
Then place between the inclines from soft wool or cloth that matches the twisting of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; and if not, do not place anything in it.
Then incline over the same wound another. Afterwards, place evenly on these inclines stars properly made immediately, if there is no swelling or hot abscess.
If there is swelling or abscess in it; then place over it what sits on that abscess, and remove the swelling; and let it remain for some days. Then bind over them the stars.
The stars shall be from the middle parts of wide reeds, shaved and skillfully formed; or they shall be made of wood from which cribra are made, which are made from pine, yew, palm branches or calingi; and let the width of all the stars be according to this form and this same shape.
However, it is necessary that the star placed over the tendon should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and the length of the star shall be according to what allows the limb in terms of size and smallness.
Then bind over the stars with another bandage, according to the first stricture. Then bind over it with threads properly, according to what we said about the stricture; and your stricture shall be above the fracture more; and the greater the distance from the fracture, the less the stricture.
It is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and be made of soft flax.
If threads are thick, as I saw in the operation of fools tying threads twisted from flax cords, it is a great error: because a constriction falls out with them beyond quality.
Fine threads do not agree again: because you will not achieve what you want through the constriction with them.
And it is not proper that there be less than a finger's breadth between the anvil and the hammer.
If the weak [person] is injured by the extremities of the anvils after the constriction in healthy places: then place under them soft wool or carded wool until nothing is injured from that.
But when there is a fracture with a wound and there occurs disruption in the skin, I will come with its discussion in chapter two under special cases.
And know that not every broken limb should be tied with anvils from the first day. What is meant by this, is that when a limb is large, you should not place superior anvils on it unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your safety from the risk of cold abscesses.
This is the method of plasters which the ancients used to restore, which are placed on a fracture and dislocation.
¶ Common Plaster Method abbreviated, restoring a fracture, suitable for many constitutions, particularly women and children: because it is from that which heat does not conquer nor cold.
And it is to receive from the flour mill dust and it is the marrow of the wheat which hangs on the walls of the mill near the movement of the stones: and make this as it is, except that you sift it with egg white: and place its composition not thick, nor thin. Then use it.
¶ Another Plaster Method, restoring a fracture, dislocation and twisting. Prepare almess, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mugath. Grind all of them until they are as fine as ten parts of myrrh, five parts of aloes, and twenty parts of alethil. Sieve them and mix with alethil water, or with sheep's white grease if the disease is hot. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, restores broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Another method for the plaster which also treats fractures and dislocations. Prepare mugath, mess, white alteae, all of them pounded until as fine as ten parts of myrrh, five parts of aloes, six parts of acacia, twenty parts of Armenian pounded boli, and sieve them. Mix with water or sheep's white grease and administer.
Another method for the plaster for joining bones and separating them from their places: it relieves pain and swelling in those places, and heals broken bones and fractures. Take boiled wool, immerse it in vinegar and hot oil, then place it over the affected area.
In this plaster there is no healing power, but it is good for the relief of hot abscesses and it effectively drives out pains.
Another method for the plaster that restores a broken bone. Take the leaves of the fig tree and the wild papaver: grind them all and make a plaster from both.
Another short method for the plaster administered in the healing of a broken bone, and when you wish to resolve the remaining abscess. Prepare the root of alteae, chamomile, flowers of violets, and herb flour, all one part: grind them all and mix with wine if the limb is not heated.
If it is heated (the wound), then make that with water of coriander (juice) or with water and use it.
Another stronger method for healing, stronger than the first, when a hard abscess occurs during restoration of a limb. Take equal parts of althea root, linseed, balaustia, lentil, samsuc, viole flowers, and chamomile. Grind all together and make a paste with water of willow, sweet water, or wine. Apply the above to the member according to its heat and calmness of the heat.
Hippocrates himself did not say in his book that it should be placed on a fractured member during its healing, except for plaster made from tallow and oil, not anything else; and he said that it should have a middle state between thickness and subtlety.
Galenus, however, saw fit that they should be placed on a fractured member during its healing, things that have the dryness of heat, such as myrrh and aloes and olibanum and similar ones mentioned earlier.
Method of plaster for injury and pain relief. Take equal parts of mugath (althea), chickpeas, human hairs (or bird feathers), althea root, and salt. Grind and sieve and make a paste from it; and make plaster out of it.
The amount by which the ligature should remain, then dissolve, is such that you consider whether pain does not occur, nor itching, nor is the bone moved from its place; then do not dissolve it for many days. If itching or discomfort or swelling occurs in the place; then hurry and dissolve it within an hour and remove the plaster from it; and take a soft cloth or a soft sea sponge moistened; and submerge it in warm water and wash the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain is soothed.
If itching or discomfort or swelling occurs in the place; then hurry and dissolve it within an hour and remove the plaster from it; and take a soft cloth or a soft sea sponge moistened; and submerge it in warm water and wash the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain is soothed. Then let the member rest for one hour. Then place a scalded wool upon it, immerse it in vinegar and oil (or rose oil), or oil: and bind it on top of it at night until you are secure from the hot abscess, and let the swelling of the member subside, and remove its pain.
Then repeat it for a delicate bandage and a small plaster: and do not bind it tightly with your first constraint, and delicately with it until it heals.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling and all other symptoms are already completely removed, and if you need plaster and bandage, then repeat it as you did at first equally.
If nothing of what we said happens in the member, then do not loosen it, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is released after twenty days, according to what appears to you from the loosening of the member, as we said, until when a fracture adheres and coagulation of the flesh approaches on it: add also in the bandage more than your first binding: and add also in the thickening of food for the sick, according to what was previously remembered.
If you see a place of the fracture already to dry out and thin more than is necessary: then know that nutrition is prevented from reaching it. Therefore, anoint the member with warm water at every corner where you loosen it, and let it be for all three days, and rub the bandage slightly.
By this operation, nourishment flows to the member, and it heals quickly.
But what the foolish restorers do from a fracture of the member instead of first restoring it as is necessary, and they restore it according to crookedness, this is an error in their operation, and there is great fear: and if it were right, they would have said that in their old books, and operated with it.
And I have nowhere seen their trace in that entirely, and it is more correct that it should not be done.
On the making of a fracture in the head.
Types of fractures are diverse, and their forms many; and their causes are distinguished.
For there is a fracture which occurs from striking with a sword; and the blow removes bone completely as far as it penetrates into the siphac, which is beneath the bone, just as an ax does in wood; and for this reason this type of fracture is called Axial.
Or the sword cuts something of a bone and cuts its face, but does not penetrate with the cut to its end; and this type of fracture is called Kalan, that is, Absolute Lever.
And there is a wound of two types of fractures, either large or small.
And from a fracture there is one that is a crushing or grinding; and its cause is a blow with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also penetrating, which approaches the membrane, which is beneath the bone; or it is on the face of a bone; and this type of fracture has two forms, either small or large.
And from a fracture there is one that is hidden in the bone in its finest part; and it is a small crack, and for this reason this type of fracture is called Capillar.
And among them there is a fracture that occurs from falling or striking with a stone, and similar things; which make the layer of the bone enter within, and it forms a hollow in its place; just as happens to the caldrons of brass when they are struck, and part of them enters within.
And this indeed often occurs in the bones of moist heads, such as those of children's heads.
And all these types of fractures of the sternum are separate, and I shall come with the recollection of that entire thing in its place.
And we know all these types of fractures by detection over it and examination of them with tests, and removal of the corrupted flesh that is over them.
The Capillary type is known by this: it is detected over the bone, scraped off and then bound over it with pitch; for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, consider first the condition of the patient: then, if you see signs in his condition that indicate fear, such as cholera vomiting, extension, loss of intelligence, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, eye discharge, redness of eyes, and similar signs in many other conditions, it is most likely not to heal; and if you see signs that do not frighten you and you hope for recovery: then begin the treatment.
If someone comes to you wounded first with the wound, and it is in winter days, then it is necessary that you strive for the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all circumstances.
And if it is in summer days, then it is necessary that you hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the bone from fat corrupts and the signs that we have mentioned occur.
If the fracture of the bone has already reached the fat touching the brain, and is with grating and pulling: then it is necessary that you cut the broken and ground part, as I tell you.
And it is necessary that you shave the head of the wounded person: and scrape over the bone in any way possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light for the patient.
If it happens to you during bone examination, a blood flow or a hot abscess: then oppose him with what is necessary. And it is to be filled with linen soaked in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess settles down, and be careful of bleeding. Then begin in the cure of the bone, and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
One method is to cut the bone with a curved blade: and this is its shape.
Then administer another scalpel, broader but shorter than the first: and this is its shape.
Then also administer another scalpel wider than the second.
And the second method is to have a number of scalpels of different sizes, some wider than others and some shorter; they should be at the end of their sharpness, and made of iron or bronze; use them with ease when striking the scalpel so as not to strike the head and injure it.
If the bone is hard: then it is necessary to bore around it before you administer the scalpel, with the chisels that are called terebras, which do not penetrate deeply; they are not called so because they do not pass beyond the limit of the bone to what is behind it; because the terebra has a rounded end above that which is underneath the head and is sharp like an edge, and a small circle prevents it from sinking and penetrating the thickness of the bone.
It is also suitable for you to take a large number of these chisels, one of which corresponds to the thickness of the bone, until there are as many terebras as the skull requires; the sharpness of each should be according to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three species of trephines, or trepans.
The quality of perforating around a broken bone is as follows: you should place the trepan on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that it has already penetrated the bone. Then change the trepan to another place, and place there that which is between every hole of such size as a finger's breadth or approximately so.
Then cut with the saw what is between every hole in the bone, and make it finer than possible at the end of the thinness, as we have said, until you have chiseled the bone, either with your hand or with some other tools which you have prepared for that purpose, such as tenaliae and fine forpices.
And it is necessary that you take every care to ensure that the trepan or saw does not touch anything from the skin.
When you therefore perforate the bone by circumscribing it and it has been separated from the skin, if it is continuous with it, and you extract it, it is necessary that you grind and level off the extremity which remains in the bone with another similar saw. However, it should be thin and delicate compared to other saws.
If something remains of the small bones and splinters, then take them with ease, with that which is at hand from your tools. Then care for the wound afterwards with linen and ointments as we have said.
And another method of operation is easy, entirely far from fear; which Galen said and praised greatly; and this is his saying. It is necessary for you first to begin by exposing the bone from the place where the fracture is more intense and clearer; until when you have exposed that part and placed under it the extremity of this saw with a concave shape, which has this form.
The rounded part (of the eye) cuts nothing gently: and the sharp part of it proceeding in both its sides as you see, so that the rounded part of the lens is attached to the sclera, with its sharp edge incident on the bone.
Then strike upon the Incisor with a small hammer until you cut through the bone easily, as it is usually turned (in operation): and be careful that no cloth slips into what is being cut, which you fear might happen altogether.
If the physician were not more foolish than men, nor more ignorant of his craft, nor asleep, then if something remained attached to the bone from the cloth in certain places, he would cut it away with the sharp edge of the incisor's lenticular part and free it easily. It is freed from it without harm and without fear.
If the bone is not broken through to the cloth, and what is being cut away from the bone is its face, with roughness and subtle irregularities remaining in it: then it is necessary that you smooth out that roughness and remove those irregularities with fine rasps which you have prepared in various quantities, so that it is possible for you to administer more suitable and correct ones according to the procedure of the operation, and the broken bone and its shape. And it is necessary that you administer according to your judgment, first smoothing the bone more broadly with those rasps. Then use a finer one after that.
And it is necessary that you administer according to your judgment, first smoothing the bone more broadly with those rasps. Then use a finer one after that. And do not cease to do this in continuity until you come to administer more thinly and finer of them all.
In each of the remaining small cracks and a fine break, care must be taken according to what leads to its correction.
And it is a matter that cannot be hidden upon all, to which in this art there is any study, and it stood upon what we have written, and we showed in large fractures.
If however a piece of cloth is found to be retained when you excise bone: then it is necessary that you take linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it on the opening of the wound. Then take another piece of cloth, either doubled or tripled, and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first one; and do that as easily as possible above it, so that it is not heavy.
Then administer on top of it a wide bandage; and do not tighten it except according to the size that holds the wound only; and release it with this care for one day or two days until you are assured from hot inflammation. Then dissolve it (the bandage), and administer afterwards medications with which excessive dryness is superfluous; such as the roots of garlic, and flour of herbs, and powder of incense, and aristolochia, and similar ones: and it is that you make from these medications a powder, which is to be sprinkled on the wound like dry ones.
And universally administer on it all medicine with the property of purifying and not biting. And be careful according to your ability that the wound is clean during your treatment; neither let there be filth from ointments, nor dirtiness.
And be careful according to your ability that the wound is clean during your treatment; neither let there be filth from ointments, nor dirtiness. Neither let the pus gather in it entirely; because when pus gathers on a cerebral cloth, it corrupts it and rots itself, and great evil follows after that for the patient: and already it has happened in the head, when the bone is cleaned from it, especially when care is neglected for it, blackness appears on its surface.
Consider then, if afflictions occur to the sick as we have said, know that it is undoubtedly dangerous.
If there is no discoloration (nigredo) unless it arises from the medication placed upon it and it is in the virtue of that medicine to cause discoloration: then you should take a portion from honey, three portions from rose oil, and anoint with them a cloth. Then place it on a sheep's bladder (siphac): afterwards treat it with the remedies suitable for healing until it is healed.
[Section heading: Restoration of the nose when broken.]
Know that the nose is not broken except by the two upper parts of it together or one of them: because they consist of two bones; since its lower part (inferius) is cartilaginous, it does not break and does not happen unless there is rubbing, distortion, and deviation.
If one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you insert a small finger into the nose's opening and hold the fracture with your index and thumb from the outside until the nose returns to its natural shape; this should be done skillfully and easily. And beware that your treatment does not cause pain to the sick person.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger does not reach it: then you should apply pressure to the end of the radius where there is a slight swelling.
If the fracture is in two parts, then make a similar one and approach with its healing on the first day of the fracture if possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day in the presence of warm cauterizers (apostematis).
Then insert a strip of linen from a linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part; or insert two strips of linen if the fracture is in two parts: and let there be a swelling of sufficient size in the linen to fill the opening of the nose.
And certain restorers of old times said, that linen should be soaked in butter and changed every day. That rather does not seem to me, but it is necessary that linen be soaked in cow's milk, prepared with miller's flour. Then let the linen be removed when the bone hardens and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the place of linen in the nose, after a soft cloth has been laid upon it; and this is done so that the linen holds the fracture of the nose more strongly, and so that the weak are not hindered from breathing.
And this is not necessary. If you wish, do it; and if you wish, do linen.
And if it happens that the nose again when treating an abscess while operating, pack the nose with hot plasters, or with cerotic, or with pitch softened in rose oil, or a little bit of aloes.
But if an abscess does not occur, then it is necessary that the pack be made with sesame flour and incense powder prepared with cow's milk. Then place a soft wool on top of it, and do not tie the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are broken by a small fracture or crushed, then it is necessary that you cut above them and extract them with instruments suitable for them. Then be cauterized and care for it with that which adheres to it, and let it heal with suitable packs or ointments.
If there is a wound between the nose and lip, then it is necessary to care for it with linen; and administer a lead tube until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of the lower jaw when it breaks.
When the lower jaw is disrupted and its fracture is not accompanied by a wound: then examine whether its fracture is only on the outside and it does not break into two, and it bends towards the inside: then its recognition is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is in the right part of it (the jaw), insert your left index finger into the weak bone: similarly, if the fracture is in the left lower jaw, then insert your right index finger: and push with it the bulge of the fracture towards the outside with ease from within the bone using your other hand properly from the inside part of the bone, and with it equalize it.
If the fracture of the lower jaw is already separated into two, then it is necessary to administer extension from both parts, according to rectitude: until it is possible to equalize it.
If however, disturbance or disruption has already occurred among the teeth, then bind those which you hope will remain with a thread of gold, silver, silk, or floss. Then place upon the broken lower jaw pieces of lead. Then place over it a double cloth and put over the cloth a large star-shaped plaster well made: or an equal piece of shoe sole leather in length of the lower jaw.
Then bind it above (the dressing), according to the preparation of its binding and the fitting of its application, until it is not destroyed: and order the patient to rest quietly: and put his softened food.
If you think that something has changed its shape by some means: then hurry and undo it on the third day. Then straighten what has been changed from it, and plaster it with flour mill powder, with egg white or wheat flour, after you have removed the lead: and place over the plaster soft wool.
While that adhesive plaster remains on it and the bone arrangement does not change, leave it undisturbed until it heals; or tie up the fracture. This fracture is often tied for three weeks.
If a warm abscess occurs meanwhile, then administer what I said earlier for its relief until the abscess is removed.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, consider. If the bone fragment is already separating from the bone or the flesh, then be careful with this. Use fine instruments to remove the bone fragments that are suitable for you in removing them from the instruments.
If the wound opening is narrowed, then expand it with a leech according to your needs.
Then when you remove the flesh, and nothing remains of it, or if the wound opening is large: and if not, cover it with plasters that are suitable for this, and let it heal until it heals.
[Title] On the restoration of a fork when it breaks.
Much indeed is broken by the Furcula from the anterior part, near the humerus, and its fracture is made according to one of the three modes.
Either it is broken and separated into two, apart from which complications may occur within it; and it is easier for its restoration.
Or, so that complications occur in the bone itself; and it is difficult for its restoration.
Or, so that it is a fracture with wounding.
And the procedure for it when the fracture is without wounding is as follows: make two attendants present, so that one of them holds the assisting hand that follows the broken Furcula, and the other stretches the neck towards the side.
Then you must equalize the fracture with your fingers until it takes on its form, as is required; there should be no prominence nor hollow within it.
If you require more stretching, then it is necessary that you place a small ball made of cloth or wool beneath the weakened patient's neck, and its size should correspond to your need; and stretch, lift, and apply the ball with your hand until you equalize the fracture, as is required.
If you cannot draw out the extremity of the Furcula to the outside because it has reached deep within; then it is necessary that the weakened patient lies on his neck and places a splint of medium size under his shoulder; and press an assistant on his humerus towards the lower part, so that the bone of the Furcula in the deep part is lifted upwards; at that time, correct the fracture and equalize it with your fingers.
If you feel a splinter from the Furcula and it moves; then it is necessary that you probe over it and draw out the splinter easily.
If it is retained in the bone, then prepare a probe for its incision with one of the Incisorium you have prepared for that purpose; after placing an instrument under the Furcula to protect the Sifach (ligament), and this instrument can be made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It resembles a snail without a hollow part.
Let its width be according to that which you require for it depending on the size of the bone and its smallness. The length (of it) should also be, as much as possible, for your operation.
It shall have two ends, as you see: one wide, and the other narrow.
If however the wound split which you cut when you pulled out the splinter of bone, is wide, and you are free from heat: then gather together two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the split is small, or you fear a hot abscess: then fill the wound with cloths, and lint according to the size of the wound cut.
If a hot abscess occurs, then pour oil of rose into it, and vinegar, and wine, and place (something) on top of it.
The narrowing (of a bone) without wound and without cutting, is to place on the bone a plaster made from flour milled with egg white. And place a soft cushion over it. Then place a sphere under the sensitive part of it, if needed. Then take a roll (tourniquet), that which the Saracens hold, which is very long: and its width should be as large as one palm or approximately that. Then place lint (together) on top of the cushion and plaster. Then take a needle from a delicate wood, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then insert it into the cloth. Then insert the cloth with the needle at the place of the bleeding that falls upon the fracture and place. Then place the astringent (tourniquet) upon the fracture as it is turned, and insert it upon its healthy part and its weak part: and tie it over all parts, so that the narrowing holds the fracture properly: and this is what must not be concealed from you, and all of it, so that the needle does not move from the broken bone. It is necessary that you examine the sick person every day. Whenever the ligament becomes soft and you see the splinter being removed, then adjust it and tighten the ligament.
Then place the sick person's sleep on his back and put a small pebble under his pulse during his sleep so that when he is awakened, help will be near him from the side of himself. The break in the collarbone is to be treated by elevating the shoulder.
Or bind the arm to the neck; and do not loosen the binding, unless it happens in the place of occurrence from itching or from an abscess, for twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see his face turning towards it. And add a small amount to the constriction, and let it go until it heals and hardens.
The break in the collarbone is tightened and supported most for twenty days; and sometimes it happens in fewer than that number of days in some people.
Chapter on the healing of a broken oar.
Rarely does an oar break at its wide part; and it is not broken except from the edges of it.
When it breaks at its wide part and breaks in the middle, and this is not known except by touch; then prepare for it according to the shape of the break. Reduce it to its natural form by any means that is possible for you.
Then put on the place flour of milling with egg white and soft wool, and put a small cloth on top. Then place over it a splint made of thin wood according to the size of the oar, or slightly larger but not much so.
If there is a hollow under the star (mark) on any spatula's handle, then fill that hollow with soft wax until the mark sinks down evenly.
Then coat it on top with long alum paste, with appropriate constriction and strength of the star, until it is not removed from its place.
And consider the ligature (bandage) each day. Whenever the ligature softens, coat it and if the star moves from its place, let it lie weak on its healthy side.
The spatula is restored within twenty or thirty days.
When this number (20 or 30) is complete, then loosen the ligature: and you will be safe. For it (the spatula handle) is made of bones whose fracture is not feared, nor their solution.
If a splinter comes out of the bone and pierces under the skin, then cut above it and remove it. And do as we have said in the treatment of a dislocated collarbone with warm poultice, if something happens from it (the spatula handle).
Chapter on the restoration of a broken breastbone.
The breastbone sometimes breaks in half and this rarely happens. Its extremities break more often and are crushed due to accidents of it.
When its middle breaks and declines towards the lower part, and it causes a violent pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and possibly vomiting blood, and a hollow is declared on the broken bone and not concealed from the sense, the restoration of it is that it lies weak on its back: and place between the spatulas its pulvinar.
Then press the arms and bring the ribs from both sides or flanks with hands: and grind it evenly in accordance with any way that can be possible for it to return to the shape of the bone, as is necessary.
Then place upon it an ointment and a stopper, and on top of it an astel from subtle wood (such as willow or alder), or chalking (a type of plaster) and similar ones, after you have rolled it up in a cloth. Then bind it firmly to the broken bone so that it is not moved: and go with the bandage according to its round shape towards the back several times, and tighten it appropriately using a suitable ligature.
Then consider the bandage in every hour, and whenever it becomes soft, tighten it; and if the need for its solution arises due to itching, corrosion that occurs at the place, or pain, or abscess: then go, unbind it, remove the ointment, and correct whatever has happened with the treatment method.
Then reduce the ointment if you see it facing that way; and connect a ligature until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of ribs, when they are broken.
Know that a rib fracture does not occur except in thick places following the back, and from the extremities of them from the anterior part. And it does not occur by rubbing, unless because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this is not hidden from sensation during examination with fingers.
And the restoration of it is done so that the fracture is aligned with fingers to the extent possible until it is equal in shape as required. Then apply ointment and bind the broken bone with a stopper if needed.
If the rib fracture is sloping towards the inside: then a severe pain occurs, and puncture, just like the puncture that happens to one who has pleurisy: because the bone pierces the membrane (pleura), and also difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood frequently; and this is difficult to treat.
And the ancients were skilled in that [surgery] with many devices: and among them are those who say, that you should place foods for the sick which generate inflammation and wind, so that the belly is inflamed, and it is extended, and pushed, the fracture to the exterior.
But we abhor that a cause quick for making a hot abscess should not happen if it does not occur. If it has already happened, then you add it [the medicinal substance] to it.
And some of them said: place a windy mixture on the location, then squeeze it with strength, and it is similar to reasoning. However, it is feared that windy superfluities are attracted to the location due to the arrangement of weakness.
And some of them said: the location should be covered with wool that is already submerged in hot oil: and lice should be placed between the ribs until it is filled up: so that it will be a bandage equal when you turn it according to roundness.
Then the sick person is treated with a pleural treatment from food and medicine.
If something severe presses the sick person, which he cannot bear, and it touches the wound with a sharp object or prick it with a puncture, and we fear above the sick one: then it is necessary that we cut above the location and expose the broken rib. Then we place on it an instrument that conserves sifac, whose memory has preceded: and we cut the bone with ease, and cut it itself.
Then we bring together two lips of the wound, if it is large with stitching: and we treat it itself with plasters until it heals.
If a hot abscess happens meanwhile, then hurry, and pour lice into rose oil, and place it on the location: and the sick person is treated with that which is suitable for abscess.
The patient should also lie on the opposite side until he recovers.
On the restoration of a fracture of the spine and neck.
Fracture sometimes occurs in the bones of the neck, and it rarely happens to them attrition; and similarly with the spondylus of the back. When such a thing happens to someone, and one wishes to know whether it will heal or not: then consider. For if you see his hands already softened, stunned, and dead; and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor contract them; and when you squeeze them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, it does not feel this, nor does it feel pain in them: then know that it will not heal, and in many dispositions it is mortal.
If it moves them and feels compression with fingers and prick: then know that the neck bone is intact, and that a broken one will heal with treatment.
If such a thing happens to the spondylus of the back, and one wishes to know whether it will heal or not: then consider his feet; then if you see that they have become softened, and this happens in them as it happened in the hands; furthermore, when he lies on his back, discharge of wind and urine occurs involuntarily; and when he lies on his stomach, discharge of wind and urine occurs involuntarily; and when he wishes to defecate, he cannot: then know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not labor in its treatment.
If nothing happens to him from that, the matter is lighter.
And the treatment for that which happens to him from that is, to apply warm compresses of apothecary's pitch; thus, you should place upon the affected spondylus warm olive oil or fresh cheese of lamb.
Place upon it several times a day until the warm compress is absorbed; then place upon one spot of an ointment that comforts and heals, and bind it over with a bandage, and instruct the sick person to rest quietly and peacefully. He shall not sleep on the part where he found pain, until it is healed.
If it happens to be a fracture of the nasal bone or something that is already separated from it: then one should saw through the skin, and remove it. Then, bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with suturing. Then take care of himself with some fat, from ointments, until he is healed.
If however the last bone of the jaw is broken, and it is at the end of the neck: then one should insert the thumb of the left hand into the nose, and with the other hand, align the broken bone as much as possible, according to what is feasible, and according to the second alignment.
Then place it on top and remove it: and take care of the wound as before, until it is healed.
Chapter on repairing anus.
Chapter 11.
Rarely are the bones of the anus broken. If they break, then the fracture of their bones is not anything but a comminution at their extremities: and they are split lengthwise and inclined towards the inside: and it occurs that there is pain in the place, and puncturing: and the leg which breaks becomes numb.
And the restoration [of the broken bone] is that you place your hand upon it until you stand over the fracture as its shape is.
If the fracture is only at its extremities, then you should adjust that fracture according to how it is prepared for you by the equation, until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is along its length or already inclines towards the inside: then make the weak one lie on his belly, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When you have adjusted it [the broken bone], place ointment on it; then place a splint made of wood or hide over it, and bind a bandage over the splint where you will not fear the displacement of the fracture or removal of the splint.
And adjust the concavity [of the bone fragments] with what will fill it up until the bandage encloses it according to its equal shape; and command the weak one to sleep on his back or healthy side.
If a hot abscess happens to him [the patient]: then stop the extension and restoration of it until the hot abscess sits; and place on it whatever sits under it, as before, then return to its restoration; and bind it as necessary.
If it happens in a bone with pus, or if it is crushed, extract it.
Chapter on the restoration of the fracture of the ulna (forearm bone).
The ulna is that which lies between the elbow and the end of the spatula (wrist).
If it breaks, then its restoration is according to one of two modes.
One mode is that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness in the shape that follows.
And [the piece of wood] will be bound at its two extremities with two bands.
Then it is suspended from a raised place: and the sick one sits on a seat. Then let him cast his broken arm upon the wood until he reaches its notch, in whose middle is attached a cleft of the wood.
Then raise something heavy above him so that the assistant may stretch him to the lower parts. Then the physician joins the break with his hands until it returns, as required.
And another method is that the sick one lies down on his neck: and hang his hand from his neck with a strap. Then order two assistants that one of them holds what is above the break with his hands: and that the other holds below him, and each one stretches to his side.
And if you wish a stronger extension, then tie below the break with a strap, and above it with another strap: and each of the two assistants stretches to his two sides.
If therefore the break is near the end of the shoulder, then it is necessary that a strap be placed under the notch, and another under the break facing the elbow.
And likewise if the break is near the elbow: then it is necessary that a strap be placed over that place, and over the elbow itself.
Then equal the break with ease and without labor, until when it is joined as required, and applied with a good dressing: then tie it if no hot abscess occurs.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs, then release the binding for seven days. And place above him linen cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess subsides: then tie it: and the method of binding is that you put a plaster over the break.
Then place a new cloth layer on top of the plaster. Then gather the arm upon the support itself, and place his open hand upon his shoulder.
Place the cloth and tie the arm to the support so that the arm remains in place like a star; if it does not prevent you from doing anything or if something from the broken bone does not change on you.
If you fear that something from the broken bone may change on you, then use stars; and there is, so that you place upon the fracture itself a star which is wider and stronger than the other stars. And place the width of each star at the size of a finger; and let the length of the stars be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from every part.
Then tie on the stars with the bandage as I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is so that your bandage is tighter over the place of the fracture. And as the fracture becomes longer, let the bandage be looser.
If you see the position of the stars and the bandage as we said, in the hour when you restore the member immediately, then do so; and if you fear a hot abscess, then leave off the bandage and the stars until the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the bandage in all three days to avoid itching or swelling in that place, or for food to be prevented from reaching the member because of the accumulation of superfluity due to the tightness of the bandage. Therefore correct this entire matter as we said.
If you are of the trust that nothing will happen from it: then do not loosen the bandage unless after three days or more.
And let the sick person sleep on his back and place his hands on his stomach; and put under the support a mat full of wool equally.
And consider at every hour of the night or day that the shape of the broken member does not become loose, or the bandage becomes soft. Correct that entirely with your power.
Feed the sick person according to the order we have prescribed, so that the food is subtle at first until the bone begins to close; then it should be increased in size.
For the custom of aid and the leg is that it should be bound for forty days; then it must be loosened, a bath administered, and it should be treated with ointments that correct it.
If the fracture is foul, scrape it; then do not loosen the bandage and splints for fifty days, nor for two months.
Chapter on the restoration of an arm fracture.
The arm is made up of two bones which are called the two humerus bones.
One of them is small: it follows the little finger. And the other is large, and it is placed below the small one from beneath.
Therefore, the larger humerus bone may be broken alone, or the smaller one; and they may break simultaneously.
If therefore the smaller humerus bone is broken at the top, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
And if the larger humerus bone is broken below, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
It becomes worse when both bones break simultaneously.
If the bone that is broken is the smaller humerus bone at the top, then it is fitting for the doctor at its restoration that he should put an extension of lesser size with ease until it matches it.
But if the larger humerus bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to put a strong bandage on it.
And it is necessary to put the hand shape at its restoration and its extension extended over the pulley. The thumb of the hand should be higher than all the fingers; and the inferior joint should be higher than all the digits, or the rest [of them]; and if it is weak, the sitting man should be square with himself, and the pulley be in front of him, or directly below him, at a height so that the weak man does not strain.
Then, the assistant should stretch out the arm from the lower part, either with his hand, or with a rope. And another assistant shall stretch out likewise above [it].
Then the physician shall set the bone until he has reduced it as best as possible to its proper form.
If there are pus-filled sores in the bone fracture, then try to reduce every fragment into its place with your strength.
If it appears that the pus-filled sore is separated and pierces the skin, and there is no hope of restoring it: then puncture it and remove it as we have said in the preceding [instructions].
If there is a bone fracture with a wound: I have already made a separate chapter for that subject, so receive treatment from there.
If a hot abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then prepare a cloth with wax made from rose oil, white beeswax, and have it between thickness and subtlety; and tie the cloth over it with a thin ligature until the abscess settles; then remove the wax, and apply the ready-made plaster prepared from milled powder with egg white. Then place a splint, and let the splint placed over the fracture be somewhat wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in various positions; whether it is a fracture in one splint, or in two splints at once.
Then place a stronger and more powerful ligature over the location of the fracture, and apply a ligature with more string than the one at the top or bottom of the fracture; or place a softer ligature a little below the one mentioned earlier, according to what was recalled in the beginning of the chapter.
The fabric that is wrapped around a fracture should be soft, wet and not hard or rough. The thread with which it is tied should be made of linen specifically, neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have said.
After days, examine the limb and ligament. If something happens that requires correction, such as itching in the limb: then, one must heat embrocation for the limb with warm water until the itching stops, and release the unbound limb until it calms down, then repeat the binding.
If the binding has already been softened and the bone removed, along with similar cases: then correct it completely with your skill, and examine again.
If nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive binding, then one must soften it slightly and release it for a few days until it reaches the same nutrition, then bind it again.
If nothing happens to the weak limb from what we have said, then it is not necessary to be released, unless after 20 days or about this time.
Then, the weak hand should be suspended to its neck. Its neck should be kept straight and it should be guarded with your skill against excessive movements. Make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture is restored within 30 or 40 days; it may possibly be restored in 28 days. Everything is according to the dispositions of temperaments and the dispositions of virtue.
Chapter on the Restoration of Fractures: Hand.
Know that a scissor's hand and the knots of fingers rarely occur a fracture. It occurs to him only through frequent rubbing.
When a break or injury occurs in the foot, then it is necessary that the sick person sits on a level surface opposite to him. Then place his hand upon it extended.
Then the assistant extends the broken bones, and the doctor adjusts them until they join together well.
Then it is necessary to place the plaster and the wool, unless a warm abscess occurs. Then place the splint over it according to the size of the place; and now you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
If the break is at the lower part near the sole of the foot, then make something similar to a ball from cloth; and order the sick person to bend over it with his injured foot; then wrap it tightly with a long cloth.
And let the splint be of leather, which has softness, so that it may be applied to the body of the foot; and tie it as necessary.
If the break is at the outside, then it is necessary to place a splint over it and another below on the foot; and keep the hand open straight. Then apply the bandage, as the hand rolls; and extend between the fingers with a ligament.
If there is a break in any of the knuckles of the fingers, and it is the thumb, then adjust it as necessary. Then tie it with the palm of the hand; and if there is a wound, place a straight splint below it, small, so that the break is elevated and not moved.
If the break is in the other fingers, such as the middle finger, index finger, or little finger, then adjust it, and tie it to the healthy finger that follows it; or tie all of them according to their continuity; and this is better. Or place a small splint over it, as was said for the thumb.
Consider in your restoration, and after its arrangement remove the tumor with warm [substance]: and apply to it what is necessary, when something happens from that, according to his story's repetition.
On the Restoration of the Hip Fracture.
The hip is often broken and becomes apparent to the senses because it turns towards the inner and posterior part.
And its restoration is done in such a way that the ligament above the fracture is tightened, and another ligament below the fracture. The patient stretches himself out on his face.
Then, stretch every ligament that belongs to its part equally: and this when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If it is a fracture close to the root of the hip, then let there be a ligament towards the wing-shaped part, so that the extension falls upward; and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if it is a fracture close to the knee, then let there be a ligament near the knee, so that the extension is towards the lower parts.
Then the physician reduces the bone with both hands until he restores it to its natural shape; and the bone is united by a good union.
It is then necessary to apply a plaster and a bandage if there is no tumor on the limb. If a tumor occurs in it: then let it be left for several days until the warm tumor subsides; then return to your treatment.
The bandage of this should be in such a way. It is necessary to wind something hard over the fracture, that is, a bandage; and double it twice or thrice; and there should be excess in it. Then wind the leg until it reaches the calcaneus at the root of the toes.
Insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee towards the lower parts, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper side of each part. Then wind around the leg and hip that which is surplus from the bowels.
Thereafter place a star on the hip at the location of its own fracture, and place one star upon the bone of the leg.
Then fill the voids between the leg and hip with soft cloths, so that they may be made firm.
Thereafter begin the strong suture at the middle above the location of the fracture with three or four turns. And as you extend more with the ligament from the location of the fracture, let your suture be smaller and softer, and looser.
Then direct the two ends of the thread which you inserted between the hip and the leg. Tie then three stars with each of them that are above. Then go with the two ends of the thread to the lower parts until you reach the ankle of the foot. And with each tie also the ends of the stars on the other side: so that the ligament may not be removed from its place.
Then release the suture above that, until it remains, so that no rot can occur on the limb, nor abscess, nor swelling, or similar things. If anything happens from that. Approach then with the solution of it, and correct completely what happened there, according to what we have said many times.
But if there is a splinter in the bone that pierces: then it is necessary, to equalize it, if it is possible for you. And if not, seal over it, and remove it: and treat with care the one who preceded it in memory, until it is healed.
And sometimes this hip fracture is sutured, besides the addition of stars, as we said in assistance and in the arm.
In the restoration of such a fracture, it does not happen that the infirm (person) limps. If only one is restored (the broken part), except if another leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that the one whose it is limps forever.
And know that the hip is bound for 50 days, or a little more, or a little less; all of this is according to differences in complexions and other dispositions.
Chapter on the restoration of the knee joint fracture.
Know that the fracture of the patella of the knee joint occurs rarely, but it often happens that it wears down (rubs).
If there is a fracture, then it is not anything other than a crack or a hole in its parts. And it is with (accompanied by) a wound, and without a wound. It stands on the whole of it with feeling.
The restoration of it is such that it is fitted together from its parts with the fingers until it is united, according to what is possible from fitting and ease, and construction.
Then apply a plaster made from rice flour or milled wheat with egg white; place on top of it a round bandage if needed; and bind above with a suitable binding for that.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have mentioned in other fractures; such as a hot abscess and similar things; so that you oppose to each event with what is suitable for it until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of the leg fracture.
Know that there are two bones in the leg, one of which is large and is called by the name "leg"; and the other small and slender, and is called "shin".
And it happens that there are the same kinds of fractures for both bones of the leg as for the two bones of the arm; and because of this, the restoration of it is the same as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
If two bones are broken together, the leg is turned in all directions.
If a bone is broken more delicately, the leg is turned to the front part.
If a bone is broken coarsely, you will find it lower and it belongs to those that are not hidden from you.
Then administer the extension, the equality, and the binding of stars according to that equally.
Nevertheless, if the fracture of the leg is a foul one, having many seithages: let the extension be less and the alluviation softer by you.
And in the leg there is something from the operation that resembles the arm and it is, when you equalize the stars, and complete your entire operation, then take two bands made of pine wood which are used for the construction of solaria placed under the tables; they are made of spatulas of the palm and choose those with little thickness and not from the small ones; and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee downwards.
Then roll up on one band with two folds according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side and the other part on the other; they should be from the knee down to the foot.
Then bind the two bands at three places from two ends and the middle. For if pressure is forbidden, the leg inclines to the right and left, and stands firmly in a good position.
And already the cradle made of wood according to the length of the leg should be placed under it to keep it still.
And indeed you should make that in the fracture when there is a wound properly.
Then consider the leg every day and strive with it the utmost diligence from swelling, or inflammation, or other things. If something from these occurs, then oppose it with what is necessary, until it heals, if God wills.
On the Fracture of Bones in the Foot and Fingers.
The calcaneus does not suffer a complete fracture.
Bones of the foot do sometimes suffer a fracture, and fractures do also occur seldom in the fingers; they do not occur unless there is rubbing in various positions.
If a fracture of the bones in the foot occurs and you see those bones rising above one another, then place the injured foot on the ground prepared like when walking.
Then stand you and place your foot on what rises from those bones; then press, or trample it; and apply equal pressure until it returns to its original position.
Then place ointment and wool on top of it; and place a small board under the heel, with two flat heads.
Then tie the foot with a suitable binding when you have wrapped it with linen and whatever else is required.
When three or four days have passed, then loosen the binding. For you will find the bones to be aligned if they are fractured or dislocated. Therefore, the operation is as you see it.
If some fingers are fractured, then restore them and align them according to what I told you in the restoration of fingers of the hand. Then place a star under the finger according to its length, and make it slightly wider; then place this board that I told you about under the foot and bind it with a suitable binding.
If what breaks from the bones is two or three or more, then place a star of its size on each finger, rolled up in linen; and bind the board at the bottom of the foot; and let the standing board be above one head of the foot to hold it well by retention.
It is suitable for you to remember that you should consider all the things I said to you regarding other fractures due to accidents, and apply it to every accident as necessary.
On female facial fracture, clavicle fracture, and the bone of the male thigh.
When a woman's face is fractured, then make her sit upright. Then tilt her head towards the back a little bit, and hold it in that position.
Then the midwife should fill the woman's wound with linen until it is filled, and her face should become round like a sphere from that.
Then shake the woman gently and press her back gradually. That linen will come out until it becomes before the mouth of the wound like a sphere, and the broken bone recovers.
Then place a poultice on her back. Whenever you want to apply the poultice, remove the linen easily, then apply it; bring it back as you initially inserted it, and then return to the original poultice.
Let it be done for seven days or approximately, because the bone recovers itself.
And if you wish, take the bladder of an egg, and tie a reed tube around its opening, and insert the entire bladder into her wound. Then blow air into the tube with force until the bladder inflates inside the wound, because the fracture recovers.
Then fill it again with linen and let it stay for some days as we said before, until it heals.
When the clavicle of a man or woman is fractured, then apply treatment for its restoration and perform what we described regarding the bone of Anchus.
And it is not concealed (the straight line) in these nearby fractures that are not serious, especially in one who has some study or practice.
Understand my book much, for the fracture itself signifies to you in many dispositions a straight way in its restoration and constriction: understand therefore.
In the man's member when it breaks, take the goose's gullet; and insert the rod into it. Then place upon him a cover made of cloth, and wrap it around, and let it be for three days, or about those, and it will heal if God wills.
[Chapter] On the restoration of a bone fracture when it is with a wound.
It is suitable for him who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh bone or arm bone, or similar to it, that you hasten, and have the blood-letting done immediately; if the conditions of blood-letting are attested to you, as we have previously stated.
If the wound discharges blood, then it is necessary that you hasten to the incision of it, so that you powder over it some sieved vinegar; if there is no other present for you.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day: and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
If however an abscess hot occurs, then let the restoration of it wait until the ninth day, until the abscess settles down. And do not approach him on the third and fourth day at all, for you would cause harm to come upon him.
If the broken bone projects above the skin and is detected, then it is necessary that you compress it back and level it with your hands with ease and slight extension.
If however the extension is not prepared, and its equality with your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And the instrument is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight fingers' breadth, and its width according to the size of the wound. And therefore it is necessary for the physician to take from them three or four according to the quantity that is needed for that cure in every type of fracture.
And it should be round and have a small thickness so as not to multiply on the fracture during the hour of surgery, and it should have sharp edges with a margin at its extremities. And let the upper part of it be thick from the middle downwards.
And this is its shape.
It is necessary in this operation that its sharp edge should be bent over the projecting bone's extremity and push it with it once until the bone returns and becomes equal to some measure.
Therefore strive to match the fracture's extremities against each other.
If the fracture's extremity is subtle and the instrument does not receive it well, then it is necessary to cut the bone's extremity until the instrument has control over it.
But if you cannot reduce them with it as we said entirely, then cut the bone with one of the saws that we mentioned, or cut through with a chisel in any way possible for you.
Then smooth what remains on the bone due to roughness and small cortices.
When the bone is reduced and an unusually strong pain is found after its reduction, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Make that. For you give great help to the weak one when you complete the restoration you make of the bone.
Then dip cloth in strong wine, black. And it should properly be in summer. And do not place upon the wound any lead or anything containing oil; lest it cause rot and corruption at the wound site.
Then administer the stars in the hour of completion of your bone restoration. And leave the wound exposed: so that you cut with forceps a hole in the layers according to the size of the wound.
And be careful not to stitch the wound along with the fracture. For often have foolish doctors done this; and it has caused death, or rot, or gangrene, that is, pus, upon their patients. And let your suture be soft, gentle, diverse from the sutures of other fractures.
If the wound is bad, or the wound is large, and you fear some unfavorable occurrences that we have mentioned, and you find pain at the site: then it is not necessary to place stars upon it. And make layers with stiff cloths in place of the stars and stitch it with them.
But if it is a day or two later, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus: then remove from above it the cloth that you placed upon it with the wine. Then administer linen and unguents with which we are accustomed to treat wounds; such as the tetrapharmacon ointment and similar ones.
And it is suitable for you to loosen the binding. And examine the wound every day at morning and evening until it becomes consolidated and healed.
It is necessary that the limb be prepared so that pus runs out of it easily towards the lower parts.
If days pass over the wound and it does not heal nor discharges pus from it: then you know that there are small fractures of bones there. You should examine the wound with a probe. Count how many of those fractures are separated, remove them and extract them. And those which are not separated, and pierce the limb, and cause pain, try to cut them and remove them in every possible way for you.
If it happens that the wound becomes blighted, or ulcerated, i.e., it becomes gangrenous, or of another kind of corruption and putrefaction: then you should apply to each of them what is suitable for it according to the treatment that has been narrated in its own chapter.
And from that which my speech should remain firm and the thought you should have when a bone breaks and protrudes above the limb, such as the hipbone or the arm, and similar ones from large members, it is that you should not presume to draw it, for often death happens from this; on the contrary, leave it alone until it putrefies.
Perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days.
Then take care of the wound if it seems to you; otherwise, leave it alone.
Chapter on the treatment of a swelling at the site of a broken bone.
This swelling often occurs at the site of healing of a broken bone. Mostly, it is near joints; and becomes corrupt in its shape from it. And perhaps it prevents the limb from operating naturally.
Therefore consider if the swelling is recent; administer to it medications that have astringency, such as aloes, olibanum, myrrh, resin of turpentine, acacia, and similar ones.
Take some or all of these [items], and sew them up with sticky wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar; and place them on the swelling in a linen cloth, and tightly bind them there with a good binding.
And release the binding, do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and apply another one until the swelling is removed.
Or bind it over the lead plate properly. For lead has the property of removing all that is feared from limbs.
If the swelling has already turned into a stone and is bound and urgently requires removal: then seal over it from above and cut off any projecting excess; or file it with certain rasps until it is removed; and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter on the treatment of a limb that remains tender after healing.
When a bone fracture heals and the limb remains tender and weak, this is not done except for many reasons. One of the reasons is an abundance of loosening and binding of the ligament that is not as required; or because of the excessive tightness of the ligaments, preventing nutrients from reaching the limb; or because of an excess of embrocation at an incorrect time; or because of a scarcity of blood in the body of the weak person and its debilitation.
And the treatment for this is to feed the weak person, and make his body soft until blood multiplies in him. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and happiness over him.
Then place pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts nourishment in large amounts. And continuously apply embrocation to it with warm water until the nourishment returns, and it regains its natural shape.
On the treatment of fractured bones when they are restored crookedly.
When, after the healing of a limb that has been restored, crookedness or protrusion of the fractured bone, or nodosity occurs and the limb becomes deformed due to it, nevertheless, the function of the limb is not prohibited; then it is not appropriate to listen to the opinion of one who suggests breaking the limb again.
And there have been many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land.
This operation is highly blameworthy, leading to death or great fear that it might be fatal.
If the limp and nodosity are recent: then it is necessary to bathe it with warm water in which softening herbs such as althea leaves, its root, melilotus, and similar ones have been boiled. And prepare an ointment for it with a softening plaster such as well-made diachylon.
Or take the mucilage of the althea root and grind it with chicken fat or sesame oil; and apply an ointment with it.
Or take figs that are fatty, pound them with dove excrement and similar ones that are called medicine reducing consolidation.
And sometimes the nodosity is dissolved by persistent, gentle, old-fashioned friction, which is done with wet hands. And the movement of the limb should be applied to every part daily.
If crookedness has already occurred beforehand, and it has become strong and turned into a stone, and the necessity of treating it with iron has arisen: then it is necessary to saw above it, to separate the continuity of the bone, and cut off what protrudes from nodosity or bone with finely sharp tools; and apply ease to it with diligence and care.
On Speech in Dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some joints from their place. Why it should be forbidden from moving and mutilated in appearance of the member. And causes the occurrence of pains on the weak and severe injuries.
When dislocation occurs to someone, then it is necessary to hurry for its restoration; it should not be delayed at all.
For if it is delayed, the location becomes putrid, and perhaps with it the reduction of dislocation.
Therefore, it should not be moved nor extended at the hour of its putrefaction. Because it often causes a spasm and painful injuries.
However, when this happens, then it is necessary to hurry to the bloodletting of the sick person. Then it is let go until the putrefaction ceases.
Then anoint the member with warm water and oil. Then reduce it gently.
And treat every member along with it when its memory comes back to its place.
I myself have already arranged the chapters on dislocation, even according to what preceded in fracture, from the upper part of the body down to the lower part of it.
Chapter on the care of dislocated lower jaw.
The two jaws are rarely dislocated to a lesser extent.
The dislocation of both [occurs] according to one of two modes. Moreover, they are moved away from their places by slight removal and made somewhat soft. Moreover, they are dislocated entirely and completely until they become soft to the chest part, until the saliva of the sick runs, and it cannot hold it or close its mouth, and its tongue is wrapped with speech.
But when the dislocation is slight, then it returns by itself in various ways with a lack of abundance.
But if the dislocation is complete and whole: then it is necessary that its reduction is administered quickly, and it should not be delayed deeply; and there is [the need] for the minister to hold the head of the sick one; and the physician should introduce his thumb of one hand into the root of the Mandible dislocation if the dislocation is from one part. Or he should insert two thumbs at once, if the dislocation is from both parts. And the remaining fingers of his hands should be outside, as required.
And command the sick one to clean his Mandibles and purify them for eating in every respect. The physician should press and push the Mandible until it returns to its place.
If the reduction of it is difficult, especially if both Mandibles are at the same time: then administer steam with hot water and oil until the reduction of both becomes easy; do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said.
When they return and meet and the mouth of the sick one is closed, and they are not made soft: then place on them cotton wool pads, with a preparation made from beeswax; and with rose oil.
Then it should be tied easily with soft cords.
And let the sleep of the sick one be upon his back: and his head should stand between two pillows, so as not to move it to the right and left: neither let him try or be forced to chew something: rather, let his food be made soft, until when the pains are removed, and the jaw is tied: then let him eat whatever he wants, and let that be given to him with ease.
He should not labor on the operation of his mouth while eating and drinking, and speaking, until the jaw is tied, and it heals.
If the reduction of both jaws becomes difficult when they dislocate at some hour and do not return to their places: then often fever occurs, and there is constant soda: and perhaps the stomach of the sick one breaks open, and he vomits pure bile.
Therefore when you see that: then know that it is a loss, and the one to whom that happens often dies within ten days.
Section on the reduction of dislocation of the jaw and the end of the arm.
The collarbone is not dislocated from inside outward due to its continuity with the chest. It becomes dislocated sometimes outside, and this is perceived by feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the sick one lies on his back, and extends his arms. Then, with your bent hand, press the dislocated joint, because it will return.
Then place an ointment on it, and pack it with cotton, and bind it.
However, the extremities that follow the elbow, which are continuous with it, do not become dislocated unless rarely. If it becomes dislocated on any day: then it must be reduced and set according to what has been said, and what you have prepared for yourself.
Then place upon it [the wound] the plaster, and the leeches, and the ligature. And instruct the sick man to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
When this same cure brings the edge of the arm back to its place, it should also be separated from its place.
Chapter on the reduction of dislocation of the arm.
Know that the humerus is not dislocated, unless in three ways.
One of them is, it dislocates to the part of the pectoral at the lower side. The second is, it dislocates to the chest part. And perhaps it dislocates to the upper part of the humerus: and that happens rarely.
Nor is it dislocated at the backside, because of the spade [splint]. Nor is it dislocated to the front side, because of the nerves.
Indeed, it is most often dislocated and comes out to the lower side turned towards the pectoral: especially in those whose flesh is scanty. Because it goes out quickly in them and enters quickly.
But in those whose flesh is abundant, the reverse holds true: namely, because it goes out with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps some people experience a blow or an accident and the humerus is dislocated by a hot application, and it is thought to be so because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, one must experiment with that until you are certain of its nature, and then proceed in treating it.
And the dislocation is known when it is to the lower side turned towards the pectoral, and you shall distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a healthy humerus. For you will find among them an evident difference, and in the head of the humerus there is a hollow, and beneath the pectoral at the touch of the head of the humerus as if it were an egg: and an invalid cannot bring his hand to his ear nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upward: then you will find an evident touch, and it cannot be hidden.
And this kind of dislocation has an easy reduction when it is recent or the child is weak.
The reduction is that he elevates his hand to above. Then place your thumbs beneath his, and with strength lift the joint until it is in its place; then he will elevate his hand, and stretch it upward. Then put it down, for he quickly returns.
If it does not return as mentioned, and from the beginning when dislocation occurs are many days: then it is necessary that the sick one bathe in warm water, and receive embrocation which softens and soothes, just as if they decoct root of althea, and fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and give it.
Then the sick one lies on his back upon his back; and let a sphere and wool be placed under his thumb which is equal in softness and tightness.
Then the doctor places his heel upon the sphere, and lifts the head of the humerus with force, and draws the hand of the sick one to below.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this method; and it is that you make the man present who is taller than the sick one, and stands on his side, and introduces his humerus under the thumb of the sick one: and lifts the thumb of the sick one to above, until the sick one is suspended in the air. And another person pulls the hand of the sick one to below his stomach. If the sick one is light: then it is necessary that he be suspended with something else, in order to weigh him down; for the dislocation quickly returns.
And it is also reduced according to another method; and it is that a long wooden rod is fashioned on the ground, whose head is rounded in form: like a mitten of a hammer-maker; which is neither too heavy nor too thin. Then place it under the patient when logs of soft cloth are placed on his head, and let the patient stand according to the length of the logs.
Then extend his hands towards the lower part from the other side, and extend his body from the other side with force, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
If the reduction (restoration) is difficult by all that has been said, then use this care: and it is to take a log whose length is the size of two forearms and its width four fingers, and its thickness two fingers, with rounded head to widen its entrance into the depth for pressing, according to this shape.
Then wrap around his head with soft cloth logs, so as not to injure the log supporting the patient.
Then place it under the support of the patient, so that his hand or arm may be extended over the log to below, and tie the log above the arm and hand and lower limb.
Then place the arm on a step of the ladder widthwise, and extend the hand to below, and let the rest of the body hang suspended from the other side. For the joint enters immediately.
Since the entrance is filled to the greatest extent possible, then it is necessary that you place under the support a sphere made of wool equal in size to it. Then place a prepared plaster made from milled flour with balm and egg white on the entire shoulder as it is rolled on top of it.
Then tie a suitable suture below the support and roll the bandage over the plaster above it, connect the patient's hand to his neck and do not move his hand for seven days.
It is necessary that a scanty food be placed (for the patient) until the limb recovers its strength, since it heals more quickly in this way.
Then it should be placed larger after seven days, or five, and it should be opened with motion. If therefore it is firm and does not become soft, then it is healed.
If however the union is dislocated many times on account of the moisture that occurs to it or on account of some other cause: then it is necessary that a cautery be administered in it with three holes, according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery.
If this is done entirely, and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the union does not become firm, and a plaster and pressure are applied to it several times, and it does not become firm and falls, and cannot be raised upwards: then you know that the nerves which are to the head of the humerus have been cut or extended or softened: and you know that the union will never fuse in its place.
Dislocation that happens towards the chest and breast, or to the back reduction, is made with pressure and extension with hands until it returns, and a remaining pressure and care are administered until it heals.
If after healing there is heaviness in the member and slowness of its motion, then the sick person should use baths many times until that heaviness is relieved, and it returns to its first nature.
Chapter on the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
You know that the union of the shoulder dislocates with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is indeed dislocated to all parts, but especially in front or behind.
And the dislocation of the shoulder is not hidden from you; because it falls under sight and touch, according to whatever form it is dislocated. And when you join a dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, that is clearly shown to you. The joint must be closed, and it cannot be doubled over the arm nor touch its own shoulder.
You should rush and immediately reduce a dislocation before it gets an abscess.
For if an abscess occurs, the reduction becomes difficult; and it may not heal at all, especially when it is towards the back. Indeed, every kind of dislocation is worse and more painful; and death often accompanies it.
And its restoration, when it can be reduced, is to extend the hand with two hands; and the arm should be extended, and the hands of the physician are above and below the elbow, and he himself pushes the joint with his thumbs or the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Or the dislocation is towards the front: then it is reduced in such a way that the hand doubles over with its own hand until it strikes the elbow which is dislocated with the root of its palm.
If the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a violent extension, very strong; and it is to be done that two attendants stretch the arm; and they are to hold it so that it is not moved during the extension.
Then the arm is rotated to all parts after it has been wrapped around the hand with a double cloth or wide bandage.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he binds it with oil; so that it is one of those things which help in the lubricity of the joint with ease. Then he pushes the joint forcefully until it returns.
After its reduction, it is necessary to place an ointment on it, which contains styptic and purifying properties with egg white; and it is to be bandaged tightly. And let the arm of the sick person be suspended from the neck for some days.
Then it is loosened. If the joint becomes fixed in its place, then loosen the bandage from it and let it be.
And if you see that the joint is not well closed, then apply the plaster again, and bandage it and let it be for some days until it is closed. Then loosen it.
If, however, there is pain after the reduction of the joint and it has movement: then administer humectation in a bath, fine friction, and compression until it is lined up, or place upon the joint, that is, the fat of the ram's woolen cloth. Then let it be bound and kept for a day and a night over it. Then remove it, and immerse it in the bath. And when it sweats, then friction the joint with a moderate friction. Then apply to it three times with warm poultices when entering the bath until it is softened.
And if you wish, place upon it dried dung, warm, mixed with butter, and bind over it.
Make this often. It becomes softened, and returns to its former condition.
Chapter on the treatment of dislocations by Albucasis.
The hand of Almahassem is frequently dislocated, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy. On the contrary, the other joints are more difficult to reduce. However, speed must be taken in the reduction of this dislocation within the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place is loosened: or a hot abscess occurs at the site.
Reduction of dislocation is to place Mahassem's weak hand on a table, and let the attendant extend it; and the physician shall place his palm on the prominent joint, and push until it returns.
Furthermore, it is to be considered if the palm has already retreated into the body of the hand: then let the weak place his back of the hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand be placed intrinsically on the table, that is, the inner part of the hand should be placed on the table, so that the physician may fall upon the prominent joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then bind it with a plaster sitting on the abscess; and leave it alone, do not repeat that.
For if it cannot bear (the pressure), nor can you perform reduction of it afterwards when the days pass, but the joint remains according to its twist; and nothing harms the weak unless what is softened for the hand, and nothing can be bound; then know that the nerves have been cut or rubbed.
Therefore, there is no skill in it except to bind with a cautery near to its destruction. And perhaps it does not bring anything about.
When Almahassem does not return, then place an ointment on him as we have said. Then bind it, and let it be for five days; afterwards it is to be loosened and let go, and exercise the hand.
If its movement is taken away, and something heavy happens in it: then soften it with warm water, and rub it gently many times until it is softened.
Chapter on the cure of finger dislocations.
Chapter XXX: When a finger is dislocated from any part, or from the back of the palm to its body, or the inside of it: then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the digit, and suspend it towards the side where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then extend it until it aligns with its proper position on that day.
When it is night, tie it according to the story given: and do not cease to loosen it during the day: and exercise it with movement: and tie it at night.
Do this for several days until it tightens.
And do the same with it if it is dislocated towards the palm of the hand: and tie it to that side, and perform your first operation on it until it heals.
And do the same with it when it is dislocated towards other parts.
Chapter on the treatment of dislocation of the spondylus of the back.
When a person experiences dislocation of the spine, either complete of the neck, or multiple spondyles are displaced from their places: then there is no cure in it, since death approaches the weak.
And the sign of this is that the hunger of the weak escapes without will, and he cannot hold it; and many times some members of his are softened, or both legs of him, or both arms of himself, or one of them; or a spondyle is displaced from its place.
For many times it is displaced, which is often done to four parts.
That which is displaced towards the rear is called a humpback.
The cure for it is to consider whether the humpback occurs from childhood; then there is no cure in it, and there is no healing at all from it.
But in that which occurs from an accident, or blow, or similar things, the ancients have already said the methods of treatment in a lengthy speech. Of this, more often than not it does not return with recovery.
I myself have already abbreviated from that which is rarely justified by a large part due to my proximity to the subject: and in my explanation, I explained that, and shaped its instrument in a different way from how they showed it and explained it.
Therefore, I say that in humpback which occurs from the front part, there is no talent, nor healing from it.
And similarly in that which occurs to both sides.
And it is not cured from them, unless that which occurs in the back properly, with what I speak: and it is to extend the weak over his face on an equal plank nearly up to the wall; and expand under him a wet cloth, so as not to harm his chest.
Then place a straight stick fixed in the bowl on the ground, at the end of the foot, about its head: and another stick about its feet at the other end of the foot: and let a servant hold the stick, and it shall not be fixed in the bowl. And let another servant hold the other one.
Then bend over the head of the patient, and under his chin tie a firm bandage, and extend the end of the bandage to the stick that is at his head, and tie it there.
Then bind another bandage above the ankles of the patient, and at the joints of his knees. Then gather all the bandages together, and tie them to the other stick that is at his feet.
Then let all the servants extend their bandages to the part of the stick, and neither of the sticks should be moved from its place where it is fixed: but they shall not be fastened, as we have said.
And the doctor shall put his hands on the hip-bone with force, until he returns: or place a board over it. Then he attaches his feet to the board until he returns.
If he does not return through this treatment, then receive a board whose length is about three arms. And carve a hole in the wall that we mentioned which is near the patient, into which the end of the board may enter. Then place the middle of the board on the hip-bone. And let the doctor place his feet on the other end. And bind tightly, until the hip-bone is dislocated, and he returns to his place.
Then, if you wish, operate with a lathe that turns by hand: and it is so that you may carve two sticks in the ground at the head of the patient's last foot, whose length is that of an arm: and at his head at the last foot two sticks.
And let the length be that which is between every stick and a palm [width]: and now a hole has been made in every place where a tourniquet runs: and let all the sticks be fixed strongly to the ground so that they do not move at all.
And insert a round stick: and there is a tourniquet in which a cord is turned in the holes of two sticks.
And at the end of it there is a hole where the stick is fixed, whose length is a palm plus what is turned: and similarly in two other sticks.
Then bind the cords which you have bound around the chest of the sick man at the tourniquet that is near his head: and bind the cords which you have bound around his legs at the tourniquet that is near his feet.
Then stand by every tourniquet the servant who turns his hand with a cloth, with which the tourniquet is turned: and the physician measures the pulse, as we have said.
This is the form of the tourniquet that follows.
Then when the pulse has been measured and the place is ready, then it is necessary to put on a plaster made from excrement and egg white. Then apply [a substance called] stuppa. Then put on top of the plaster a star-shaped piece from wood, whose width is that of three fingers, or about those [dimensions]. And its length shall be the quantity that covers the depression and the healthy part of the pulse.
Then bind it with the cord we have mentioned. And the sick man shall use nourishment that is subtle until he is well.
If there remains something raised in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe, with the use of the tablet we have mentioned for a long time. And now, it is administered on that plate of lead.
Occasionally, a protrusion happens in the last vertebra of the back; it is thought to be a dislocation, and that bone which has become prominent is involved. Therefore, it is not proper to presume this medicine for him; perhaps it will cause death.
Chapter on the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Know that the union of the ankle and shoulder joint does not occur except in a dislocation; nor does it happen to them what happens to other joints from a slight displacement and hollowing out.
Indeed, the ankle joint is dislocated according to four parts. Because it is dislocated toward the front and toward the back.
It is indeed dislocated most of all to the inside; it is dislocated less frequently to the front and to the back.
The treatment of a dislocation to the inside is as follows: because when you join the limb of a sick person with a healthy one, it is longer; and the knee joint of the sick person is more prominent than that of a healthy one, and the sick person cannot double his foot near the knee; and there is a place following the knee which is hollowed out by a hollow instrument, because the head of the hip has already reached that place.
The sign of one who has a dislocation to the outside is that his symptoms are opposite these symptoms.
The sign of one who has a dislocation to the front is that he spreads out the healthy leg to its full extent; however, he cannot double it without pain in the knee, and if he attempts to walk, he cannot step forward on it; and urine retention occurs in him, his knee becomes hollowed out, and during walking there is a striking of his foot on the heel.
The sign of the one who experiences dislocation at the posterior [region] is that it does not extend the knee, nor can he double it before doubling the thigh; and his leg is also shortened on the other side; and the thigh is softened, and it has the head of the hip in that place.
The reduction [of this dislocation] is of the following forms: consider then, if the dislocation is old and has already degenerated with it. Then if you administer the reduction of it, and it remains according to its position; then there is no treatment at all in it. Therefore, one should not make a rash assumption about it [the condition].
In the one whose dislocation is recent, and belongs to one of the four forms of dislocations: then go ahead and apply pressure on it, extend it towards the inside and outside, and move it right and left; perhaps it will return, and no other care is needed.
If it does not return in this way, then a strong attendant should prepare and extend the leg from below: either with his hands or with a rope that ties above the knee; and another assistant should extend his hand above, so that he may insert his hands under the armpits of the patient. Then tie a soft rope around the root of the hip and hold the end of another rope.
And the extension [of the leg] should be from the front of the thigh to the neck of the collarbone, or from the back to the backbone.
And the extension [of all] should be one and the same until the sick man with his body is raised from the ground and remains hanging.
This is indeed a common form of the four forms [of dislocation].
If the dislocation returns as we said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to follow the specific cure mentioned below.
In the reduction [of a dislocation], when it is toward the inner parts, the sick one must lie on his healthy side. Then put the bandage over the root of the hip, where it is between the head of the hip and the place that is below the groin. Then extend the bandage upward from the groin to the higher part of the body, to the neck (region).
Then another strong man takes hold of his arm and reduces the large place of the weak hip by extending it to the outside with great force. Now it is back in its own place.
And this method is easier than the other methods of treatment, by which this limb is reduced.
If, however, it is dislocated above you and does not obey you at all with this method of treatment, then it is necessary that two weak feet be bound together with a strong bandage, loosely, on both heels, and on both knees: and the length of each one should be four fingers' breadths: and the weak leg should be extended by more than two fingers.
Then the sick one is suspended over the top of a log that is in the house; and its length from the ground should be two forearms' lengths.
Then command a strong youth to bind the head of the hip; and suspend another with the sick one: and another youth pushes, while binding the hip with force, because when it is bound together, it returns quickly to its own place.
In the reduction [of a dislocation], when it is toward the outer parts, the sick one must lie on a couch, as we have said in the one with a hump. And bind the bandage over his weak leg and over his chest.
Then two logs are placed, one at his feet and another at his head. Then place a support stick in the middle of the foot, secure it well; upon which let the wet cloths be wrapped, so as not to hurt the weak; and let the stick be between his thighs, so that he is not drawn downwards during extension.
Then let every attendant go to their place, and the doctor shall adjust the reduction with his hand.
If it obeys in returning, it will be good.
And if not, place it on the table and press it evenly, as we have said in swelling, likewise. However, it is necessary that the weak one lies on the side of the healthy.
And when the dislocation is towards the front, then it should be extended quickly; and this is according to the same narrative on the foot; and the doctor shall place the palm of his right hand on the sick person's thigh. Then bend him with one hand, and with that bending place him extended towards the lower part of the leg.
If the dislocation is towards the back: then it should not be extended downwards; and the sick one should not be raised up from the ground; instead, he should be placed on a hard surface, as it should also be done if his dislocation is towards the outside, according to what we said about his lying on two sides: and it is on his face and his limbs are extended; according to what we said recently.
And it is necessary that compression is administered with a board also on the place from which the joint departs, when the reduction is completed according to what is required.
And the sign of his reduction is not hidden from you; and it is to extend two legs of the sick one; and when you see them even, and the sick person tightens his leg, and expands himself without any resistance; then you will know that the limb has returned, according to what is required: then join the thighs, and apply a plaster, and tie with gauze, that is, roller; in such a way that the dislocation does not move towards any part; and let the sick one remain quiet for three or four days.
Then unfasten the ligament, and apply the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see that they are equal in position, then you will know that the dislocation is already fixed: therefore leave the patient to walk.
And if you see something softening: then return, and apply the plaster again, and bind it according to your first binding: and let it be for three days.
Then unfasten it and cause it to slow down in walking on both sides, until it recovers well.
Chapter on the Dislocations of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated to the outside, to the inside, and to the below (i.e., the back).
And it is not dislocated to the front.
The sign of this dislocation is that you order the patient to apply his leg to his hip. But if it does not stick to the hip: then know, that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the modes of dislocation is that you make the patient sit upright, so that he now extends his leg if possible over it and presses his back against his face; and place his foot between your feet.
Then cause the knee to stick to your palms, and keep them straight across the knee. Then apply two palms of your hand firmly on both sides of the knee. And let another servant extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place.
The sign of return is that the leg sticks to the hip gently, not forcefully.
Then apply a plaster to it, and cause the leg to stick to the hip. Then bind them together with ointment for three or four days. Then dissolve it.
And let not the sick person walk for some days until he is cured.
If he refuses to return, then give him a strong extension with ligaments, whose description is found in the treatment of an aneurysm, until he returns.
Chapter on the treatment of dislocated heel bone.
Calcaneus is sometimes removed by a slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to its extent. Dislocation of it happens either towards the internal or external parts.
The sign of its dislocation is that you see the calcaneus swollen, projecting towards the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its removal is easy return: and it is that it is extended with ease with hands, and adjusted until it returns.
However, in its treatment when it is dislocated according to its extent, one must make the patient sit straight: and a strong assistant should hold him very firmly from the back part of his middle.
Then hold with your right hand the foot from above its part, and with your left hand from below the foot at the place of the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. And with your left hand in two places.
Then extend it with your left and push the sole of the foot towards you with your right without strain.
Do that twice as we have said.
Then push the sole of the foot towards the leg at the third place, and you pull the ankle.
If therefore it returns at one or two places according to this method and you see the foot aligned, it is good: and if not, then repeat the procedure on him; because he will return.
But if the reduction of it with him as we have said is forbidden to you: then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a peg in the ground firmly so that he falls between his thighs; and now roll a cloth over him so that he does not harm the sick one.
Then receive an assistant his thigh: then another extends the leg, either with hands or with a strap that binds around its neck. Then let every attendant extend himself opposite to the extension of his own [position]: and let the pillow be standing between the two hips of the sick person, holding him, so that his body is not drawn downwards during the extension.
Then the physician should dislocate [the bone] with his hands, and another attendant holds the sound leg towards the lower parts. For dislocation is regained quickly.
When therefore dislocation has returned and the health of its return is shown to you: then put an ointment and a plaster, and sew it firmly with bandages, and bind the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary that you be careful or fearful of the nerves which are above the heel at the back, so that the bandage is not too tight and harms them.
Then let him go for two or three days. If the bandage becomes softened, sew it again: then dissolve it on the third or fourth day: and forbid the sick person from walking for forty days. But if he attempts to walk before that time, there will not be safety unless the dislocation is dissolved upon him, and it is spoiled, and it will not receive treatment afterwards.
If it happens to him a hot abscess: then it is necessary that you administer for its sedation what was previously told in another place about the cure, and an embrocation until it is removed.
Chapter on Dislocation of Fingers of the Foot and Cure.
It is necessary that it be equalized what is being dislocated with little extension without effort: and this is not difficult, rather it is easy.
But if the dislocation is in some nodes of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that the sick person sits his foot on an equal place to the ground, or on a table: and he stands thus as walking.
Then you stand, and place your foot upon that which projects from those joints. Then press it with your foot with force until it returns and you see it has become even, and no projection appears in its place.
Then place under the heel of that foot a board which can hold the entire foot, having two handles. Then bind it with a ligature decent three days. Then unbind it and let him rest from walking for many days until it binds and assures against relapse.
On the types of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When something happens to it (the wound or fracture) and you attempt its cure and restoration, often death occurs; and therefore, one should not presume about the cure of such a thing unless he is wise in long practice, merciful, pious, slow, not bold, nor presumptuous; and that he uses for the beginning of treatment only medicines which quiet inflammations hot only; and that he allows the weak to the divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for recovery from destruction with mildness of illness and where something appears with hope. Therefore, attempt the reduction of it immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a hot abscess occurs.
If the limb then returns as we desire, then administer a regimen that quiets the abscess; and cure the wound with it which suits it from dry ointments.
If the dislocation is with a fracture, and pus-filled sores separate from the bone occur, then attempt their removal; and make in it what was said for simple illnesses in the places of those sores.
And take care according to your strength, and guard yourself from the entrance into the way of fear; according to what was previously said to you.
It is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more healthy for your body with them at your time.
