After I have completed this book for you, my sons, which is the last one concerning knowledge in medicine with its supplement, and after I have reached the end of it through explanations and declarations of the same, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise, which constitutes a part of operation or surgery with the hand.
Since operation with the hand is laid low in our region and is completely absent at our time; until perhaps the knowledge of it has perished and its trace has vanished; and only minor descriptions of it remain in old books, which have been altered by hands; and errors and hesitations occurred until the intentions were closed and the force waned: It seemed to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise according to the way of positioning, declaring, and abbreviating; and that I should come with patterns of iron instruments of Cautery and other tools of work; which is done by adding declarations and by properating what is necessary.
The reason why a good craftsman with his hand is not found in this our time is that the art of medicine is long, and its author must be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy as narrated by Galen, until he knows the means of limbs, their shapes, their connections and disconnections, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, their number, their origin, the pulse vessels, and the quiet ones, and the locations of their exits.
And because of this, Hippocrates said that name with name is much, and with work it is little, especially in the art of hands.
We have already spoken about it at the beginning of this book.
Since he who is not knowing what we have said about anatomy, will already fall into error, in which people are killed: just as I have seen many of those who are formed from this science and boast about it without knowledge, and without experience.
I saw a foolish surgeon cut an aposteme on the neck of a woman and accidentally cut some arteries in her neck. Consequently, blood flowed from the woman until she died in his hands.
I also saw another surgeon who presumptuously attempted to extract a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large.
Therefore it came to him, and he extracted the stone with a piece of bladder.
Therefore, the man died on the third day.
I myself had already been called to extract it; and I saw from the size of the stone and the weakness of the patient that he would die.
I saw another surgeon who was receiving a fee from one of our land's dukes on account of medicine; and a black eunuch who was with him suffered a fracture near his heel; and the surgeon, in his ignorance, tightened the fracture over the wound with splints, pulley irons, and strong bands; and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he closed it according to his own devices.
Afterwards he released him after a few days and ordered him not to undo the bandage; and it remained like that until an aposteme formed on his leg and his foot, and he came to ruin.
I was called to him; and I hastened to undo the bandage; and calmness came upon him, and he was relieved of his pain.
But the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb; and I could not prevent it.
Stop the corruption from spreading through the limb until it perishes.
I saw another physician who pierced a cancerous boil; and it was opened after days, until the wickedness of it with its master (the cancer) was revealed.
Because when a cancer is pure from black bile, then it should not be reached with iron at all unless it is in a member that can bear it, so the entire thing may be cut off.
And because of that which is said in the Gospel, "You shall know them by their fruits," it is necessary for you to know that the operation is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation that brings salvation; and the operation, with which there is danger in many dispositions. And I have already warned in every place of this book where the operation comes that has fear and terror.
Therefore it is necessary for you to be careful about it and separate it from itself so that fools do not find a way to speak and disgrace themselves.
Therefore receive the measurement with care and protection, and treat your weak ones with ease and firmness, and use the better way that leads by the grace of God to salvation and praiseworthy success; and abandon the terrible ailments difficult to heal; and free your souls from what makes you fear, so hesitation in faith and comfort enters over you. For it remains more to your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to the quantities of yours.
Galen has already said in some of his admonitions. Do not heal the evil ailment; lest you be called evil physician.
Chapter One.
On incision and perforation, bloodletting and ulcers, and wounds; and on the removal of arrows and similar things; and on the entire chapter, arranged according to the forms of instruments. ¶
Chapter third.
On restoration and dislocation, and treatment of twisting and similar conditions; the chapter arranged from head to foot, and according to the forms of instruments.
To God alone be the glory.
The Book of Surgery by Albucasis.
Part I.
On the remedy and harm of cautery; on which conditions it is applicable, and at what time; and if with iron or gold.
Chapter I.
Before I remind you of the operation with him, it is necessary that I say the quality of his remedies and his harmful effects, and in what composition they are presented.
I say therefore, that the discourse on the quality of the cautery, and its harmful effects, is a long, subtle, learned discourse, full of secrets and hidden things.
Moreover, a multitude of wise men spoke about it and disagreed on it: and to me, their discourses are enough, fearing protraction.
I say therefore, that the cautery applies universally to every composition, whether with matter or without matter; except for two compositions, which are the hot composition without matter, and the dry composition without matter.
In the hot and dry composition with matter they disagreed.
For some, it was said that the cautery is beneficial in the hot and dry composition with matter.
And others said the opposite of this, namely that the cautery is not suitable for the disease which is from heat and dryness; because the nature of fire is heat, and it is inconvenient to heal from a disease of heat and dryness with heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite of this said that by the cautery there is benefit in every disease of heat and dryness which happens in human bodies; because when you compare a man's body and his humidity to the composition of fire, you find a man's body cold.
And I myself say through his discourse; because it has often been proven to me that.
Nevertheless, it is not necessary for it to be brought up unless he who has already been proven and has been exercised in the chapter of cautery exercise at the end, and knows the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of diseases within themselves, and the causes of them, and their characteristics, and the space of time of them.
From the remaining humors, there is no fear for you; and especially in cold and moist diseases. For indeed, all physicians have agreed upon them (the cauteries), and they have not disagreed about using the cautery with them.
And know, my sons, that from the secret of cure through cautery with fire and its goodness upon the cautery with medicine burning, because fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the part being cauterized; and it does not harm another member joined with it unless slightly.
But the action of burning medicine reaches to that which is separated from the limbs; and perhaps it causes difficulty in healing the disease in the member, and perhaps it kills it.
Fire however, because of its subtlety and goodness, does not do that unless it is excessive.
But indeed that has been made known to us by experiment, because of the length of service and study with art, and steadfastness on truth; and because of that I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And know, my sons, that they themselves disagree on the time when a cautery should be made, and place the better time in truth.
And I say that a cautery is suitable at all times; therefore, any harm resulting from time is submerged in the benefit attracted by the cautery.
And especially if a cautery is for pain resulting from necessary pains, strong, sharp ones which cannot tolerate delay; therefore, it is feared that an evil greater than slight harm may occur through the passage of time.
And let that thought not slip from your minds, O sons, that which is not deemed true except by the vulgar and foolish physicians, namely that there is no return for the sickness that is cured by cautery; and they set forth this consequence, but it is not so as they think: because cauterization is only in place of medicine, which alters complexion, and expels the humidities that are the causes, why pains occur.
Nevertheless, cauterization is unnecessary over medicine due to the swiftness of its own vitality and the efficacy of its operation, and the intensity of its dominion: it is possible that sickness may return at some hour according to the constitution of the sick person, the location of his sickness, and the potency of his illness; and what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities within him; and what comes to him through consumption of food and similar things due to the causes, unless there arises a sickness in which cauterization is administered. A subtle sickness in a member of few superfluities and humidities, such as cauterization of the tooth, due to pain and similar things, it is possible that that pain will not return in him.
But this happens in rare cases.
But indeed the speech of the vulgar is correct again, that cauterization is the last medicine: it is not intended for what they intend in this matter; because they believe that there is no cure that is given with medicine nor with anything after the disappearance of cauterization.
But it is indeed the opposite of theirs and their intention that cauterization is the last medicine; this is not so except when we administer modes of cure for a sickness and those remedies do not confer; then at the end of the matter, we apply cauterization and it confers; then it follows that cauterization is the last medicine, but not according to the intention which the vulgar and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than a cautery with iron; and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold and the loftiness of its substance; and they said that it does not cause pus in the place of the cauterization. This is not always true; because I have already proven that it does not do this in some bodies without others.
And a cautery with it (gold) is good and better than with iron, as they said.
However, when you apply fire to cauterize it (gold) in fire from gold, it is not made clear to you when it burns according to the quantity you wish, due to the redness of gold; and when it approaches the same cold, and if you add more heat to it, it melts in the fire and turns into layers.
Therefore, the craftsman falls into it (gold) in confusion; and because of this, we make a cautery with iron among us more quickly and closer to the operation, for its rightness.
And I myself have now arranged this chapter on cautery, according to the chapters; and I have arranged it from head to foot so that those who seek something from it find what they want. Chapter on the method of cauterizing at the junction of the skull (coronal suture).
Chapter II.
Here is the cauterization for mastery over humidity and coldness on the brain: these two are the causes of soda, and the abundance of flow of humors from the head to the parts of eyes and ears, and the abundance of sleep, and toothache, and throat pain; and universally all illness that occurs due to coldness, such as paralysis, sodae, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ones due to illnesses.
The method of cauterization is to instruct the sick person: to evacuate firstly with purifying medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the sick person, and his age, and his custom.
Then instruct him to rub his head with a sponge (or soft cloth).
Then make him sit facing your hands, so that he has placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that place with a charcoal (or other non-burning substance). Then heat the cautery oil: whose shape is this. Then place it on the marked place with charcoal, and you gradually press your hand down, and turn it.
Then lift your hand quickly and look at the place.
If you see that a piece of bone or wood has come out from the skull, then lift your hand.
And if not, continue to press with the iron itself, or with another one if it becomes cold; until the bones that I told you are seen.
Then take some salt, and dissolve it in water, and immerse the cloth in it, and place it on the place; and leave it for three days.
Then place upon him a cloth soaked in butter, and let it remain until the burn is destroyed by fire. Then treat it with four-ingredient ointment, until it heals.
It has been said that the longer a wound remains open, the more pus it discharges; therefore, it is better and more beneficial.
Some have said that the skin should be cauterized to the bone; and hold the cautery until it burns something of the thickness of the bone.
Then scrape off the burned part of the bone after that, then treat it.
Some say that when the cautery is reached to the bone, it should be pressed onto the bone for as long as an impression of a knife blade is made, so that the bone falls away, forming a hole like a scar: or the instrument which women put in place, filled with vinegar: and they think that vapors from the head escape through this place, and leave the wound open for a long time.
Then treat it until it is healed and solidified.
But I do not see these two types of cautery at all, except in some people, according to the way of fear.
And leave it alone, in my opinion, it is better for its own sake.
For the head becomes weak from the solution of its own continuity; just as we have testified in other members; and especially when the head is naturally weak; and the first species of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use it: operate therefore with it for the benefit.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the head in pain of the whole head.
Head III.
When there is a chronic pain throughout the head and it persists in a weak person, and they use warm things, and poultices, and sweating, and oils, and plasters.
If already cauterized with one cautery, as we have said, and adds nothing of those [other substances]: then consider.
If the head of the sick person is strong by nature and not weak, and it finds a very intense cold: then cauterize with another cautery slightly under that one.
Then cauterize it on top of all the horns of its own head with another cautery, so that the skin is not pierced and the quantity of bone exposed, as we have said.
Then cauterize it with one cautery on the occiput of its own head, in the place which is called 'vas': and this is the place where the sinus is placed: and grind your oil in that, and do not expose the bone.
For the sick person finds an intense pain there, different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And I say this Cautery in its place: it is necessary that it be a cautery for the horns of the head and the occiput more delicately with the cautery for the middle of the head.
And this is its form.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for hemicrania, both with hot medicine and with iron.
Chapter IV.
When there is pain and swelling on a part of the head or it extends to the eye, and the head is treated with cleansing medications, and the rest of the treatment is given as I said in the divisions of diseases, but it does not help completely: then cauterization is done in that according to two methods: either cauterization with a burning medication: or with iron. The cautery with a burning medication is as follows: take one tooth from an almond and grind it, and cut off the ends of it from both sides.
Then cut open the place of pain at the time with a large lancet, until there is a space under the skin where a tooth can be taken.
Introduce it into the same place under the skin until it is covered; then bind it on top with a small bandage of appropriate tension, and leave it for fifteen hours; then dissolve it, extract the garlic, and leave it for two or three days; afterward place a warm cloth soaked in butter over it, until a pus forms; then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do this with some burning medicines mentioned in my treatise on Medieval Remedies, the Twelfth Book.
Cauterization of it with iron, is according to this method.
Fire-cauterization, whose form is as follows.
It is called Clavilus: because the head of it is like a nail, in which there is something hard and in the middle of it is a small projection.
Then place it on the location and hold your hand; and you turn the iron slowly with speed; and let the quantity that is heated be according to the thickness of the skin, as much as half of it.
And lift your hand, so that the artery which is below is not burned, and let there be a flow of blood.
Then soak the cloth in salt water, and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; then put the cloth with butter; afterwards care for it with an ointment until it heals. And if you wish, cauterize this half-cranium with the tip of a second cautery.
Caution: avoid cutting the artery in this half-cranium, not an old one properly.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in an old half-cranium.
Head V. (The Latin numeral 'V' indicates the fifth head or section.)
When you treat a hemicrania, as we said in the previous treatment and what we said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment does not improve: and if you observe from the disease that what we said with the first cautery with medicine, or with cautery with fire, is insufficient, then it is necessary to heat the cauterium with a small knife (cultellare), until it becomes white after marking the place of pain with a line, whose length should be half a finger, or about that: and place your hand on one side, and tighten it so that you can cut through the artery, and reach the bone. However, you must be careful not to burn the jawbone, which moves during chewing, so as not to burn the side or the nerve that moves it, thereby causing a spasm.
And take care, and be cautious about bleeding from the artery that has been cut.
Indeed, fear of this (bleeding) is great, and especially for those who are unaware of what it does, and not diligent or experienced: and they abandon the operation first with it.
And I will come again when reminded of the regulation for controlling bleeding from an artery according to its method and in its place in this book.
If you observe from the disease that this cautery is insufficient and if you see a weak body tolerating the cautery in the middle of the head as we said, treat the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery as we said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with a cautery having two small knives.
For this reason, cauterization is better and more effective in this way. Chapter on the method of cauterizing ear pain.
Chapter VI. When pain occurs in the ear due to coldness and is treated with solvents, and with the remaining treatment as we said in the division, and the pain does not go away, then cauterize it with fire (Cautery). This is what is called a Punctum, whose form is as follows.
Then the puncture points, after its ignition around the entire ear, as it is revolved; or around both, if the pain is on both sides.
And move the cautery slightly from the root of the ear after you have marked the places with wax; and let the amount of cautery be ten punctures in every ear, and approximately so.
Then care for the places until they are healed.
\ paragraph on the method of cauterization in Torture.
Chapter VII.
Torture that is treated with cauterization, is not other than those afflictions that occur due to phlegm, as we said in the division of diseases. And avoid cauterization for the species that occurs due to exhaustion and spasm of a nerve.
When you treat this species of torture with hyssop, purges, gargarisms, and your treatment does not improve, then it is necessary to cauterize the weak one with three Cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little below the eardrum, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the weaker side.
Because softening does not occur unless on the healthy part.
And the form of cauterization is to cauterize itself with the cautery on the edge of the upper part of the ear, slightly below the horn of the head; and another one at the eardrum; whose length should be according to the length of a thumb.
Place your hand with the cautery until it burns to a depth of half the thickness of the skin.
This is the form of a cautery and it is of the type of scissors, whose shape is as follows: nevertheless, it should not be too delicate, as you see; and it is necessary that the scissors are in it of only slightly excessive thickness. Then take care of the places with it, until they heal.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in ancient apoplexy.
Chapter VIII.
When apoplexy occurs and your care and the medicine I mentioned do not help, and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on every horn of his head, and a cautery in the middle of the head, as described before, and another cautery at the back of the head, according to what was described earlier: and the method of cauterization should be as described earlier.
Also cauterize with a cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and this is more of an emergency measure.
Then care for it with what was described earlier.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in oblivion.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that there are in the drink firstly large amounts of hyssop, and purifying pills for the brain.
Then shave the head of the sick person entirely, and place on his head an ointment made from syrup described in the book of ointments; put it there several times. For this is the method of cautery; make it according to the same order as I have said there. If he recovers through that, it is good.
If not: then perform three cauteries on the back of his head, which shall descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye; place between each cautery a thickness of a finger.
Then care for the cautery, as with that which has come before.
If you wish an additional treatment, and the sick person can bear it: then perform a cautery in the middle.
And if you wish an additional treatment: then cauterize him over two horns [temporal regions].
Then care for him until he is cured; let the cautery be anointed according to the form that has been given.
[Chapter heading] On the method of cauterizing paralysis and softening it.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary that you proceed with the mundification of the head with hyson, and with what has been said.
Then scrape the head of the sick person; afterwards, cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the back part of it, and with three over the spondyles of the neck.
If however you need softening for the disease of the body with more of those [medicines], and the person is weak, and the disease is strong: then cauterize it with four cauteries over the spondyles of the back, and the last one with a cautery, until it is burned through most of its skin, and loosen your hand.
Then take care of him, until he is healed; and thus cauterize with oil.
Section on the method of cauterizing for epilepsy.
Chapter XI.
A epileptic is not cauterized unless his epilepsy is due to phlegm. Therefore, it is necessary that you first cleanse the brain of him (the patient), especially during hyers (feverish conditions), and with the rest of the treatment as we have said in the division: when the sick person is severe or endures well in the administration of medicines.
If (the patient) is a child who cannot endure medicines, then gargarisma (a solution or ointment) and cleansing chewing substances for the brain are given before many days with good food provisions.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize him with a single cautery on the middle of the head, as has been described before; and cauterize again on the nape of his neck, and over all the horn (of the skull) with cautery.
If the sick person is strong and endures well, then cauterize him with the cauteries as has been described in the presence of paralysis, and mollification of the body on the spondylus (a type of bone) of the neck and back; and let the cautery be oiled as described before. If the sick person is a child, then place a subtle cautery (tool) according to this method:
Chapter on the method of cauterization for melancholy.
Chapter XII.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the cauteries, which we said in the one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of decline towards melancholy and the body is wet, then give him to drink what purifies his brain, as was said in the division: then shave the head of the sick person, and make afterwards a well-centered plaster made from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the sick person sitting squarely should be held from all sides.
Then bring the linen. It is more appropriate from ancient sheep's butter.
And heat it over fire with a suitable temperature measurement, which the finger can bear when inserted into it.
Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle and let it go until it cools down.
Do this to the sick person once a week with the rest of his good regimen, until he is cured.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small punctures on him, in addition to holding the cautery in your hand: let it be fragrant.
For this kind of cauterization moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place a wick soaked in butter or chicken fat on him.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in water that falls to the eye.
Chapter 13.
When the beginning of water appearing in the eye is shown to you through the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the sick person something to drink, with what cleans his head.
Keep him away from all moistness, and have him sit in a bath, for several days of fasting.
Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him on two temples with two cauteries, if there is blockage of water flow in both eyes at the same time; or from one side, if there is blockage of water in one eye: and cut with the cautery all veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in width equal to the temples: and avoid bleeding.
If you see something coming out of him, then immediately cut it off with any medicine that is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and the cutting off and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck, under two bones, with two cauteries produced at the end.
Chapter on the ancient method of cauterizing in tears.
Chapter XIV.
If the tears of the eyes are old and persistent, and are above veins and arteries that are clearly visible on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is due to excess cold phlegm: then cauterize with the same cautery as I described in the blockage of water flow, cauterize in the middle of the head, and on two temples with two cauteries, and in the neck under two bones with two cauteries.
And if it requires additional treatment, then cauterize him on all sides of the eye carefully, near the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in nasal fetor.
Chapter XV.
When you treat it, as we said in division, and the medication does not help: then hurry, and give to drink infirmocochias for three nights; afterwards shave his head, and cauterize him with a medium cautery, with the cautery oiling.
Afterwards cauterize him with two cauteries and a clavius cautery, over the two eyebrows under the hair slightly.
And beware of the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the clavius cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for the softening of an eyelid.
Chapter 16.
When the eyelid of an eye is softened due to disease or dampness: then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it over the two eyebrows slightly in every place with two cauteries; and they should extend from the two temples; and let the length of all the cautery be, according to the length of the eyebrows; and do not bring your hand with the cautery to the ends, but rather according to the quantity that is burned by the third eyelash.
And this is the form of the cautery according to this method of the lunar cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing an eyelid when the hairs turn and pierce the eye. Chapter 17.
The cautery is used in this in two ways: either with fire, or with a burning medicine.
In the cautery with fire, command the sick person to let go of his hairs, if he is one who combs them, until they are extended and evened out. If they pierce him at his origin: then bind the eyes with adhesive so that they do not move until they grow out.
When therefore they are born and have equalized, then place the head of the sick in your lap: afterwards mark on the eyelids of his eyes with hot wax, mark what is in the shape of a myrtle leaf; let the beginning of the mark be near hairs.
Then put a wet cloth on cow's milk or slippery elm on the eye.
Then heat an iron for cauterization, which has this shape.
Then cauterize step by step on the spots marked in many places until the surface of the skin burns entirely like the shape of a myrtle leaf, appearing completely.
And your mark of healing is: if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting and hairs rising at the spot of the eye.
Then lift up your hand at that time; and let it go for three days.
Then put a wet cloth with butter on it over him until the wound heals.
Then treat him with ointment until he is well.
If any hair comes back from the hairs after an hour and the eyelid softens: then repeat the cauterization on that spot as you did at first.
If however there are hairs below it: then cauterize that spot until the hair is raised to its own natural position and it becomes equal so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing with a burning medicine in the same case.
Chapter XVIII.
You must command the sick to shave his head until they grow and become equal.
Make from paper in linen the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from soap known and uncooked lime from one pound each or similar; then grind them well with a good pestle and make it quickly so that it does not cool down.
Then take a piece from that [substance] and place it on the cloth you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put it on one or both eyelids.
And place under the eye a cotton soaked in egg white; let the head of the sick person be in your bosom.
Place your index finger on the medicine and press it slightly.
You should move [the medicine] whenever the sick person feels the bite of the medicine, because its bite is like fire.
While the pain persists that he finds, then release the medicine and move it with your finger.
When the pain subsides, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
Then observe if the eyelid rises, as it does when contracted by fire or incision, that is good; and if not, then apply more medicine to the place where the medicine does not press, and does not discolor, until your work is equalized and the eye contracts.
Then place cotton with butter on it until the skin burns are removed.
Then treat him with diaphinicon ointment or another until he is healed.
And it is necessary for you during the operation to keep the last guard, so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes soft after days and something from hairs falls into the eye, then apply more medicine to the place that becomes soft from the eyelid, as you did at first.
Then treat him until he is healed.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And know that human eyes differ in size and smallness.
Therefore your consideration should be according to this: and the straight path for which there is interest in this art should not be hidden.
On the method of cauterizing in the lacrimal fistula.
De modo cauterizandi in fistula lachrymalis.
When you treat a Fistula, and your treatment does not alleviate the condition as I have described in the divisions of diseases: then, it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner.
Command the sick man to place his head in your lap, and let him hold his own head by his hands thusly, so that he does not move or shake it with his head.
Then place a cotton soaked in warm oil or psyllium poultice on his eye; then cauterize it with the iron of this shape.
Let it be concave, like the shape of a goose feather quill from one end, for making a cautery; and if you wish it to penetrate to another end, and if you wish it to extend upward in this way.
However, this concave shape is better for your work.
Then place on it the cautery which has been heated very well.
And hold your hand near the cautery for a moment at the eye, at the nose part, so that your hand does not wander or the sick man is disturbed; and you will place the cautery on the fat of the eye, and destroy it.
If, therefore, you reach the beginning of your cautery up to the bone, it will be good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it for three days.
Then place cotton with butter on it, and treat it with an ointment of resorcinol until it heals. If it exceeds forty days and does not heal: then place a sharp, corrosive medicine on it until the bone appears; and shave it according to what comes under its own chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for fistula, which some of the first ones said.
Apply to the location of the fistula, and find it; then place upon it a fine cannula, that is, a fine tube, whose shape this is [diagram].
Pour into it [the cannula] a quantity of drachmae of melted lead, and hold your hand with good retention of the tube, and let the weak one not move at all, so that the melted lead does not run or reach his eye.
And it is necessary that you place over the weak one's eye a cloth soaked with infused oil, or in water.
For lead burns the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
If the fistula is healed along with what we said from cautery, and cure, it is good [outcome].
If not, then it is necessary to make an opening in the nose and lead the fistula back to the flow of the nose, according to where it will come out for itself [in its proper place].
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in fissures of the lips.
Chapter XX [chapter number twenty].
It frequently happens that fissures occur in the lip, which are called Pilae, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat these fissures, along with what we said in the division of diseases, and cure does not help, then apply small hot cautery in the shape of a knife, according to this form [diagram].
And let its concavity be according to the fineness of the knife.
Then take care of it with caerote until it is healed [or cured].
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in a fistula of the mouth.
Chapter XXI.
When an abscess happens at the root of the gum or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and bursts; afterwards it becomes old, and pus runs and becomes a fistula; then take care of it, and do not apply treatment to it, if then it does not heal, it is necessary that fire cauterize it according to its size, which can enter the fistula.
Then introduce the heated iron into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches its depth and end; do this once or twice.
Then take care of it afterwards with what I said about treatment until it is healed.
If the pus separates and heals, it will be good.
And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place, and remove the corrupt bone according to what comes to its head.
§ On the way of cauterizing in softened gums and teeth.
Chapter XXII.
When the gums become soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medicine does not help; then place the head of the weak person on your lap.
Then apply fire cautery whose form will come later; it should be so that you place the reed on the tooth; and insert the heated cautery into it quickly: and hold your hand briefly, until the weak person feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand; then apply the cautery again as often as you wish.
Then the weak person should fill his own tooth with brine water and hold it for an hour; then spit it out.
The tooth moves and hardens, and the softened gums tighten and dry up the corrupted moisture.
Caput means chapter or heading, and here it refers to Chapter 23. So, the translation is: Chapter 23: On the method of cauterizing tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is coldness itself, or worms, and cure with medicine does not help: then cautery in it should be done according to two methods: either cautery with butter; or cautery with fire.
The cautery with butter is as follows: take butter and boil it in an iron cauldron or in a copper one.
Then dip the instrument in it and apply it to the affected area.
Then immerse the instrument in boiling butter and place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it cools down; then repeat this process several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
If you prefer, immerse linen or a cloth in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth; then place hot iron on top of it until the heat reaches deep into the tooth socket.
The cautery with fire is as follows: prepare an iron or steel tube (canula). Make sure the tube has a certain thickness so that the heat does not reach the weak bone.
Then apply the heated cautery to the tooth and hold it until it cools down.
Repeat this process several times as pain will disappear either on the same day or on another day.
It is necessary to fill the hole left by cautery with good butter and keep it for an hour; then spit it out.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Apply cautery with any suitable tip according to your convenience; and this is the shape of the tube (cannula).
Method of cauterization in ulcers.
Of the Cautery.
When sutures are covered in phlegm and cold moistness, and are not obeying digestion through medicines, and desire swift digestion: then, to a concave Cautery of fire, whose form is as follows.
Having two open ends so that the smoke may exit at the Cautery from one end; and place it heated upon the ulcer once, and again, if needed, until it reaches the depth of the ulcer.
If the ulcer is small: then place the Cautery according to the size of the ulcer.
Then leave it for three days, and place upon it a hot cloth soaked in butter until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then take care of it with tooth ointment until the hole heals.
Method of cauterizing in the hoarseness of voice and constriction of breath.
Chapter XXV.
When wetness collects on the windpipe and especially when it is accompanied by cold complexion, then the sick person should be evacuated first with dissolving medicines.
Then cauterize it at the neck near the root of the throat at a depressed place; and beware, do not reach the throat with the Cautery or skin, unless something of the latter is there.
Then cauterize it with another Cautery at the junction of the neck and the last rib of that juncture; and let the Cautery be a nail according to the method described earlier.
Then take care of it with what was described before until it heals.
Method of cauterizing in diseases of the lungs and coughing.
Chapter XXVI.
When coughing and lung disease are from cold moistness, and the sick person does not have fever or consumption, and the illness is old: then cauterize it with two Cauteries above the clavicle in depressed, smooth, open places.
And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two breasts: and let the cautery be a cannula as described before.
And if your cautery is to be puncturing with a cautery called "Punctum", whose shape was described before in the treatment of ear pain: and let them be punctures from thirty punctures as far as necessary.
Then, treat this with what was mentioned before until it heals. And let the cautery have three branches as described before.
Because the cauterization should be performed with it when you use a single cautery instead of three.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in a dislocated shoulder.
Chapter 27.
When the shoulder is dislocated due to the cause of moisture and does not return within an hour from its own dislocation, until it becomes a habit of returning, then it should be dislocated again by a slight movement, as we have already testified, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first.
Then the patient lies on his back or on the healthy side.
Then you peel off the skin that is inside the shoulder joint towards the upper part with your left hand fingers, and if the dislocation is towards the inner side.
Then take a hot cautery with two points. Its shape is as follows:
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of cauterization will come with four cauteries.
And when cauterization is done with a caution having three prongs, then the figure of cauterization will be six cauteries: and there are prongs according to the fineness of the skin touched.
And this is the form of the caution having three prongs.
And sometimes an additional one is added to this method, hence there are eight cauteries.
Then place over the caution crushed turnips with salt.
Then make the sick person rest in a calm state, so that a limb is not moved at any time, until it recovers.
And if a dislocation is towards the upper part, and it rarely happens, then cauterize it on the shoulder with an iron caution or many cauteries poking.
For fusion strengthens [the area] and removes moisture; and the sick person recovers.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the stomach.
Chapter 28.
When cold and many humidities occur in the stomach until it expels itself from its composition and multiplies catarrhs on it, and continuous methods of treatment are not effective; then the sick person must be placed on his back, stretch his legs, and his hands.
Then cauterize with three cauteries: an iron caution the size of a finger's knuckle under the pulley of the chest and an iron caution, and two cauteries below the sides of one caution until the figure of the cauteries becomes triangular.
And stretch them apart so that they do not join when pus forms. And the depth of the caution should be the thickness of two thirds of the skin.
And the figure of the cauteries should be in this form without addition: and if you want to cauterize with a large caution in the middle of the stomach according to this form, then the caution used for this cauterization should be one according to the circular form.
And the stomach is to be cauterized by puncturing it in one who is fearful of the cautery: and it is that signs are placed on the stomach according to the amount that you wish with encaustum: then cauterize it with the cautery at the point: then care for it with a cure which preceded until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing the epihris, cold.
Chapter XXIX.
When pain from the epihris occurs due to coldness and dampness, or thick wind that has not yet passed out through its natural passage and discharge, and the sick person is not cured as we have said: then it is necessary for the sick person to lie on their back on their neck, and marks with encaustum are made with three cauteries according to this shape, and the same size at a location below the hypocondria, where the arm of a man reaches; and let the space between each cauterium be as wide as a finger's thickness; and let the cautery be as long as the straight body; and do not press your hand with the cauterium too much.
And let the quantity of that which is burned be according to the thickness of the skin, without adding the middle part; and let the sick person stand on their own feet.
If he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has extended his legs and lifted up his arms. This is the shape of the cautery.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a surgical cautery when you have subtlety and wisdom in the art.
And be careful not to rush into cauterizing, and let the thickness of the skin be burned entirely, for the body is being burned altogether, and it will reach the intestines; because the skin there is delicate, therefore you know this.
On the method of cauterizing liver abscesses.
De modo cauterizandi ulcera epaticorum.
When there is an eruption, and you want to know if that abscess is in the liver flesh or its membrane: then, if it is in the liver flesh, a weak pain and heaviness without sharpness occurs: and if it is in the liver membrane, with pain there is vehement sharpness: and you see now that its treatment has tired the physicians.
Therefore, the patient must lean on his neck.
Then mark the place of the abscess with a hot iron: then heat the cautery similar to a rod.
And this is its shape.
And cauterize it with the cautery until the entire skin is burned and reaches the pus, until all pus is expelled: then cure it with the treatment of abscesses until it heals.
And it is not appropriate to use this method of cautery, unless one's passion for medicine is prolonged: and through whose hands these diseases often coincide with experience: then dare to perform such an operation.
But rather, let it be expelled by itself, in my opinion, it is better.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in pleurisy.
Chapter XXXI.
The ancients said that the cautery with roots of Aristolochia should be applied to cold pleurisy in this way.
And it is to receive from the dry roots of Aristolochia a root that is longer than the others, which is found among them, and let it be as thick as a finger.
Then immerse it in oil: and light it on fire.
Then cauterize with one cautery where the continuation of the collarbone is with the neck, and with two small cauteries near the side that is under the beard.
And with two cauteries also in the place between the fifth and sixth ribs towards the back a little bit: and with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach.
And with three cauteries from the rear: one in that which is between two spatulas; and with two cauteries from both sides of the chest, the lower cautery which is between two spatulas.
And it is not proper that you press your hand with the cautery, rather let it be evidently smelling of skin. And some of the ancients have said that there are men who use the cautery similar to a rod of iron; and they burn it, and insert it inside where the ribs are, until it reaches the same as the abscess, and the pus comes out: just as we said in the abscess of Epate.
But in this puncture with the cautery there is fear because either a weak person dies immediately, or a fistula occurs at that place which does not heal.
Chapter XXXII. On the method of cauterizing the Spleen Head.
When you treat the disease of the spleen, as we said in the treatment of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then the cautery should be used on it according to three modes, all of which are correct.
One of them is that you make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the cauteries of Epate, whose figure precedes this.
And let the thickness between each cautery be the size of a finger or more or less.
And the method of the cautery, as we said in the cautery of Epate, should be equal.
And do not press your hand with the cautery; and let the weak person lie on his back.
And another method of cauterization is: to burn the cautery with two points, as we said in the chapter on dislocation of the humerus; and peel off the skin that is directly over the spleen, where the arm of the weak person reaches; and your peeling should be such as you peel the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two hot wires, until they penetrate the skin from the other side: then extract the cautery; thus there are four cauteries made. And if you wish to cauterize with another cautery, take three wires.
Then care for the cautery after you release it for several days; for it is more beneficial than the other treatments that preceded it in the healing process.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in hydropisis.
Chapter 33.
The cautery does not fall into hydropisis except for the true scrotum.
When you cure a hydropisis with the methods of treatment mentioned in the division, and healing does not occur, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back between the spine bones, and one directly over the chest, and another directly over the stomach. The depth of the cautery should be about the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open cautery to emit pus for a long time.
And do not evacuate the sick person from treatment after cauterization with it; for two intentions should be united to him: and healing will hasten towards it with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery when the abdomen is cauterized should be claw-like; according to its previous form. And the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to its previous form.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing feet and legs. Chapter 34.
When they are incised in Hydropico and filled with citrine water: it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot at the nocturnal, which is between auricularem and anularem; and lift your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it; then lift your hand; and do not return to it entirely.
The citrine water will drip out, and let the cautery be in this shape.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be with the tip of the lancet-like cautery; and let the cautery be along the length of the leg, one below the knee, and another lower than that, about half the length of the leg; and over the whole hip make two cauteries; and leave the open cautery without long healing time; so that some water drips out from it; then heal it with the rest as I said.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in the solution of the Abdomen. Chapter 35.
When the solution of the abdomen is due to cold and moistness, until it weakens the powers retained and digested, which are in the stomach and intestines; and it is cured with methods of treatment, but does not heal; and you see a person who can tolerate an abundant cautery, then cauterize it with a large cautery on its own stomach, according to what has been previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach with the circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle clavicular cautery; and with a large cautery on the alcatin above the loins, or with two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moistness and the person can tolerate it, then cauterize it with a cautery on the sternum and on the whole loin; and perhaps you may add two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach.
The progress of treatment is indeed beneficial, and its aid does not wander.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When in the anus there are many old hemorrhoids or one, and they are of thick cold or corrupted humors, and they are treated as we said in the division, then the cure does not help: then cauterize with three cauteries over the lower part of the loin slightly triangularly below the almeidate, and with a cautery beneath the navel as if by two fingers.
If you think that his stomach is cold and his food is not digested, and you see his face is purplish, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery, as was mentioned before: and cauterize over his Epar, and another over his Spleen, with a cautery claw: and leave the open cautery for some time: then care for him until he is cured.
On the method of cauterizing althelul after their removal.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you remove althelul, then heat the cautery which resembles a ray.
Then insert the heated cautery into the removed althelul: and at the end of your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows, let this be done once or twice. If therefore there are many althelul, then cauterize each one with a cautery as was said before.
Then care for them, with that which helps them from ointments, until they are cured.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery over the ulcer, it is more of help in healing.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the sick person does not obey cutting and operation as was mentioned in its place, and fears it, perhaps he is cured with a cautery.
When therefore a Fistula occurs and suppurates, pus runs out from it, and its humors are corrupted.
It is necessary therefore, as far as possible, to test it with a thin probe.
Then recognize the depth of its quantity by means of a probe.
Then heat the cautery which is like a rod.
Then introduce yourself heated into the very Fistula and the depth to which the probe enters. And repeatedly apply the cautery on it until all the corrupted bodies are burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to your necessity.
And guard yourself from the burn of the nerve or great vein: or if the Fistula is directed towards the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestines, then guard yourself from these places altogether.
And do not perform this, unless when the Fistula is in a fleshy place: and remember that it does not penetrate.
Then take care of the place until it is healed.
If however the place is sealed and the matter is removed from it and remains for a long time in this state: then you know that it has healed completely.
If however the matter is not removed from it, then you know that it is a penetrating fistula or that its depth contains rotten bone or something of this kind: whose memory will come to its place.
Section on the method of cauterizing Kidneys.
Chapter XXXIX.
When pain in the kidneys occurs from cold or from thick distention and it weakens the body due to this illness of the loins, then it is necessary that you cauterize it above the navel on both the kidneys with a cautery over the entire kidney with a cautery claw, whose reminder has preceded.
And perhaps we cauterize it (the pain) for the second time in the same navel area.
Therefore, three lines will come.
Therefore, it will be more beneficial in the end.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the bladder.
Chapter 40. When weakness and softening of the bladder occur due to cold and moisture so that it cannot hold urine, then cauterize it in the lower part of the abdomen below the area where the hair of the beard begins, on the bladder, from the right side of the abdomen, and from the left with another one: and let the length of this cauterization be as wide as the knuckle of a thumb: and cauterize it with an inferior back cautery, or with two cauteries if necessary: and let it be according to what has preceded the cautery claw.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the uterus. Chapter 41.
When cold and moisture occur in the uterus and it prevents pregnancy due to this illness, and its menstruation is corrupted and their induction is delayed, and pain occurs near the time of their arrival, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and a cautery below the lower back or with two cauteries: and let it be a cautery claw.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the anus in displacement.
Head, XLII.
When the moistness of the mucous membrane drains to the Ancha bladder plaster and causes it to leave its place, and this is a sign when they are applied opposite each other, that the leg is prolonged on one side; and there is found a void spot in it.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the weak one on the bladder plaster of Ancha with a similar cautery circle; after you mark with hot iron around the bladder, as it is customary; and so that the bladder falls into the middle of the circle.
And let the cautery be of the same form that was used in the cauterization of the stomach.
If this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large oil-soaked cautery; and let the depth be made according to the thickness of the skin in its entirety.
Then care for it until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in sciatica. Head, XLIII.
When pain occurs in the bladder plaster of Ancha and the cause is coldness and moistness; and the weak one is cared for with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and it worsens; then it is necessary to dissolve the weak one from the thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills, or similar.
Then cauterize it.
And the method of cauterization in this is according to two methods; or cauterization with medications coming forth, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with fire, is according to many modes.
One of them is that you cauterize on the bladder plaster of Ancha with three triangular cauteries in this shape.
And make for them a good depth, or a bad one.
Let the space be which is between every cautery of its quantity be the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be to be oiled.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is made in the middle on top of the head of the anus itself.
Why are there four cauteries.
If you want to cauterize with a circle, whose form preceded it in the cauterization of anus displacement, one: so that the circle contains the entire anus.
Burn away the thickness of the skin entirely.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica, when the pain is adhering to the anus itself, and does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, on the place where the patient indicates, in which is the pain, and your cautery four fingers from the part of the buttock a little bit: and let the cautery be sharp. Let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends towards the toes, then cauterize it there where the patient indicates with a puncture cautery, three, or four, or more if needed.
If he indicates that the pain is under the knee turned towards the leg, then cauterize it there with a sharp cautery.
And beware of yourself in all your cauterizations, that you do not burn the nerve or a large artery with the cautery, and draw harm to the patient by this, or contraction.
And I myself have already seen one and another, from those who cauterized above the buttock, and burned in their cauterization, and the leg swelled until the swelling reached the foot, and it was perforated completely, and the entire foot was destroyed: then followed a rupture of the abdomen, and death after that.
If there is pain in two parts simultaneously, cauterize both in this manner.
Wise men have said in the cauterization of the anus, and this is its method.
Make a probe similar to the thumb, whose diameter is half of a palm, and it should be placed at its opening according to the size of a nutmeg or less; and within that probe, there should be another smaller probe.
And let the space that is between all probes be according to the size of a knuckle; and let the probes be open at both ends; and let their height be like a nut or two nuts; and make a handle from iron suited for the probes.
And this is its form.
Then it is heated in the fire until it glows and sparks; then it is placed on a dish for the weak anus lying on its healthy side.
Cauterize it therefore with three round cauteries at once.
Then leave it for three days.
Afterwards apply ointments with butter; and leave the open wound for many days.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says, "In this form of cauterization, my sons, we have not used enough due to the appearance of it; and therefore, because few are found who will endure upon it.
However, for those who can endure it, it is one of the good cauterizations, and it finds its place with it.
However, the cauterization with acting medicines is, that you make two probes having a perforated bracelet, into which descends the rod of its door from copper or iron, the length of the wall; whose height in them should be two nuts, or about the same size.
And let the space that is between both be according to the size of a finger, and let them be open on both ends; and let it hold each other in this manner.
Then place her on a board with holes, lying weak on the healthy side.
And press your hand upon the board with holes very hard.
Then pour water between two circles that has been warmed slightly by fire, and hold it for the space of an hour: let the weak one bear the biting of it, and his burning, for he finds healing by this biting as fire does until the biting ceases.
Then wash your hand with an instrument, and clean warm water and sweet water from the whole wound: then let it be for three days.
And place butter over it until the soot of burning is removed: then let it be for some days, and pus will run from it.
For it is the ultimate help.
Then treat this with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg: make a splint for it in that which contains water, according to what you did for the wound equally.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Take alkali and unburnt lime of both parts equally, grind each one, and put them in a new pot whose lower part is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters the radish: and put another pot below it without holes: then pour alkali and lime over it from sweet water, so that they are submerged by about a finger: then press them with your hand firmly: and let the pot be until the acid water comes out of the lower part of the earthen pot.
Then mix this water completely, and pour it over another lime: boil until it is renewed.
The substance will then be very sharp for acuity, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and also in the cauterization of other members.
Since the fire itself performs the operation.
And among the medications are those with which anchas are cauterized, also like tesisie, and honey of carduus, and lime with soap, in such a way that each be mixed. [Paragraph break]
And Galen indeed narrates the cure of a certain man from the ancients, who was cured of the pain of an ancha and sciatic vein: and he praised it very much.
And he said that it did not require any other cure, and because it was cured from a single visit, until he reported that perhaps the man himself entered into a bath, and left from it already healed. And it should be taken from wild seitaragi: and if it is not found green, let dry one be gathered, and grind it well with some fat, and place it on the ancha where there is pain, or the leg, or in the hip: and tie it, and leave for a quantity of three hours, or until he feels weakened by the sensation of burning.
Then let him enter into a bath.
When his body becomes warm, then let him enter upon the sun.
Because the pain disappears and is healed.
And know that no one should use cautery with these medications unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that goat droppings, when used with it for the cauterization of the sciatic vein, is beneficial to him: and it is made into a cautery in this manner.
Take wool, and soak it in old oil, and place it on a deep place, which is between the little finger of the foot, and between the heel, and closer to the heel.
Then take dried goat's dung and heat it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on wool and let it burn out.
Then repeat the process.
Do not stop doing that until sensation reaches through the mediation to the bone and the pain ceases.
And this method of cauterization is called a Vaccine Cautery.
Chapter on Cauterizing Back Pain.
Chapter 44.
Sometimes there is pain in the back due to various causes, either from an injury, a blow, excessive movement or similar, due to the infiltration of cold and wet matter; cauterization does not apply except in this sole case which is made by the infiltration of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the sick person with stinking pills and similar, three lines should be made on the back where there is pain, in accordance with the width of the hand of the same [person], after signs have been made with encaustic on every line with five or more cauterizations, according to the amount that comes from the strength of the sick person; and let the cauterization be done with the cauterization needle.
And if you wish, cauterize three or four times with a middle nail cautery in this manner.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in the beginning of Humps.
Chapter 45.
This happens frequently to infants in small numbers. (Note: The original Arabic text uses masculine plural pronouns and nouns, which have been translated here as "infants" for clarity. Also, the word "haec aegritudo" translates to "this illness" or "this disease".)
The sign of its onset in children is that a constriction occurs upon him in panting at elevation, and movement; and you find at the end of the spine of the Back and its knots, which have already begun to appear above the other spines. (Note: The original Arabic text uses masculine singular pronouns and nouns, which have been translated here as "children" for clarity. Also, the phrase "et inuenis in ultima spondilium Dorsi et nodorum eius," translates to "and you find at the end of the spine of the Back and its knots".)
When you see this [sign], and wish to do so, then cauterize it with a cautionery that is round in this shape. (Note: The original Arabic text uses masculine singular pronouns and nouns, which have been translated here as "it" for clarity.)
And the cautionery should cover all parts of the spine evenly; and if you wish to cauterize around the spine with a puncture-type cautionery, use two or three lines; and let the punctures be close to each other. (Note: The original Arabic text uses masculine singular pronouns and nouns, which have been translated here as "it" for clarity.)
Then treat the area until it is healed as we have said. (Note: The original Arabic text uses masculine singular pronouns and nouns, which have been translated here as "it" for clarity.)
And be careful not to administer the cautionery on a hump that occurs due to the spasm of the nerve. (Note: The original Arabic text uses masculine singular pronouns and nouns, which have been translated here as "it" for clarity.)
Chapter on the method of cauterization in gout and joint pain. (Note: The original Arabic text uses masculine singular pronouns and nouns, which have been translated here as "it" for clarity.) Chapter XLVI. (Note: This is simply the chapter number of the original Arabic text, and does not require translation into English.)
When the pains of joints are due to cold moistness that spread to any member of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is the custom among physicians to call it gout properly. (Note: The original Arabic text uses masculine singular pronouns and nouns, which have been translated here as "it" for clarity.)
When, therefore, gout (Podagra) is treated for a cold cause with methods of treatment and the pain does not subside, then cautery removes them.
And it is to cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the foot, with many irons: and let the cautery be Oilvear (Arsenic trisulfide).
This is its form.
And if you need to puncture the sole of the foot, then make it with a hot iron (cautery).
If the pain rises to the knee or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it on the whole thigh with three or four irons from all sides, with this same iron called Clavil (Iron clamp). If you need more of this cautery, then cauterize it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, rather let it be about the thickness of the skin.
If the pain rises to the knees and back, then administer what was said in the chapter on it.
If the pain is only in the hands, then puncture around the wrist joints, as two lines are rolled.
If the pain remains in the fingers, then puncture them, on every knuckle and on the back of the hand (knuckles and back of fingers).
If the pain rises after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both from all sides.
Do not evacuate a weak person due to good diet and medicine intake.
For if the diet is good and phlegm is evacuated, it will be healed with God's help and this cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing ruptures (wounds).
Chapter XLVII.
When there is a rupture in the groin and the intestine or spermatic cord descends to the testicle, which is beginning, then it is necessary to instruct a weak person to abstain from eating on his own day.
And he shall use from laxatives, so that the feces may descend from his own belly.
Then let him sit between your hands upon his back: and command him to hold his breath, until it passes or appears, a bubble, or the intestines.
Then bring him back with your fingers, and mark with a branding iron under the wound on his neck, with a sign whose end is similar to half of a circle above the body.
Then apply the cautery iron of this shape until it becomes white, and throw shavings (of charcoal).
Then bring back the intestine or bubble to its hollow.
Then let the assistant place his hand on the place, so that the intestine does not come out: and you have already opened between the legs of the sick person, and placed a stone below him; and another servant is over his legs, and another over his chest, who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery iron on the mark above him, with your hand standing straight with the cautery iron.
Hold him until you reach the bone with him; or follow with another tool if you have not reached the bone with it in the first attempt.
And observe carefully the exit of the intestine during your cautery, so as not to burn him and it goes over the sick person or death comes upon him or a great harm.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, the operation is useless.
The cautery must be subtle for children, according to their measure.
Then care for him with ointments until he is healed.
The sick one lies down on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
It is necessary to place nourishment for him of the length of the time of his treatment, so that his belly may be softened, so that there will not be an exit of the intestine during attempts and evacuation.
Then, when he wishes to operate after forty days, then administer a correctly made ligature and hold it for another forty days.
For when using this regime, thus he is cured in a complete healing.
When ruptures occur in the remaining abdomen and are beginning, and there is fear that they will not be added, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and let what is heated be like the third of it from then on.
Then take care of him as I said: do not add anything.
And some have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this shape.
After it is signed with the enkaustreum, and a line is placed which is across its width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below it. And place your hand in the middle with the clavicular cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better. Chapter on the method of cauterizing for pain due to injury or contusion.
Chapter XLVIII.
When there is pain in certain limbs due to injury or contusion, and the pain persists for a long time, and no healing occurs with medicine, then it is necessary to be cauterized with the punctiform cautery.
And the cautery for every limb should be according to its size, and its smallness, and weakness, and strength, and location of twisting, and pain from it.
If he is healed by the first cautery, it is good.
If not (then): repeat the cautery over him (the patient).
Because it is a custom of these pains that they change from one member to another which approaches them (meaning the pain moves from one body part to another).
Therefore it is necessary that you follow them with the cautery until the sick person gets well.
Section on the method of cauterizing in leprosy.
Chapter XLIX (49).
Leprosy is sometimes benefited by cautery, with great benefit.
And primarily, the type of leprosy that arises due to corruption of phlegm and black bile: when considering the use of cautery on it.
If leprosy is spreading, and you have treated it as I have said in the division, and it does not subside nor stop: and if you fear that corruption will take hold of his entire complexion; then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head known as the fontanelle (soft spot), and the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hairline, and two on the sides over the horns, and one behind over the nape of the neck.
And place your other hand with the cautery until it makes a small impression on the bone, and the outer layers separate from it; so that the expiration of large vapors is alleviated from him, and cauterize again with the cautery over the spleen, as required by the preceding part.
If leprosy has already spread over the weak person and is clearly visible: then it is necessary to cauterize with those cauteries that I have mentioned on the head, and with a cautery on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on the cheekbones, and two cauteries on the spondyles (vertebrae) of the neck, and six on the spondyles of the back, and one large one over the alhahosos at the buttocks and one above it, in the pubic area: and two on the ankles: namely one over each ankle, and two on the elbows, and two on the wrists, and two on the tenderness of the chest: and cauterize him over all the joints of his hands and feet, and cauterize over all the heels of his feet, and the soles of his hands.
Beware that you do not burn the nerves which are above the heel bone (calcaneus). And sometimes the cautery is applied to the throat (pecten), and in another place to the stomach, and in another place to the liver.
Know that the more you add cautery, it is more helpful and beneficial.
Know that the sick do not find pain from cautery as the healthy ones do; for this reason because his body is already numb.
It is necessary that the cauteries should be in size and shape according to limbs and joints as per which they were previously made from types of iron tools.
Chapter L.
When any member becomes numb and is treated with medicines, oils, plasters and still does not heal, then cauterize the numbed member with cauteries, according to the size of the member or its smallness.
Let your cautery enter somewhat into the thickness of the skin.
Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
Sometimes when cauterized for numbness that occurs in the hand and foot, in the joints of the back near the nerve exits that move that member, the numbness is removed.
But do not presume to do it unless one who is wise in the anatomy of members and the exits of nerves moving the body.
Chapter on Cauterization in Albucasis.
Chapter LXI.
When Albaras is decayed and does not receive anything from the resources of medicine: then cauterize over it with a deep cautery somewhat, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness disappears, and its color changes.
Then care for it with barley flour and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and the blood of a dove and the blood of a heron: each should be in equal parts: mix all these together, and apply them on a cloth, and stick to the place until it heals.
Chapter on Cauterization in Cancer.
Chapter LXII.
When cancer is beginning, and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a ring-shaped cautery around it, as it rotates.
The wise have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
But I do not see that: since I fear that it may burn: and I have already seen that many times. It is more correct that it [the wound] should be cauterized around it with a circle, as we said; or with many cauteries. On the method of cauterizing in Adubelati.
Chapter LIII.
When someone has adubelati and it slows in maturation, either due to excess causing it or due to the person's weakness with age, or when it is decrepitus pauci sanguinis, or due to time and the need to hasten in the maturation of adubelati, then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by puncturing.
Then let it be released.
For itself it will hasten with maturation.
If you wish to perform a perforation of it with a cautery, then burn the cautery with fire, which has this form:
And place it in the middle of adubelati until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be weak, so that the flow of pus is alleviated.
Then care for it until it heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in a rotting tumor. Chapter LIV.
Corrosion is only corruption walking and destroying itself: just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see corrosion in a place that can bear a cautery with fire, then give much cautery, small and large nails according to what suits the place where the corrosion is present.
Then cauterize it entirely from all sides until you have completely removed the entire corruption and there remains nothing of it beneath. Then let it rest for three days and place over the cauterized places powdered sulfur with oil until all scabs have been removed and all corruption.
Then treat it with ointments that stimulate the flesh.
If after three days you see that new flesh is growing healthy without corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery over what remains from the corrupted places.
And corrosion is sometimes treated with sharp medicine.
Indeed, it rises in the place of the cautery.
However, cautery with fire is more useful in a hurry: and I myself have said that cauterization with sharp medicine is for division: therefore take it there when you need it.
Chapter on how to cauterize nails and warts. Chapter 50.
It often happens in the lower parts of the feet this disease: and it is a coarse, filtered thing that harms the foot. Indeed, cautery in these cases is done in two ways: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
As for the one with fire, it should be done in a concave form similar to a vulture's beak: which is made of iron, according to the size that contains the nail from all sides and be thin along the edges.
Then place the hot iron on the nail. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. And leave it for three days, until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply balm made of forest malva, ground with salt, leave the plaster on it at night. It will be uprooted from its roots.
Then take care of the place with a healing ointment until it heals.
If they do not turn and frequently occur on the body surface, especially on hands and feet: then apply cauterization with hot water. And it is to be noted that you should take a cannula made of brass, iron or feather quill; and place it on the nail or knuckle.
Then pour a small amount of hot water into the cannula; hold your hand and turn it with slight pressure so that the edge of the cannula touches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to reach deep into the nail root. Let the patient endure the pain of the hot water for an hour.
Then let it go, as the nail along with its roots will be uprooted.
Do this to them one after another until you have reached all those that are present on the body.
Then take care of them once they have been uprooted with a healing ointment.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for tremor.
Chapter 66.
When trembling occurs in a nerve due to cold, or quartan fever, or something else: then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the dorsal vertebrae, and with a cautery between each vertebra, and with a cautery on its chest, and with a cautery on its stomach.
The trembling ceases when cauterized with oil, and health hastens from the illness caused by cold. On the method of cauterization, according to Albatheir.
Chapter LVII.
Sometimes, Albatheir expels filth from the body, that is, pustules which are formed from gross matter corrupted.
Therefore, in the first place, when they appear, they should be cauterized on top of every pustule with a subtle cautery along with a piece of myrtle wood, whose tip is burned with fire.
Or with the root of long-stemmed aristolochia.
Or with a lentil-shaped cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized with aademenul, at the beginning of its removal according to this method: and it is not increased: and the excess is broken, making them (the pustules) disappear and heal from them.
However, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
On the method of cauterization during blood flow from an artery in a wound.
Chapter LVIII. Many times blood flow occurs from an artery that is cut at a wound caused externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or cautery of a member, and similar things: and it is difficult to separate it.
Therefore, when that occurs to someone, then immediately put your hand on the orifice of the artery and place your index finger over it: and press very hard, until the blood is trapped under your index finger, and nothing escapes from it. Then place in fire small oil-filled cauteries, and many numbered ones: and blow over them until they become very hot.
Then take one, either small or large, according to the wound and place where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein, after you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cautery until the blood is severed.
If the blood is expelled with the removal of your finger from the opening of the artery, and extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery quickly, from those prepared in the fire. Do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is severed.
And beware lest you burn the nerve that is there, and further harm comes upon the weak through your carelessness. And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to sever it: especially if the artery is large, unless with one of four methods.
Or with a cautery, as we said before.
Or by extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, the ends of it contract and the blood is severed.
For when it is extracted, the ends of it contract and the blood is severed. Or it may be tied with a strong thread.
Or medicine of the property for severing blood may be placed upon it and tightened with a decent tourniquet.
Whoever administers the severing with a ligature and a tightening with a cloth, or by placing on it things that burn and similar items, does not greatly benefit him except rarely.
If this happens to anyone and the physician is not present nor medicine: then begin with the position of the index finger over the opening of the vein as we said before, and constrict it very tightly until the blood is besieged from above the wound, and on the artery.
Do not remove the finger, always place cold water on it of great coldness until the blood freezes and it swells and is cut off. And meanwhile consider for it what requires cautery or medicine.
Chapter First Ends.
The Second Book of the Surgeon Albucasis. On incision, perforation and phlebotomy in wounds, and similar things.
We have said in the first chapter that every sickness in which it is fitting to burn with fire and medicine, as well as its occasions, causes, instruments and forms of cautery. And there I placed chapters from top to bottom.
And I shall proceed in this chapter along the same path: to clarify what is sought for him who seeks it. And before I begin that, my sons, it is necessary for you to know what is in this chapter from fear of that which is in the first chapter on cautery.
And because of that it is necessary to be more cautious in this, for the operation which is in this chapter often causes evacuation with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision on an abscess, or opening of the passage, or cure of the wound, or extraction of the arrow, or incision on a stone, and similar things: from all of which are associated trembling, fear, and death occurs in many of them.
And I warn you not to fall into that which is hesitation, for sometimes those of this art fall into it as do the weak ones.
For there is one who becomes angry with his sickness and death is light upon him because of the great danger which he finds from his weakness and the length of his misery.
And when sickness is from fear, it signifies death.
And of those who give their trumpet and tell you to come with them, hoping for health, the sickness is harmful. Therefore it is not appropriate to agree with him who comes to you from those whose way is such.
Let your caution be greater than your greed and avarice.
And do not presume about anything from that, unless after certain knowledge, which is verifiable by the succession of praiseworthy outcome in you where it has arrived.
And treat all your sick with prognosis and direction to that which suitably is health for them.
For in that there is help for you in the acquisition of reputation and glory, and memory and praise.
God will inspire you, O sons, with His wisdom, and not take away from you guidance and inspiration; for that is in His hand.
And indeed I have organized this Chapter dividing it into sections, according to what came before in the chapter on Cautery, from neck to feet; so that you may be relieved of what is sought from him and what is needed by you.
Chapter on the Treatment of Water Accumulated in Children's Heads.
Chapter I.
You should know that this affliction often occurs in children at childbirth, or when the midwife presses the child's head without gentleness.
And it sometimes happens also for hidden reasons which are not known.
And I myself have not seen this illness in anyone other than children, and death followed all whom I saw from among them for that reason; therefore it seemed to me that the operation should be abandoned in such a case.
And I myself have seen a child whose head was full of water and his head swelled every day until he could not sit on himself due to the size of his head; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture, or collects between skin and bone, or collects beneath the bone above the nose.
And the operation on it, if there is moisture between skin and bone, and the abscess is small, then a split should be made in the middle of the head, one incision in width; and the length of the incision should be like two knuckles, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the form of trepanation (spatium means "hole" or "space", here referring to a surgical procedure involving drilling or sawing a hole in the skull).
If the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then place these two incisions according to this form (i.e., make a larger split in the manner described).
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and its sign is that you see openings of the skull from all sides, and water is pressed out when you press it with your hand toward the inside and it does not hide itself from you; then it should be split in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this method.
And after the incision, remove all the moisture entirely.
Then anoint it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then dissolve the suture, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments.
And do not let the head be tightened equally.
Feed the sick person with dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Another mode of incision is to consider where it appears that the abscess is larger and the collection of water.
Because sometimes there is more in the head or skull, or in the right or left.
Therefore ascend with the incision where it appears to you that there is an abscess and filling of water, and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, do not cut the artery, and let not the blood flow out and the sick person die from that flow with evacuation of moisture.
[Section on Incising Arteries after the Ears]
Chapter II.
When catarrh happens to someone's eyes or chest and it becomes chronic and medical treatment does not help: then the final cure is more in that, incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you are about to cut them (the arteries), let the sick one shave his own head.
Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear.
Then let the sick one tighten his own neck with any of his own cloths.
Then consider where the vein pulsates.
And the places of both (arteries) are the places that are depressed behind the ears and they are rarely hidden unless in certain people.
Then mark each one with wax on both sides: and cut each one with a pair of forceps on both sides, the incision reaching to the bone: and make it in the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert a pair of forceps under the artery and cut it above with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be as long as two fingers joined together.
For when the vein is cut, blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which jumps to the internal parts with frequent leaps.
If however, the artery does not appear to sight, then it is necessary that measurements from the ear determine the length of three fingers.
Then mark with wax and cut to the bone.
And what must be released from blood is six ounces, perhaps you may release more or less from it. The whole thing should be done according to the quantity that appears to you from the strength of the sick one and the filling of his artery.
Then consider the wound.
If there remains any flesh on the bone in the wound, then cut it so that no abscess of heat forms: then bind the wound with linen rags.
Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When an old hemicrania or acute catarrh occurs in a man due to acidic humidities and heat in the temples, or old sores, violent and similar ones: and it is treated with the modes of cure of medicine, but it does not help: then we have experience in dealing with such diseases by extracting arteries from the temples, or cauterizing them, as we have narrated.
And the method of operation in the extraction [of the artery], is that the sick person shaves the hairs which are in the temples, and stretches to appear the artery in the temple.
Indeed it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is rarely hidden except in a few men or in case of violent coldness.
If it is hidden to you, then the sick person should tighten his head with any cloth of his, then rub the place with a rough cloth.
Or apply warmth to the place with hot water, until it appears to you in an obvious manner. Then take a thin piece of metal, which I have made a little earlier. Then remove the skin with it easily, until you reach the artery.
Then insert a hook into it and pull it out towards the top until you extract it from the skin, and make it come out from all parts of the layers beneath it.
If the artery is subtle: then turn it with the tip of the hook.
Then cut off a part according to its length so that its ends can be stretched and contracted, and there is no bleeding.
Indeed, if it is not cut and if it is not severed, the blood does not rise deeply. Then remove six ounces of blood until the third [?].
If the artery is large: then it must be tied in two places with double thread, strong, of silk, or with horsehair, so that putrefaction does not come to it before the wound heals and there is bleeding.
Then cut off the redundancy which is between two ligaments.
Do this at that hour, or another hour. And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone, with a small cautery: until its ends are cut off and it remains in place for the same operation.
It is a better work, unless if the patient has fever, or has been heated in composition.
Because cautery is of those which help to end moisture.
Therefore it is better aid.
And after the extraction of the arteries, let the place be filled with old cotton: and fine powdered charcoal be placed on top of it.
And after the solution, it will be cured with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with linen until it is healed.
If during the operation if there is a bleeding from an artery, then hurry to cut it off with a cautery, or fill the place with wax: and press your hand until the bleeding stops.
If there is nothing from these present for you, then place your finger on it until the blood freezes.
And bandage the place with water of intense cold, until the sharpness subsides and it is compressed as necessary.
And from what is lighter and easier to extract, the vein, it is that you cauterize with this cautery having two small blades: and the sharpness of the two blades is like a needle.
However they are much less sharp than two blades.
Because if they are as sharp as two blades, then cold is required for both of them: and they do not cut the flesh quickly.
Since therefore there is a certain thickness in them, heat is required in them, and the flesh is cut quickly with this: when this work is better than any other, and lighter, and easier.
And let the space between two knives be the size of a finger's width, after you mark two places with wax: and place both very hot ones until they reach the bone, and cut through veins in two places: to dislocate what is between its extremities.
They are not solidified entirely with this cautionery.
And this is the form of a cautery.
On the treatment of chronic sharp course of tears from eyes.
Chapter IV.
When there are chronic tears with a course from the veins that are outside the skull of the head: and no remedy medicine is applied to them with medicines, and you see the face of the sick person turning red, and feels like a crawling sensation on his forehead, as it happens with ants: and his eyes are tired, wet, so much that the hair of their eyelashes has been corroded with corrosion: and his eyelids have been heated due to the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients used this treatment for them, and they called it the cure, with the knife.
And it is, that you instruct the sick person to shave the hairs that are on his forehead.
Then cut three slits in the forehead, equal to each other according to its length: and the length of the fissure shall be like two fingers, and one fissure shall be equal to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second one slightly less than the movement of the arms, and the third on the other side: and be careful not to cut the arteries that are in the sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and the space of all the incisions shall be the size of three joined fingers: and prepare for yourself a piece of sponge or dry cloth with which you can absorb blood.
Then insert a probang (spatula) with two sharp ends, which soon follows its form.
From the incision on the temple side, up to the second incision: and remove with it the entire skin that is between the two incisions, together with the sifac, which is over the eye. Then make this also from the middle incision up to the second incision.
Then extract this probang and insert again another tool called a sharp knife, blunt on one side and not sharp on the other side, into the first incision.
And this is its form.
And place the sharp side towards the attached flesh with skin, and the blunt side towards the bone; and push it so that it reaches the middle fissure; and cut with it all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes; except that the incision should continue up to that which appears on the skin.
Then make this in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And when the amount of blood that flows is equal, press the places from the clots of coagulated blood. Then place a linen cloth from old clothes in each fissure, and put on top of them little woolen balls soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar.
And see to it that no abscess becomes hot.
And on the third day, dissolve the ligature and administer a large infusion with warm water.
Then take care of this with a basilicum ointment and the rest that are used to heal wounds; until it heals.
[Section heading: Treatment of sharp tears and catarrhs affecting the eyes from internal parts of the head]
Chapter V.
When someone gets sharp, intense, persistent catarrhs; and you see their eyes weakened, small, and the vision is already diminished; and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out from them, and there is intense pain deep in the head that hurts and follows sneezing: then take from these symptoms, those materials and catarrhs do not come unless from many veins.
A better treatment for them is this.
And it is to be commanded the sick one to shave his forehead.
Then make one incision in the middle of the forehead, or slightly off-center by width, and begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple: let the incision go as deep as bone: and withdraw your hand from the temples that move during chewing: until when the bone is exposed: and dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with heated iron or with linen strips.
Then tie up above with threads: and soak the threads with wine and oil, so that no hot abscess occurs.
And when you release it (the wound), and see that the hot abscess is already beginning to diminish: then it is necessary that you scrape the bone, until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then take care of it with a drying dressing that promotes the growth of flesh: as if you were taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony: prepare an ointment from these, and apply it to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Section on treatment for that which falls into the ear. Chapter VI. Everything that falls into the ear is one of four species: either a mineral stone, or something similar to a stone such as iron and ivory; or it is from a plant, such as chickpea and beans; or it is liquid, such as water, vinegar, and similar things; or it is an animal.
When a stone falls into the ear, or anything similar to a stone that does not grow within the ear, reveal only the ear: if you see a stone, then pour something from violated oil, or sisamo into the ear.
Then administer its extraction, and make him sneeze with a snuff, and open the nostrils near the coming of the sneeze, after you place around the ear fragments from cloths or wool, and stretch the ear towards the upper part.
Often it goes out with this care.
If it does not go out, then administer its extraction with Geister, that is, fine Pizigaroli: whose form is as follows.
If it goes out with Geister, it is good.
And if not, then administer its extraction with a fine blind hook in small quantities several times. If it does not go out through this, then make a tube of brass and insert the end of the tube into the ear opening very much, and open what is around the tube with softened wax with oil, so that there is no windway except the tube: then pull it out with your strong force. Often it goes out with what we have said.
If it does not go out in this way: then take from helkalimbat or from vinegar, that is, gluten prepared like birds are caught, a small amount: and place it at the end of the radius after you have placed the cotton centrally positioned: then insert it into the ear opening with ease, after you have removed the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not discharge with all that I have described, then hurry to cut before a hot abscess or a spasm occurs.
The method of lancing is that the unwell person should first be lanced in the head: and draw out from the blood according to its strength.
Then make the sick person sit between your hands and turn his ear towards the upper part; lance a small fissure in the base of the ear at the fatty tissue in the depressed place there: and let the fissure be lunar shape until you reach the stone: then remove it along with it, as far as is possible for you using your tools.
Then lance the fissure at your hour and care for it until it heals.
If what falls into the ear is one grain that grows and swells: then administer its removal.
But if it does not obey you to discharge, then take a thin, delicate instrument in this shape.
And administer with it the removal of that species from grains falling into the ear and do not do this when you think that the grain is already wet from earwax, until you put on many pieces: then remove them with tweezers or a delicate instrument or with suction, as we have said; for the removal of it is allayed.
In water that enters the ear, the sick person should use sneezing with drying in the first place: and already his ear has been filled with a little hot water; and it lies above the one where there is water.
If therefore it discharges through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many small stones of the length of a finger, soft, warm and heat them slightly; and the sick person should insert one from these into his ear canal: and salt one foot on that side and hit with another stone on the stone in the ear.
The translation is: "Therefore, it should not cease to be made with stone and stone, until all water comes out.
"Thus the water comes out like this, that you take one from birchwood or from reed and insert one end into the ear; and heat the other end with fire until it burns as much as possible.
"Then take another reed and do the same many times until all water comes out; and draw it out with a probe according to what was mentioned above in the stone.
"In the extraction of an animal entering it, if it is of small body, like a louse, and similar to what was mentioned above in division, take care of it as I said.
"But if it is of large body, which appears to the sense; then administer the extraction of it with forceps and hooks; and its removal is easier for all who hold it in the ear.
"In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you care for it with what was said above in division and in the treatment of distillations, and your care does not help; then you should look at the ear in sunlight.
"Therefore, if something from worms appears there, then draw it out with forceps or with delicate hooks.
"But if nothing appears there, then take a probe of this shape, narrow below and wide above; and insert the delicate end into the ear according to the size it can withstand; then suck strongly with it.
"Do the same many times until all worms come out.
"But if they do not obey you to come out, then put the probe of poppy seeds around the ear canal as mentioned above in stone.
"But if they do not come out with what was said; then administer the distillations which the ancients have experienced in the treatment of worms; and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your discharge be oil and medicine into the ear with this tool, whose shape is depicted here.
As you see, make it from silver or brass, narrower below, with a small opening below and wider above.
Therefore, let the thing that is inside the concavity of the tube be made of brass.
And if you wish, take a rod, and wrap its end with a fitting covering; then pour oil or juice, or whatever medicine you wish into the tube; let it be in the ear; then insert the rod with the covering on top, and press it gently with your hand, until the oil is forced into the concavity of the ear, and the sick person feels it inside; and whatever is poured into the ear, let it already be slightly heated with fire; and beware that what distills into it is not very cold; medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter on the care of an otitis external.
Chapter VII.
When some infants come out of their mother's unperforated wombs.
And it happens that otitis externa also occurs in some people from an ulcer or flesh born in the ear.
And this otitis externa sometimes occurs deep within the ear canal, which is not visible; and sometimes it happens near the external opening of the ear canal, which is visible.
Therefore, that which occurs deep within the ear and is not visible, is difficult to cure in many ways.
And in that which is visible, you must place the sick person's ear on the sun and look into it; then if you see the otitis externa, open it with a small, thin spatula, whose shape is as follows, the tip of which should have a small hollow, part of which should be sharp; and the rest of the spatula should be made of two flat sides: so as not to harm the ear.
If therefore an ulcer is born from the flesh within the ear, then hold it with a fine hook and cut it out gently but strongly, until all the flesh has been removed.
If therefore the ulcer is deep within the ear, then take a fine, soft probe and heat it slightly; then insert it into the ear.
If you find that an ulcer is accompanied by weakness and heaviness of hearing, then try to open it gently; beware lest you injure the nerves of the ear.
Then place linen in the ear according to the size of the opening you made, wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for some days until you are assured of healing the wound.
Or take linen and immerse it in rosewater, grind some white zinc on it, and use it.
If you see the ear is beginning to discharge pus, then remove the linen and let it dry with another piece of linen wrapped in a cerotic that has been made with rose oil; let it sit until the hot pus settles; then take care of it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, then immerse sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear; use the remaining treatment for stopping the bleeding, which is discussed in the treatment of distillations.
Chapter on the cure of Althaeus (Marsh Mallow) for the eyes.
Chapter VIII. Those Althaeus that occur in the eyelids can sometimes be moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore hold them with tweezers or a hook, and cut them out from their roots.
Then place white zinc on the area.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lentil-shaped cautery.
And to cauterize them (the wounds) is better after incision.
For many times they return when something remains from their roots.
And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter on the care of the eyelids of Græcus (Grandius).
Chapter IX.
Many times something occurs in the eyelids which resembles a growth like Grandius in its strength and hardness, and it is called a Grandio because it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper eyelid and the lower one.
The operation in them (the Grandios) is to examine whether it is a Grandio that appears from the eyelid and moves to all parts, and its matter is easy to remove.
Find then a fissure above it (the Grandio) in width.
Then scrape it from all sides with ease until it comes out.
Then hang it with a hook and cut it off (entirely).
But if the removal of it (the Grandio) is not prepared for you, unless after you have pierced the eyelid with a small incision, then it may harm someone weak.
If the fissure is large: Then tie it together with stitches: and take care of it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it.
Unguent restores it (the eyelid) and fills it up.
If the Grandio is turned downwards towards the inner ear on the surface, then turn the eyelid inside out and hang the Grandio with a hook: besides that you will need an incision, and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is stretched by an incision, no harm will come to anyone from it.
Then wash the eye after snow incision with salted water; and care for the place with it until the sick one heals.
On the treatment of Axirnath eyelids.
Chapter X.
Axirnath is a growth that is generated in the upper eyelid's tunics; it mostly occurs in children; and it burdens their eyes, causing cataracts in the morning, and they cannot see the sun's light, because tears flow towards them, therefore, one sees them always lying on their faces, and sleeping on those faces, and their eyelids are constantly moist under eyebrows, which have already been inflated; and Axirnath's protrusion is visible to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of treatment is that the sick one should place his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare in it a piece of linen, and make a circle from it according to the size that contains Axirnath from all sides.
Then place it on it and press it with your fingers from all sides, so that Axirnath is gathered in the center of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a thin spatula making incisions through its length, and let the incision not be larger than the one made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary that you find the whole skin until you reach Axirnath, because in many dispositions Axirnath proceeds from the incision according to the shape of a white adipose tissue fragment.
Therefore take it out with the cloth that you have filled between your fingers towards the outside; and you turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses; be careful not to add in the incision so as not to reach the eye with the spatula and hurt it.
If the Axirnath is not apparent to you at the beginning of the wound, you shall easily introduce a little into the wound until the Axirnath appears.
Then extract it, as we have said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the area, and bind it with threads.
And there are some people who grind salt, and put it into the hollow of the wound, to dissolve what remains of that moisture.
Then care for it until it is healed.
If a hot abscess occurs in the place, then care for it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
Chapter on Ataxmir of the eyes, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft and falls out as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow on the eyelids in addition to the natural hair growth and fall out, then they harm the eye and cause symptoms such as constant tearing, softening of the eyelid, and white film on the eye, until it becomes the cause of eye destruction.
And Ataxmir of the eyes is treated according to four methods. Or by cauterization with fire.
Or with sharp medicine, as stated in the chapter on cauterization.
The sentence is translated as: "It is treated (by) Ataxmir through incision and suturing.
By cannulas, according to what I shall say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the sick one on your lap.
Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If therefore it is turned (good), it is well.
And if not (turned): introduce the point into it, where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and let the point pierce through the thread on top, and let this be close to the hairs themselves, that is, close to the edge of the eyelid, in which the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a spatula.
Then find on the inner part of the eyelid, beneath the added hairs, with the probing spoon from the greater lacrimal sac to the lesser lacrimal sac.
Then draw out the thread, and place under the eyelid a small ball of wool from cooked cotton or cloth; then mark on the eyelid with wax, so that it is like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it must be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: since it is varied among people.
For there are those who need to be cut from the eyelid of such size, according to the size that is softened by the eyelid. Then with the probing spoon find above the two lines you marked, and start from the greater lacrimal sac to the lesser lacrimal sac, and let there be one fissure close to the natural hairs, like the thickness of a radius.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape it (the fissure) all over. Then connect the two lips with suture, with a needle and fine wool thread: and clean the blood, and let that which exceeds from the threads on the eyebrows adhere, if you wish to make this (the stitching): and if not, do not treat it.
Then release the suture and the thread for three or four days; afterwards take care of it. And if you wish, release the wound without suture, and take care of it so that it dries and contracts.
For the eyelid is to be raised during sealing of the wound and its closure; but it will be better later on.
This method of healing was taught by the ancients (Ataxmire).
Nevertheless, it is a concern for the sick person, and it comes from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is also in Ataxmire: and it is to mark signs on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have said.
Then lift the eyelid with three separated or united combs according to the following shape, then cut what is excess with small scissors according to this shape, with equal incisions.
If it is not possible for you to hold the comb and it does not fit: then take a needle with thread, and insert it into the middle of the figure; and insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and another thread near the smaller tear duct; and gather the threads with equal tension between your fingers.
Then lift your hand equally with the eyelid lift; and lift the skin where the wound is marked, as we have said.
Then bring together two lips of the wound with a suture; and take care of it until it heals.
If a boil occurs at your incision or tear: bind the boil with wax and similar materials from healing ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inside the eyelid.
On the treatment of Ataxmir with dogs.
It is necessary to turn the eyelid and make an incision in the interior fissure, as I have previously explained.
Then, skillfully make two canes or two thin logs whose length is the same as that of the eyelid and whose width is smaller than that of a spatula; and you have already made an incision at both ends on both sides where the sutures are held.
Then gather both with finesse onto that which overflows from the eyelid of the eye and tightly bind two canes on both sides using strong binding, and release it for several days. For the bound skin will die, darken, and rot until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, then cut it with scissors.
Then take care of it until it heals.
When it has consolidated, lift the eyelid and do not pluck out hairs.
And this is the shape of two canes that you will make according to this form and size in length and width.
On the lifting of plucked hairs in the eye with a needle.
Chapter 12.
The operation is to take a fine needle and insert a thread from fine silk gently into it. Then gather the ends together, and tie them both with a very fine knot; and let the length of the threads be about one handbreadth.
Then prepare another fine thread called Alinxotati under it briefly and knot the ends if you wish.
Then let the sick man place his head in your lap and position it near the sun so that the operation is visible; since the operation is delicate or small.
Then insert the needle with Alinxotati into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you pull out a natural hair from above.
Then pull the needle above the anixotatus: and introduce into the anixotatus that needle; if it is one or two or three, not more than that.
Then pull your hand with it until the needle comes out of the anixotatus along with its hair together with the natural hair from the eyelid.
If the anixotatus is pulled but the hair does not come out with it, pull the anixotatus down towards the lower part, with the thread you have inserted in it, until the anixotatus comes out through the upper opening and is visible to the eye; then pull out the anixotatus and the thread, and remove both of them. Close the eye and let it remain closed for two or three days so that the hair adheres to its place, and new flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then join it with a long hair from the natural hairs and lift it up together; or leave it as it is until it grows out and then pluck it.
Chapter on the care of the xastratum that occurs in the upper eyelid.
Chapter 13.
When this condition occurs in the eye, it is called leporina.
And this xastratum is either natural or acquired.
The acquired xastratum occurs due to the consolidation of a wound, a cut, a cautery, and similar things.
The method of treatment is to find this consolidation and to separate its lips, and place a linen cloth between them and bind it until it heals.
It is not necessary to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict, for if you do this, the xastratum becomes worse than it was; rather use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and embrocation with water in which althea has been boiled, linseed seed; and an ointment of dyaquilon, which has been melted with some oil; and bathe the cloth with it and treat it with it.
Thy treasure of care is that thou endeavourest with all thy skill, so that it [the wound] does not become consolidated according to the form which it was first.
This operation that we have mentioned, indeed it is not but a correction of Alzharath, so that the form of the place does not return as it was completely. Treatment of Alzharath on the lower eyelid, and it is a swelling or contraction upward towards the right and left.
Chapter XIII.
This which is below, is what is truly called Alzharath.
It is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one comes from a wound, or a crack, or cautery, and similar things.
The method of operation in this is that thou takest a needle with double thread and dost dye it in the flesh and makest it pass from the left tear-duct to the right tear-duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upwards with a needle and cut it with a broad scalpel.
If therefore the form of the eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if not, taketh a cautery and place it in the crack, and turn the eyelid with it; and cut two cracks on the inner side of the eyelid, and let them be at the extremities of the two cracks from both angles of the incision, until they meet and form an angle: until when they gather together, let their shape be this shape, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then removeth that flesh by its sharp edge which is below, from that which followeth the eyelid.
Then gather together the separated parts: or it with thread of wool.
Then take care of them with what I said regarding softening medications and linen, until they heal.
If Alxatrati occurs from a fissure, and by suturing, or cautery: then it is necessary to clean the fissure flat under the eyelashes, just as was done before.
Then separate the two lips with a linen cloth, as I said before.
The essence of treating Alxatrati, whether it is above or below, is to perform the operation on it according to how Alxatrati is prepared.
Indeed, it (Alxatrati) comes in many various forms: and the skillful artisan prepares his craft according to whatever way is possible for him, until he makes its figure return to a natural form, or near to it, and the patient himself, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in various dispositions.
§ On the adhesion of the eyelid with conjunctiva, or cornea.
Chapter 15.
Sometimes this consolidation occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid adheres to the white part of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural operations.
Therefore, you must insert the end of the radius beneath the eyelid and lift it up; or extend it with a hook; then cut the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp like the edge of spatulas, but rather dulled slightly; so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation and the spatula is removed, and does not injure the eye with its sharpness; and your incision should be as if you are peeling off that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the adhesion heals completely.
Find then salt water for the eye, when cleaning it; or distill into it from distilled water dissolved with zinc.
Fold then between the eyelid and the eye with a linen cloth; place wool soaked in egg white over the eye; and after the third day use zinc and with consolidating substances until it heals.
On the incision of the nail and the protrusion of the skin around the eyes.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the nail is of two kinds. It is nerve-like (neruosa) and similar to horn, being soft but strong.
It is not nerve-like (non neruosa), similar to frozen white moisture, which when touched with iron or tried to pick up with a nail, breaks off and the nail does not sink into it.
And neither kind begins except from the greater tear duct, until it slowly reaches the eye, covers the vision, and prevents light and movement of the eye.
And the method of operation for its cutting is: that a weak person should put his head in your lap.
Then open the eyes of the patient and lift the eyelid with your hand.
Then grasp the nail with a small hammer and extend it upward.
Then take the needle and insert it into the nail with a horsehair or cowhair thread, and make sure the thread is strong, slightly bend the tip of the needle, and hammer it in the middle of the nail; pierce it with the needle and tie the nail with the thread and extend it upward; scrape off the side of the nail following the pupil as if you were holding it with hair to its end.
Then cut the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal with a thin spatula or with small forceps; and allow the natural flesh of the lacrimal to remain, so that it may not happen that due to the incision there is a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is extended with a single hook; or with thread, as we said.
Then it is scraped with a soft spatula, whose form is this: (it continues with a diagram)
And beware that the spatula does not touch the horny layer and there is a break in it, and the pupil is pierced through.
Then after the incision, throw something of crushed salt into the eye or made from seif or zinc and leave it until another day.
Then take care of it with what is necessary until it heals. If the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert a probe into it or a hook cannot be fashioned in it, then this kind of nail is treated many times with medications and heals as I narrated in the division.
If you wish to cut it (the cyst), then open the eye of the sick person and take a thin, soft, weak, sharp spatula in this form:
And scrape the nail on top with a razor with subtlety.
If you see that it becomes rarefied and crushed and pressed with the razor, then drip from your hour into the eye from seif made from zinc, or from red seif, or ground salt; and cover the eye until another day.
Then repeat the same operation until the whole thing is removed.
Unless a hot abscess appears in your eye; then leave it (the cyst) alone and treat the abscess until it heals. Then repeat the operation on it with the razor until it heals.
Prominence of the tear duct if it causes great harm to the eye, should be suspended with a hook and a portion of it excised; not the extremity of the excision, so as to avoid disruption of the flow of tears.
Then let blood or make it a purging of the tear duct, or made from zinc, until it heals. [Section on] Incision according to Alguarid and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
There sometimes arises in certain human eyes red flesh composed or laid on top of the pupil until it covers it, approaches it or tightens over the eyelashes and possibly turns the eyelids outwards; resembling a rose-bush balustrade.
And the treatment for it is to place the affected person's head in your lap.
Then open his eyes and collect the entire flesh along with appropriate hooks; hold it with a single forceps or tweezers.
Then cut the flesh first, until the whole thing is finished with scissors.
And be careful not to hurt the eye during the operation; and make your cut in such a way as we mentioned in the incision of the nail, either with a spatula, which was described in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps, with which the asbestos is collected, according to the form it will take after this chapter.
When your incision is completed and the entire Alguarid is removed, then fill the eye with pulverized salt; or pour in red powder and similar substances from corrosive medicines; place on top of the outer eye a piece of cooked linen cloth with raw egg white to protect it from hot infection.
If some Alguarid remains and a hot blood flow persists and you fear a hot abscess; then release the eye and treat the abscess with whatever remedy calms it down.
Then repeat the operation upon him until he is healed.
And similarly do with the added flesh that occurs in the eye of this type.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that all weak eyes of natural growth or accidental growth be treated with iron without the introduction of your hand into any of these operations, until you see that the member can endure the operation.
Chapter on the extraction of a seed from the eye.
Chapter XVIII. The arteries red [ones] that are woven over the eye, and forbid the operation of life: they weaken the eye with the passage of days.
It is necessary for you first to consider if the eye in which the Sebel [artery] is, is strong, and there is no sickness other than Sebel. If so, then gather the Sebel [from that eye].
And it should be ordered to the weak one, to place his head in your bosom.
Then suspend those veins with one or two needles according to your discretion: let the needle be subtle of double thickness, according to this shape, or there may be two needles graduated in one body, according to this shape.
Then collect with fine forceps those veins with delicacy, and remove the blood hour by hour until you see those veins being removed from the eye and resolved: take care not to injure the eye with the tips of the forceps.
And let your operation be at midday facing the sun, and be very firm in your operation: so that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have finished, then pour into the eye either green or red: so that its own sharpness corrodes what remains of Sebel.
If it is not possible for you to gather all of that in that hour, then bandage the eye with what alleviates the pain of the eye: and leave it for some days until its pain subsides: and heal it from inflammation with hot poultice: afterwards apply again on top of it according to the same method, until it heals.
And this is the shape of the forceps.
Chapter on the reduction of Arissatum to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
Physicians call Arissatum a fistula, which they treat with cautionery or with sharp medicine burning it, according to what has preceded its narrative.
If it does not heal, then there is no skill in that: unless you find upon the abscess at its birthplace and draw out all the moisture that is in it and pus until the bone appears.
When the bone appears, and you see corruption or blackness within it, then grind it with an instrument of this shape.
And it is called the head-rasp.
Make it of iron and let its head be round like a rasp, but pierced with the puncture of a file, or with the subtle puncture of aliskilfer; and place it upon the corrupted bone. Then turn it around between your fingers, and press your hand slightly, until you know that the corruption has been ground away; and do this frequently.
Then turn it around between your fingers, and press your hand slightly, until you know that the corruption has been ground away; and do this frequently. Then restore the place with medicines made from exccentives (dry) styptics.
If the place consolidates and flesh grows within it, and the flow of pus ceases; and it remains for forty days without renewing, without becoming an abscess, and no accident occurs in it: then you will know that it is healed.
And if not, then there is no skill in it, except to reduce the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this shape.
And it is to expose the bone secondly with iron or with sharp medicine; and when the bone is exposed, then take a gimlet according to this shape, with its end being triangular and iron-tipped; and let the wood of it be a pyramid extended to the end, as you see.
Then place it upon the bone itself; and let it be close to the tear duct; and extend your hand slightly from the eye.
Then turn your hand with the gimlet until it penetrates the bone, and you feel it weak; by this means you will find air coming out from it when you hold your hand over its nose.
Therefore, then restore the place with styptic medications, as I have taught you.
When flesh arises and the place hardens: then the matter that was flowing outward returns to the nose: it is therefore lighter upon the sick one.
On the reduction of eyelid prominence. Chapter 20.
When the eye bulges out completely and no harm or diminution occurs in sight, then it is necessary to loosen the patient; afterwards, bleed him; then place poultices on the neck without incision, but with suction.
Then place a lining over the eye that is made of acacia, aloe, myrrh, and colophony.
Then tighten the eye above with plaster containing many pustules.
And the method of pustules is: take soft cloths in abundance and fold all the cloth over four; make many from them; then place one on top of another according to the amount required by the eye; then tighten them over these with a hard cloth strap.
And repeat the poultices with suction without incision.
Then remove the poultices and release the tightened eye during the day and night.
If the bandage becomes soft again, then it is necessary to tighten it a lot; afterwards, remove the bandage after a day and night, as we said.
If you see that the eye has returned to its original condition, that is good; and if not, repeat the plaster, pustules, straps, and poultices until it heals.
§ On the incision of the bulging eyelid.
Chapter 21.
When there is a rupture in the bulging eyelid, then it protrudes and goes outside the eyelashes as if it were a grain of sand, and disfigures the human form because of this, and the sight wants to cut it; in such a case, the operation is performed according to what I narrate: and it is to insert a needle from the root of the eyelid from below to the upper part.
Then insert another needle with a double thread from the lacrimal side and make it penetrate; then release the first needle according to its position.
Then cut a place for the filum doubli (suture), and tie it with the part of Vua in a circle, and tighten it strongly.
Then remove the needle, place warm wool on the eyeball in the white of the eye, and leave it until the suture falls with the Vua.
Then care for the eye with whatever comforts it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes suture the Vua from all sides with a circular bandage until the eye protrudes significantly.
Then it is pierced with a fine spatula that reaches to the depth of the eye, and the moisture in the white of the eye is drained, and the eye falls down, and enters immediately; then tie it until it is healed.
Chapter on the treatment of Alcomant (strabismus).
Chapter XXII.
This ailment called Alcomant is nothing more than pus that accumulates in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself the same as [the fluid] inside the eyeball.
And the method of treatment for this is to have the patient sit on a prepared chair or bench.
Then take the head with both your hands from two sides and shake it until you see the pus descend to the lower part of the eyes.
Then it is figured and does not descend, and the vision is cleared; let the patient see as he saw before; if it does not descend lower, then you know that it is water.
If the descent of the pus is not prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine spatula and poke it with it slightly on the horny membrane next to the conjunctiva with the cornea at the edge until pus comes out.
When the pus comes out, then pour warm water into which you have mixed honey over the eye; or hot water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey; then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
On the treatment of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have already said the type of water in division and what is suitable for piercing when explaining and demonstrating, then accept the same thing according to health.
Then it is necessary for you to make the patient sit with hands on each side of his face facing the light, near the sun; and tie down the healthy eye, and squeeze it very hard; then close the eyelid of that eye with your right hand if the water is in the left eye; or with your left hand if the water is in the right eye.
Then take your right hand and make a strong pinch if the eye with water is on the left; or use your left hand if it is on the right.
Then place the fingertip near the corona [a part of the eye] on the white part of the lower eyelid; then push with force and you rotate your hand along with it until it penetrates the white part of the eye, and you feel that the finger has reached an empty area.
It is necessary that the measurement of the finger's journey to depth be equal to the distance from the pupil to the end of the black part [iris]; and this is called the corona of the eye.
You will see it [the corona] in the same vision of the pupil of the eye, because of the clarity of the cornea layer.
Then place your finger at the location where the water is.
Then press it down once after another.
If the water descends immediately, then the patient sees it immediately on what his vision opens and your finger in his eye.
Then rest for a while.
If the water descends, then remove it with another push until it comes out of the eye.
When it [the instrument] is driven in and does not go up: then extract almagda easily; and you withdraw your hand slowly. Then dissolve something from clear salt in water: and cleanse the eye with it.
Then place over the whole eye a piece of camphorated wool or flax soaked in rose oil and egg white, and bind the healthy eye with it.
We, as well as those of our time, place cumin ground with egg white over him [the eye].
If almagda does not obey you in entering the eye due to its hardness, because it is from a person whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you receive spathule, which is called Alberid, whose shape is as follows.
Therefore, bore only the conjunctiva with it [the Alberid], and not the bottom of your hand into the hole; and there is no other purpose but to make a subtle way for almagda.
Then introduce almagda as we have said.
And for the conclusion of your work, prepare for the sick a bed suitably made, in which he may sleep on his back in a dark house; and keep him away from all movements, and from coughing; and place food for him that softens his nature; and let him not move his head to the right or left at all.
And let the binding be according to its arrangement until the third day. Then dissolve it [the substance] in that dark house and test his vision; and let him see objects.
Then reduce the binding until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do it during the hour of cure or immediately after cutting; on the contrary, it should be left to others because water rises quickly through a strong wound.
If a hot abscess occurs: then it is necessary to open the eye before the seventh day; and correct that with what soothes the abscess, until it is soothed; then without looking at it, and place over its orifice whatever regulates its vision for several days, while it exists in that dark house.
Then gradually exit the house, and convert to your belongings.
And know that, in the case of the zaltea, a student is not exempted from watching (the surgery) several times; then he shall dare upon the operation.
And indeed a certain one of those from Alayrach has come to us, who said that it was pierced with a perforation in Alayrach, through which water flows.
Therefore I have not seen anyone in your land who has done that; nor have I read it in any of the old books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of the species from magda, to stand upon him who is ignorant of them.
Make them out of copper; and let the ends of them be with this same triangular subtlety, and the end sharp.
Forms of magda.
Chapter on the care of a born flesh in the nose.
Chapter XXIV.
Sometimes various fleshes are born in the nose, among which there is something that resembles many scorpions' feet; and from it is a cancerous flesh, stone-like, of a dark color; and from it is one that is soft, not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is from these fleshes, soft, not fraudulent, nor cancerous, it is necessary to have the sick one sit opposite the sun with his face towards you, and open his nostrils, and throw a hook into those fleshes; then pull them outwards, and cut what you have taken hold of from them with a thin, sharp spatula until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
If something remains from the one whose amputation is not possible: then scrape it off with one of the subtle instruments easily, until nothing remains from it.
If blood dominates you or a hot aposteme occurs: then apply to it what is necessary: or if it is from the malicious apostemas, then hurry to cauterize him until the blood is cut off and all flesh is removed.
Then throw vinegar, or water, or wine into the nose after the incision.
If the nose opens and moisture goes up to the palate, then you know that he is already well.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should be, then you know that there is flesh born within the upper bones of the nose, which did not reach with the incision.
Then it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen with some thickness and many knots, and put between each knot a quantity equal to or less than a finger: and let the weak one do it, so he sends out one end of the thread into the nose with a ray, or with whatever he can manage after doing so similar to an awl: and draw out the smell, until it reaches the cavity and comes out on his throat.
And indeed often the boys in school do something similar to this Attomus: and it is easy for him who wants to do it.
Then put the two ends of the thread, one which comes out on the nose and the other that remains in the nose.
Then with a saw the flesh is cut with knots on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh and the knots of the thread are together.
Then extract the thread: and put linen that you have soaked in the Egyptian ointment in the nose after draining the blood for three days or more until the entire ointment remaining from the flesh is consumed.
Then put a tube made of lead at the end of the matter into the nose, for some days, until it heals.
If there is need for a cure that will dry it out, use that.
To make a purge for the head, when olive oil and other medicines are to be administered through the nose, make it of silver or brass; that it be similar in size to a small lamp, open like a shell; and its passage likewise.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a tube.
And the shell-like instrument to make a purge for the head should be filled and perforated; it should have a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when heating oil in it, or whatever liquid you wish, and fluid substances.
And this is the form of the instrument. Chapter on the care of the nose.
Chapter XXV.
Often a Thelul is born at the end of the nose and it grows and becomes more prominent with days until it becomes an unpleasant sight.
And therefore it is necessary to cut it at the beginning of its appearance and to remove all of it.
Then place on the spot, either cautery or a burning medicine in its place.
If it is slow to be cut and grows, then consider if it is made of hard stone, dark in color, with few senses; then do not touch it with iron; because it is a cancerous ulcer.
For often I have seen that an apostema was cut open and great evil happened to the one who had it.
And if the apostema is soft, not dark in color, and you see that a cut can be made all over it, then evacuate the weak, and cut it without fear, without fear; and care for the place with whatever it may need to dry and constrict until it heals.
On the suture of the nose, and the lip, and the ear.
Sint in ore incisa quatuor partes aequales, et sine aliqua differentia: una ab orificio labii inferius ad medium labii superius, secunda a medio labii superius usque ad medium labii inferioris, tertia a medio labii inferioris ad foramen stromae; quarta a foramine stromae usque ad orificium nasi.
Know that when a solution to continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it makes little difference for the operation, unless in some humans.
Therefore, when something happens to anyone from it (the solution), you should consider whether it is a recent wound with its own blood: and then gather together two pieces of the wound with suturing: then care for it until it heals.
And if the lips of the solution are already separated and each part is healthy: then it is necessary to scrape off all the part appearing from the skin, until it bleeds.
Then gather together two lips with suturing and sew them up, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood on top of the blood, and pulverized olibanum: and place above the powders a piece of emplastrum diafinicon, and some other more consolidated plaster: and let it be bound for two or three days.
Then dissolve it (the solution), and change the medicine: and let it go until the threads fall off by themselves. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
The method of suturing is that you gather together the solution to continuity with a needle and thread, as we have said in the suturing of the abdomen: or gather together the solution with a needle and thread, as I told you.
Chapter on the extraction of neck nodules.
Chapter XXVII. Many people have hard growths like seeds of grass appearing often on the inner lips: and some of them are smaller, and others larger.
Therefore it is necessary to turn the lip over, and cut on all sides of the node, and hang it with a hook, and scrape it from all sides.
Then fill the place after cutting with boiled alum, until the blood is cut off.
Then, it is to be washed with vinegar, and the place where there is an ulceration should be cleaned with it, until the wounds heal.
On making an incision in the flesh of a newborn on the gums.
Chapter XXVIII. Multitiimes arises on the gum flesh, which ancients called abscess.
Therefore it is necessary that you hang it with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root and let pus/blood flow out.
Then place upon the wound, powder of oxytocin or other styptic powders, drying agents.
If the flesh returns after treatment, and it often does so, then cut it again and cauterize it; for it will not return after cauterization.
Chapter on tooth extraction with iron.
Chapter 29.
When accumulations form on the surfaces of teeth from both inner and outer parts, and between rough gums, they become decayed, yellowish, and greenish until corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul.
Therefore it is necessary that you make the sick man sit between your hands, and put his head in your lap, and grind/file the molars and teeth, where the roughness appears, and remove them as sand-like particles until nothing remains of them; similarly for decayed, greenish, yellowish, citrus, and other conditions until they are cleaned.
If the root is removed at the beginning of tooth extraction, that is good; and if not, then perform the extraction again on another day, or second, or third until you have reached your goal in what you desire.
And know that teeth require different types of files for various shapes and forms; because the file used to grind the tooth from below is different than the file used between the teeth, according to their shapes.
And these files should be prepared by you, which you see.
On the extraction of tooth pain.
Of the extracting of teeth that have grown into one another.
It is necessary that you cure the Tooth from its pain with all your skill, and be slow in its extraction.
There is no substitute for it when it is extracted: since it is a lofty substance: until there is no excuse for its extraction, then, when the sick tooth must be extracted, it should be made firm and certified to you by the painful tooth.
Often deceives the sick, pain does, and thinks there is worm in the tooth and extracts it; then the pain does not cease until the sick tooth is extracted.
We have already seen that from the operation of phlebotomists. (This sentence seems to be incomplete or out of context without knowing what "that" refers to in the previous text.)
When the painful tooth is certified to you by itself, then it is necessary that you lance around the tooth with a spatula, where there is something of virtue, until the gums are dissolved from all sides: then move it with your fingers, or with subtle forceps first, gradually, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps at that spot, and hold the head of the sick tooth between your knees: which you have already tightly grasped so that it does not move: then pull the tooth in a straight line, so as not to break it.
If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and introduce it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary that you fill that hole with a cloth and tie it with the end of a thin radius so as not to break it during your compression on top of it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you do skillfully with the lancing around the gums from all sides much.
Maintain your strength so as not to break it, and let a part of it remain, and return upon the sick from that wickedness which is greater than his initial pain.
Be careful not to do what ignorant bloodletters do out of haste and the audacity of their extraction, beyond what we have mentioned.
For many times they bring about great diseases in men, which are difficult to break and whose roots remain intact or some of them: or they extract it with some jawbones; as we have often testified this. Then, after the extraction, it is to be anointed with wine, or with vinegar and salt. If there should be bleeding from the places (for it often happens), then rub something of pigs' lard and fill the place with it; and if not, cauterize it, unless you have pigs' lard.
The handles of the fine forceps, which move the teeth, should be long at the ends, short at the arms, thick so as not to split when pressed on the tooth; like those of large forceps, until, when you squeeze with them, they do not bite themselves or split: short at the ends, and made from good iron or well-made steel, with pointed ends; and in their ends there should be teeth, some of which enter into others and tighten appropriately by a proper constriction, strong.
And sometimes the ends are like the shape of a bird's beak called a ciconia and are strong in compression.
Chapter on the removal of teeth and extraction of broken jawbones.
Chapter XXXI.
When something remains at the site of tooth extraction that breaks, then you should place hot cotton over it for one or two days until the location softens; then insert algasti or forceps, whose ends resemble the beak of a bird called a ciconia.
This form is forceps.
Their ends are made like a chisel inside: or scissors.
If it does not yield with these forceps, then you must be cautious around the root and dissect all the flesh, and insert a tool called Small Plank, whose form is this.
The end should be short, somewhat thick: and not dampened so that it does not break.
If the root exits through this, it is good: and if not, help with other tools whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangle's end, in which there is some thickness.
The form of the subtle triangle's end.
Also helps with this tool having two branches, whose form is this. And with other tools and instruments which have come before for the teeth's ratio.
Also helps with this tool resembling a large hook, whose form is this, triangle's twisted end with some thickness so that it does not break: and do not dampen it.
And know that there are many tools for the teeth: and likewise, the remaining tools are not counted, and the wise craftsman, subtle in his art, discovers himself an instrument according to what the operation and illness themselves signify.
Because from the illnesses there are some for which the ancient ones did not make an instrument, due to the diversity of their species.
If the bone breaks from the jaw, or from other bones of the mouth, or rots: then examine over it in its place with that which suits it from the instruments and forceps I mentioned for root extraction, and help with this gesture, whose form is this.
Let there be some thickness gradually, so that it can be tightened or held with the bone, and it does not flee and move away until the bone exits: and restore the place with appropriate medications for this.
If there is a small rot in the bone, then scrape it away from the rot, and care for it until it heals.
On the locking of protruding teeth over others.
Chapter XXXII.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, an ugly shape arises from it; and this especially happens in women and girls, that is, in those who menstruate.
For if a tooth has been born after another tooth and does not settle, or its locking or grinding is possible, then pull it out; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this tool whose shape is as follows.
It resembles a small beak, and is made of iron pointed at one end.
And let your cut be such that you cut it many times on account of the hardness of the tooth and so that another tooth is not disturbed.
If it protrudes to be ground down, then grind it with a file made of iron, whose shape is as follows.
Let it be all of iron, and the handle small with numerous sharp points like a file used to make needles; with which you grind the tooth gradually over many days with ease, so that another tooth is not disturbed, and it falls out; then smooth it and finally scrape it away with certain rasps.
If it is a tooth that breaks off and injures the tongue, then it must be ground down until the roughness of the fracture is removed and it is made smooth; and it should not injure the tongue or disrupt speech.
[Section title] On the filing of teeth with gold threads.
Chapter XXXIII.
When the anterior teeth are shaken and knocked by impact or accident, and the sick person cannot hold what he eats to keep it from falling; and you have treated them with medicinal bindings but the treatment did not help; then their condition is such that they should be bound with a gold thread; because silver becomes weak and rots after days, but gold never changes.
And let there be a thread of medium thickness, both delicate and coarse, according to its quantity, which catches between the Teeth.
The shape of the rete should be such that you can take a thread and insert its double between two healthy teeth; then weave it with both ends of the thread between moving teeth (either one or more), until you reach the healthy tooth on the opposite side with the needle and thread.
Then weave the thread repeatedly to the part from which you started; and tighten your hand with delicacy and wisdom until it is completely removed; and let your constriction be at the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out.
Then cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors; bring them together and twist them; hide these under the healthy tooth and the moving tooth so as not to hurt the tongue; then release the thread until it remains tight.
If it slips or is cut, tighten it with another thread and it will remain stable for the entire time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of the rete for two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes a tooth or two return after falling out in their places, and they are retained as we have said, and remain; this does not happen except by the skillful and experienced craftsman.
And sometimes a tooth from the bones of the cow is fitted and made like a tooth and placed in its place, where it is reinforced and tightened as we have said; and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter on the incision of the ligament that occurs under the tongue and prevents speech.
Chapter XXXIV.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it is due to the consolidation of the wound; then throw a hook into it and bore through it across, until you reach the ligament, and the knot is loosened.
If there is a flow of blood, then place some burnt wheat on the spot. If blood overpowers you, then cauterize the place with a freckled cautery, which is suitable for that; then take care of it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals. Chapter on the Extraction of the Salivary Gland located under the tongue.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes there arises under the tongue a boil similar to a small frog, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and it may swell so much that it fills the bone.
If you see it of a dark or black color, hard, in which the weak one does not feel anything; then do not touch it, because it is a cancer.
And if it is inclined towards whiteness, in which there is moisture; then throw a hook into it and cut it with a very sharp scalpel, and release it from every side.
If blood overcomes you during your operation hour, then place upon it a zegi crushed, until the blood is cut off; afterwards return to your operation until you extract it with its complement.
Then wash it with vinegar and salt; take care of it with appropriate cure until it heals.
Chapter on the treatment of a double abscess (boil) in the molar teeth.
Chapter 36.
Then either you will pierce it or it will burst by itself.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is thin; then you should cut it.
And the operation on it is that you consider before the operation if the abscess of it has ceased to be hot and complete rest, or it has decreased somewhat by reduction; then let the patient sit facing the sun, and his head in your lap; and open his mouth, and let a servant be between his hands, and press his tongue downwards with an instrument, whose shape is this. Let it be made of silver or copper, which is thin like a scalpel.
When you press his tongue with it and the abscess is revealed to you and falls upon it; then take a hook, and pierce it into the molar tooth, and extract it as far as possible, pulling along with it something from the tunics.
Then cut it with the instrument whose form follows this:
They are similar to the forceps, but their extremities should be curved so that each of them has an opening facing directly towards the other's sharp point; therefore, it is advisable to use iron or alfuled that has been soaked.
If such an instrument is not present, then cut it with the spatula whose form follows this:
It should be sharp on one side but not on the other.
And after cutting one almond, cut the other according to this same shape of incision.
Then, after the incision, the sick person should rinse his throat with cold water or vinegar and water.
If there is bleeding, he should rinse his throat with water in which have been boiled the bark of pomegranate or myrtle leaves and similar ones from willow, until the bleeding stops; then take care of him until he is healed.
And sometimes abscesses other than almonds arise in the throat.
Cut them, therefore, according to what I said regarding the incision of two almonds equally.
I myself have treated a woman with an abscess that was born in her throat, which pulled to the side and caused few senses, which had almost closed her throat; she breathed through a narrow nostril, and food and drink had already been prohibited for her, and she had come close to death if she had remained for one or two days.
The abscess had risen only so much that it expelled two branches until they came out through the two nostrils.
I hurriedly approached and tied one of them with a hook.
Then, I pulled it out, and a large part came out with it.
Then cut (it) where it can be grasped through the nostril opening.
I made that to him which protruded from the other nostril opening.
Then I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue; then I attached a hook to the boil; then I cut off a part of it, and it did not run out except for a little blood; therefore the woman's throat was healed, and she immediately began to drink water, then she received food.
I did not stop cutting from the boil for a long time; and the boil kept coming back in the place where I was cutting, until it grew too large and with her I decided to do something else.
I devised another plan, and burned the boil in the throat.
Then she stopped adding (the substance); then I went away from her side, and I did not know what God had done with her after me.
[Section title: Incision of a boil in the throat.]
Chapter XXXVII.
When catarrh descends to the throat and a boil forms and is long, it is called a perpendicular; and if it is large and round in the lower part, it is called a balloon.
When it is treated with what I said earlier in the division, and the treatment does not help; and you see that the boil has become warm and soft, and thin; then it is necessary to cut (it).
And if the part that is collected is round and not long, and it is red or dark or black, and there is no sensation; then it is necessary to make an incision in it.
For fear of harming the weak (person).
Therefore when you see it as I have said according to its whiteness and length, make the weak person sit facing the sun; then press his tongue with the instrument whose description has preceded; then attach a hook to the throat and pull it downwards; then cut (it) with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two tonsils.
It is necessary that you do not cut from it, unless what is added beyond the natural limit without addition.
If you cut from it more, you harm the voice and speech.
Then after cutting (incision), use what we have said about the incision of two amygdalas and take care of it until it heals.
But if the sick person is afraid of cutting: then it is necessary that you use your skill in cauterizing it without fear and trembling.
The method of cauterization in it is not, except with sharp water: and it is to put the head of the sick person on your breast.
Then press his tongue with the instrument which we have said.
Then take from the water which I have told you in the chapter on cauterization, and make a ladle not extinct with it, and place it not thick nor thin, but of a medium thickness, and fill the depression of this instrument with it, whose shape is as follows.
Let the end of it where the medicine is placed be concave like the concavity of a cochlea (spiral shell-like structure).
Place the instrument with the medicine on the boil itself: and let the sick person lie on his side so that saliva runs out of his mouth from the internal medicine, so that something does not fall out of it into his throat and harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine.
And you apply it to the boil for a quarter of an hour with the quantity of the half-hour until you see it already softened and calmed by the medicine.
And if you want to take the purge (cotum), and roll it up on the end of a rod, and pour the purge with the medicine, and insert the rod with the purge into the cannula from above until the purge adheres to the boil. Repeat this frequently until you achieve what you desire concerning cauterization of the vein.
Then release it; for it will dry up and fall off in three or four days.
If you require to reapply medicine, reapply it; and after cauterization cleanse the vein with a cloth moistened in butter, and cleanse it with that which is around it from the medicine; and rub it with cold water.
Externally it shall be treated with plasters, internally with poultices, until it heals.
Therefore, this method of treatment is healthier than surgery and more distant from fear.
And sometimes the vein is treated with something more subtle than cauterization and cutting; it is treated by fumigation in this manner.
Take calaminthe, hyssop, origanum, rue, asafetida, chamomile, and wormwood, and similar herbs; mix them all together, or some of these in a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, and boil them; let the pot be coated with lime; and have a hole in the middle of the pot, over which you place an instrument concave in this manner.
Make it of silver or copper; insert the end with a grain into the mouth of the sick person, until the vapor reaches the vein through the pipe, until the vein is filled with smoke.
Then repeat over it frequently, until it dries up.
And beware, do not perform this treatment at the onset of the abscess.
Usually a pus forms in an abscess, and it is not appropriate to do this unless at the decline of the heat of the abscess.
If this instrument is not available to you, then take a pipe, and at the end of it prepare an oxhide layer; so that the bone of the sick person is not burned, because the oxhide prevents the vapor from burning the bone; and this is good treatment with safety.
On the extraction of thorns and bones from the throat.
In this text, it appears that we are discussing Chapter XXXVIII which deals with the extraction of thorns and bones from the throat. This was a common procedure in medieval medicine, as injuries from these objects were relatively common due to the lack of protective clothing and sanitary conditions. The Arabic original likely provided more detailed instructions on how to perform this surgery safely and effectively.
Often a bone or fish spine sticks in the throat, or something else.
Therefore, it is necessary to extract what appears visible above the point where the vision falls, after pressing the tongue with an instrument in the sun, and when it becomes clear to you that something is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary to make a meal of weak vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach.
Perhaps the object attached will come out through vomiting.
Or the weak person may swallow a fragment of ginger or radish root, or a piece of dry bread: or he may take a fragment of soft sea sponge and tie it up with a thread, then swallow it.
When it reaches the place where the thorns or bones are, and it is extracted, then it comes out. If it does not come out with what we have said: then use an instrument made of lead in this shape.
Let it be thicker than the radius by a little, and at its end let there be a hook, which he introduces easily into the throat with facility: and itself have its head raised upwards.
And let him beware of touching his epiglottis, so that he does not have a cough, and drive out with it the bone or thorn, or the doctor may insert it himself with his hand.
However, what the weak person introduces is better: because of his knowledge of the place where the object is attached: and he drives it downwards, or pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all of this according to the amount that has been prepared for him until it comes out.
On the extraction of Leeches.
Extrahere Sanguisugam per os.
When a leech (sanguisuga) is treated as I mentioned in the division of cure with medicines, and it does not work, then consider checking the throat of the sick person in the sun, or after pressing its tongue with the tool that I told you about.
If your vision falls upon a leech (sanguisuga), extract it with a small hook or with well-placed fine tweezers.
If it is not possible with them (the tools): then take a hollow cannula and insert it into the sick person's throat as far as its base; then insert a hot iron into the concavity of the cannula.
Do this often: let the sick one refrain from water for the whole day.
Then let him take cold water treatment (uitreatum), open his mouth in it, rinse his mouth with it but do not swallow anything from it; and move the water one hour after another with his hand.
For a leech (sanguisuga) immediately falls when it feels cold water.
If it does not come out when we have done what I mentioned, then fumigate the sick person with fleas (cimicis), or with asa (an herb) using the tool that I told you about for fumigating the throat (uuula).
Do this often, because it will fall by itself.
And the method of fumigation is as follows: take an earthenware pot, with live plums and fire inside it; and let the pot be covered with a lid having a hole in the middle; and insert the tip of the tool into the hole.
Then release the fumigation, and let the sick person put his mouth at the tip of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape before you know that the fumigation has reached the leech (sanguisuga).
The bloodsucker falls immediately.
If it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the sick person bear thirst, and eat salt and other things, but drink no water. Therefore, it is necessary for him to leave with this regime.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker is pulled out from the throat when it falls upon itself.
It resembles forceps, as you can see; except that there is this hook which enters the throat.
And its end resembles the beak of a bird called ciconia, in which there is the roughness of a file: when it seizes something, it does not let go of it at all.
Section on the opening of abscesses, and their cutting and treatment in general.
Chapter XL.
The species of abscesses are many, various according to the recollection of them, that is, of one kind, and of one kind in this book: and they are diverse in their perforation, and cutting of themselves in two ways.
One of them is from the species of an abscess itself, and because it encompasses moistures.
The second method is due to places where it occurs in the body.
Since an abscess occurring on the head is different from an abscess occurring in the anus: and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from an abscess occurring at joints: and each of them has its own judgment according to the operation.
And from abscesses there are those that should not be opened unless after the ripening of pus in them and its completion: and there are those that must be opened while they are raw, and do not ripen according to their completion.
As abscesses which are near joints.
Since when an abscess occurs near a joint and prolongs, until it putrefies what is in its vicinity perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted; therefore it is the cause closer to the contraction of that member.
Or is an abscess near a main part of the body; since if you delay the opening of it until it ripens, it will harm either that part or through the main member.
Or it is near the anus, open it while immature: and it should not be opened, an abscess which is raw, not completed digestion, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply, and extend to the interior of the anus, and become a fistula, or remain at its end, which will not heal. It is necessary that you know the hour of the opening of the abscess which has ripened according to its completion; and it is in the stage of sedation of pain, recession of fever, diminution of redness, and pulse, and acuteness of headache of the abscess: and the remaining signs. And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower part of the abscess, and of greater projection: and the perforation should be reaching along the body length, if abscesses are in parts of hands and feet, and places of arms, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and ultimately in all places equal to which there is no reflection.
In those which reflect, go with the perforation according to that limb.
When the abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better to leave its perforation until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to the completion.
Because if you perforate it before that, the course of the virus from it is prolonged, and there are many filths and foulnesses, and perhaps its lips harden and its depth.
And some abscesses are to be perforated according to the width of the body for necessity; or according to that limb which requires it.
And it is necessary that you administer a small perforation for small abscesses, and a large perforation for large abscesses; or many cuts according to the similarity of the size of the abscess.
And there are some abscesses in which the skin must be concaved: and it is to be cut when already made like a cloth, and become at the end that has already died; such as happens in many cases, that it breaks open, and buboes.
And from these [abscesses] there are some which are to be cut by a section having three angles.
And from these [abscesses] it is that one is to be cut as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
As an inguinal abscess.
And from these [abscesses] there are some in which a circular cut is administered, and a crescent-shaped cut; and similar to these from cuts.
That which has no head, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary to pierce it with a superficial puncture, or only plainly.
When the abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, so that it does not spread and pull out all the pus in that hour: rather, extract a part of it from itself.
Then let the abscess be opened until another day.
Then remove something from the pus again.
Do it often according to the degree, until it comes out: especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a woman pregnant, or a small child, or an old man decrepitus: for the animal spirit is often resolved with the exit of pus, and perhaps the sick one dies, and you do not perceive.
Therefore beware of this chapter with great caution.
And after your perforation, by which you pierce the abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound: and reflect.
If therefore the wound of the abscess is small, or the incision is plain, then administer linen cloths, or ancient bandages.
And if the abscess is large, and many incisions of perforation are present, then it is necessary to insert linen cloths into each fissure until they meet.
And if in the abscess you have cut off a piece of skin, or you concave it around: then it is necessary to fill it with an old bandage, or as when cloth is sewn, or shorn with linen wool without moisture: and tighten it until the third day.
Then throw it out, and care for that which is necessary with an ointment for it until it heals.
If however bleeding occurs during your operation hour, then administer cold water and vinegar, after being soaked with cloths on the place of the bleeding; and put it many times on top of the bleeding place.
If the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer a regime, cure, and powders, which I have narrated in many places of this our book, and from division.
If it is during winter and the site of the abscess involves many nerves: then it is necessary to pour hot poultices with wine and oil, and place them on the site.
And if it is in summer and the site is fleshy: then it is necessary to place cold poultices soaked in water, oil or wine and oil, and let it all be cold.
Until the third day, as we said, then it is necessary to dissolve the abscess, remove it, and administer its treatment suitable for it until it heals.
Therefore this is what is necessary in terms of the universal knowledge of treating abscesses.
According to the method of distinguishing, I have already said about every abscess, how the way to treat it is detailed individually for each case.
Chapter on excision of abscesses that occur on the skin of the head.
Chapter XL (40).
Small abscesses occur on the skin of the head, and they are of the kinds of nodules that are contained by membranes which are like sacs: as if they were swellings caused by a hen's galls.
And their appearances are many.
From them some are fat, and from them some contain moisture similar to clay, and from them some contain moisture similar to plaster or powders, and others like these, and from them there are hard stones.
And in their incision and extraction, there is no fear, provided that it does not make a contradiction with the nearby artery during their incision.
And the procedure for their incision is to test it with an instrument whose shape comes after this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
For if it is what contains moisture, then cut it through a lengthwise incision with a surface incision in this manner.
And begin with the incision from line b to line g. Therefore when the moisture is evacuated, then cut out the cyst that contains this moisture and do not leave anything inside it.
For often it recurs if something remains in it. Then immerse the skin in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt, fill the wound with it and leave it until another day.
For that which remains from the cyst will rot itself. Then repeat over the skin with Egyptian ointment a second and third time, if necessary, until you are confident that nothing remains from the cyst; then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
If the abscess contains a fat nodule: then cut it in this manner, with an incision having a cross shape; and throw hooks between the folds of the incision, and remove it from all sides; and make every effort in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If an artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you later.
And similarly do for a stone in an abscess, by cutting and the same cure, as we have said. Cutting over a stone abscess is easier, because there is little blood and moisture.
Sometimes there are such abscesses in the head of certain people in whom there is no moisture at all.
Or make a perforation in them always from the lower part, to divert the flow of pus towards the lower parts.
Then cure those with whatever is suitable for their cure.
Chapter on cutting Strangles in the neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, under the shoulders, and groins; and sometimes they occur elsewhere in the body.
On those that occur on the neck from them, there is one type and many; and they are generated by turns; and every Strangle from them is within its own layer, like a knot or abscess in the head, as we have said.
The types of these Strangles are numerous.
For they are stony ones; and from them there are those that contain moisture; and there are malignant ones, which do not obey treatment.
In that [part] which you see among them with good disposition in touch, whose color is clearly close to the skin and moves in all parts, and it is not attached with the nerves of the neck, nor with veins, nor arteries, nor is it deep: it is necessary to separate it by a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body along line b, to line g. And peel off [the skin] from every side: and stretch two flaps of skin with a knife, or with several knives if you need it, as we have said in abscesses of the head, and gradually remove it.
And be careful not to cut a vein nor a nerve.
Let the spatula not be very sharp: so that it does not add your hand to the cut, or disturb the sick person, and cut what is not necessary.
If you cut a vein or an artery, it prohibits you from the operation, then put in the wound some zegi powder rubbed or certain powders that coagulate blood, and tie up the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess subsides and the wound softens: or if it begins to rot.
For the blood is coagulated by the scented ointment (Redi), so go back to your operation when you have finished it.
Then care for yourself.
If a whole leech bursts (expires), then gather the edges of both wounds and immediately tie it up when you see that no surplus remains.
If you see that some surplus remains due to the size of the leech, then you must cut its root and pull it out; administer the suture as we have said.
And those leeches which contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial puncture to reveal the ripeness of it; and place the puncture below, as we have said.
Then apply linen with ointment and similar substances after the puncture, in order to remove what remains from the corruption until you see that the wound is clean; then care for yourself with a generous ointment of flesh until it heals.
Chapter on the Section of Epiglottis due to obstruction within the throat.
Chapter XLIII.
The ancients have described this section on the Epiglottis and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; this is their writing.
For those with synanchnia (tongue-tied), it is necessary to avoid section of the Epiglottis: as no benefit is derived by that; for all veins and lungs are weak.
But for those who have a hot abscess in the mouth or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no illness in the nostrils, it is necessary to use section of the Epiglottis, to prevent loss which occurs by suffocation. Therefore, when we wish to do that, we should cut the Epiglottis under three or four circles of the Epiglottis, with a small section across its width in the area between two circles, which should be a section in siplach (cartilage), not cartilage; and this location is suitable for sectioning because it lacks flesh, and the blood vessels from it are far away.
If the surgeon is afraid, then it is necessary that he spreads the skin of the throat with a hook.
Then let him find the skin until he reaches the channel (trachea): if he sees anything from them (the lungs or any fluid), let him remove the blood vessel.
Then cut the carotid artery as we have mentioned, and it is signified by the escape of mucus from the trachea when it is divided, and by the separation of the voice (trachea).
And let the open wound remain for some time.
When the fear of suffocation is removed, gather two lips of the wound skin, and the skin itself without cartilage.
Then administer medications that cause growth of flesh until it is healed.
Says Al-Zahrawi (Albucasis).
In conclusion of the discourse we have told, its interpretation is not given except when they see that one of these abscesses (boils) has opened the throat of a sick person: and he is raised up above death and wishes to be cut open in his suffocation: they go to cut Epiglottis so that the sick person may breathe over the place of the wound with some breath, and thus be saved from death: and for this reason they commanded to let the wound remain open until the malignancy of the disease is consumed, and its malignancy is for three days and seems like itself: then they command to sew up the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
And the thing I saw by myself was that a servant girl took a knife and sent it into her own throat, and cut a part of the trachea of the lung with it.
And I was called to treat her, and I found her groaning, as is the groan of a dead person.
I then uncovered the wound, and found that blood had come out from the wound, albeit little.
The wound had not been incised nor lanced; and pus was discharging from the wound.
I cured it myself and dressed the wound until it healed completely; nothing happened to the maiden, except a slight hoarseness in her voice; and she returned after several days to a better state of health.
Hence I say that there is no fear in cutting the Epiglottis.
Chapter on Cutting a Hernia in the Throat.
Chapter XLIV.
This swelling called a hernia of the throat is a large swelling, according to the color of the body; and it occurs more frequently in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural, or it is accidental. Certainly there is no innate tendency to it.
The accidental one occurs in two ways; the first resembles fatty knots.
And the second is similar to a swelling that results from the thickening of an artery.
And there is fear associated with it; and it should not be approached with a knife without caution, unless it is small; and you should examine it and probe it with an instrument.
If you find it similar to a fatty knot and it is not suspended with any veins; then cut it, just as knots are cut; and extract it along with the surrounding flesh if it is in the cavity of the throat; and if not, then examine the entire area carefully.
Then care for the location with what is required for treatment, until it heals.
Chapter on Cutting Across Nodes (Overview).
Chapter XLV. There are many types of nodes, and I have already described all their types in the division; it is necessary to distinguish here between a node and an abscess, as there can be doubt about this matter. I therefore say that when heat and fever and violent pains are present until the ebullition of superfluity subsides and putrefaction is complete: then indeed fever and heat cease.
When the knot is not hot nor feverish, nor are there pains present, and it contains them with a bag that is specific to them, according to the color of the body: and its beginning is like a chickpea, and it becomes like a grape, and it grows bigger or smaller.
And they are of two kinds: either fatty: or containing moisture.
The colors of moisture are many, as I have said in the division. Therefore, when you come to the treatment of the knot, it is necessary that you test it and investigate it first with an instrument called Introscope, according to its form as will be described in the chapter following this one.
And the method of examining boils and knots is to receive this instrument (Introscope) and insert it into a moist place which you find in the boil: and you move your fingers slowly with it until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
Then, finally, place your hand upon it according to the size of the boil.
Then extract the Introscope, and observe what comes out after its trace.
If moisture of any color comes out, then cut it with a superficial incision, as I have said about other boils.
And if no moisture comes out in the trace of the Introscope, then you know that it is fatty: cut it with an incision in the shape of a cross, as I have taught you: and hang it up with hooks, and scrape off the skin from all sides with ease: and keep the bag if possible over it, so that you can draw out the healthy part along with the knot.
If however a cyst is ruptured during the operation and it cannot be extracted whole as it often happens, then extract it piecemeal until something remains of it.
If some part remains, either little or much, a nodule returns most often.
If it conquers you and some part remains: then fill the wound at your completion with certain corrosive powders and sharp ones; and sew up the wound, and place upon it what sits there, a hot abscess, and take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If therefore the nodule is large, then cut two lips of it and take care of it along with that which becomes incarnated. If it is pulsating or non-pulsating artery to you: then rush, and fill the place with boiled wine, and leave it closed for two or three days until the wound putrefies and the boiling of blood ceases; then return to cut what remains of the nodule.
Chapter on external instruments for cutting and piercing.
Chapter 46.
These are the forms of the instruments to be introduced and there are three types.
Among them is a large one, among them is a medium-sized one, and among them is a small one.
Make them out of iron squares with well-centered ends so that they enter quickly into the abscess.
And these are the forms of the Perforators and Nozzles (piercing instruments): one of them is called Beris, that is, piercing; and there are three types.
From these there is a great one, and a medium one, and a small one.
They come together so that they may be treated by means of cauterization, excision, fistulas, and boils that are located near the bones.
And some are round, polished, smooth, similar to large needles which have seats made of citron or brass or iron or silver. The better ones among them are those that are made of citron.
And experience also shows that black lead is useful for treating fistulas whose concavity serves as a mirror, so that they may be treated gently with these mirrored areas.
And there are again three types. Because from these come the long ones, the medium ones, and the short ones, according to the size of the fistula and its constriction. The shape of pincers is various. Because from these come the simple ones, that is to say those with a single curvature; and there are three types as you see, large, medium, and small.
And among them there are blind pincers; and there are three types.
And among them there are pincers with two curvatures; and there are three types of these: and among them there are pincers with three curvatures, and there are three types of these: and all these are necessary in their respective places.
And these are the shapes of knives, with which knots and cauterizations are cut and scraped; and there are three types: because from these come the large, medium, and small ones.
The tips of which cutting is made are sharp, the other ends are not sharp; and they are not placed thus except for assistance in scraping knots near the fear of cutting a vein or nerve; and that the weak may be healed through them, and find some temporary relief from the burning that is found during the scraping of cauterizations.
These are Magda, and they are of three kinds.
They are made of brass and resemble a rod similar to how alcohol is made: at the end it has a broad hole, hidden point Spatumilis running through both inner and outer parts as you see.
The shape of Spatumilium hidden between the fingers at the opening of abscesses: these are not felt by the sick; there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The forms of Ventosarium with which the flow of blood is cut off: there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Make them of brass or citron, round, slightly shorter in length than you see, and refined to be delicate.
And these forms of Ventosarium should be large and small with you so that you can cut off the blood quickly in case of necessity, and when no medicine is present for you.
However, do not use them for cutting off blood in every part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy parts: such as the arms, legs, hips, shoulders, breasts, abdomen, groin, etc., from moist fleshy parts.
Sometimes they are made into small instruments similar to the balls of a fist, according to their shape, with which blood is cut off when it flows from the site of phlebotomy or incision of vein or artery; and sometimes they are made round in this shape.
[Chapter Title] On the treatment of male breasts resembling female breasts.
Chapter 47.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become inflamed during sleep (that is, when they begin to dream), until they resemble the breasts of women and remain as abscesses with a foul smell.
The person who is repelled by it (the lump), it is necessary to cut through the breasts with a lunar incision, according to this shape from the line 'b' to the line 'g'. Then scrape off the entire fatty tissue.
Then fill the wound with an ointment made of pitch.
Then join together two lips of the wound with a suture, and take care of it until it heals.
If the breast leans towards the lower part and softens due to its size, as happens with women: then it is necessary to make an incision in both upper sides of the breast, in two similar sections like a lunar shape, each one containing the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller one, according to this shape from the line 'b' to the line 'g'. Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what was mentioned about suturing and powders, which is necessary for treatment, until it heals.
If you do not complete the incision that is required to be made due to the restlessness of the patient or due to bleeding: then fill the wound with a plaster submerged in a caustic ointment, and leave it until it corrodes what remains from the fat.
Then take care of it until it heals.
Chapter on Perforated Boil, which happens under the armpit.
Chapter LVIII. These boils that occur under the armpit are of the types of Strophulas which contain cysts, and there are those that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut through with a lunar incision, according to this shape from the line 'b' to the line 'g'. When everything in the boil is evacuated by pus, then fill it with an old plaster and leave it for another day.
Then remove the wound, and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If it is an abscess resembling a knot of swellings (boils), then cut it open as we have said regarding incisions on boils equally.
If the wound extends and discharges pus, then apply cautery to it, as we have said in what was previously mentioned.
Chapter on the incision of an abscess that occurs due to an artery and a vein.
Chapter XLIX.
When an artery bursts and the skin above it hardens, there is often an abscess; similarly, this also occurs with veins, so that an abscess and swelling occur in them.
And the signs by which one recognizes that an abscess and swelling are due to an artery or vein, are as follows: for when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and aggregated in the depth of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a grating sensation.
What concerns the Vein is round in obvious body.
And the incision over this boil is a mistake, especially when it is under the armpits, groins, neck, and in many parts of the body; it is very large.
Therefore, its care with iron should be avoided, and what is also in the extremities or head should be avoided.
Find in the skin incision, along the length, what is from the swelling of the opening of the Artery.
Then open the incision with scissors, subsequently the Artery; and free it from tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert the point under it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the Artery with double thread at two places, according to what I taught you for the extraction of two Arteries which are in the temples.
Then puncture the place that is between two ligaments with a lancet until all the blood that is in it comes out, and the abscess is dissolved.
Then administer treatment that generates pus until the ligaments fall off; afterwards treat that with suitable ointments until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the incision of a Vein, then you should hold with your hand what is possible from the abscess with the skin.
Then insert the point under the place that you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let a double thread be in it until you extract it from the other side.
Then tie the abscess with a good ligament; according to what I told you for the ligature of the vein, with two parts and with two ends of thread. If you fear that the thread is pulled out, then insert another point with a different thread under the entire abscess near the incision; press and tie your threads at four places.
Then cut the abscess in half through its center until what is in it comes out; then cut off the superfluity of the skin, and let what was tied from that be released.
Then place a poultice made with wine and oil on top of it (the abscess).
Then administer the treatment which is made with linens and unguents until it heals.
On amputation that occurs due to a twist in the nerves.
Chapter L.
As an amputation occurs in an Artery and Vein, similarly it occurs in Nerves; what happens to them is either a blow or due to excessive labor, and similar causes; and it mostly happens at the locations of joints or heels, and in every location where the joints move; and it is a grave amputation. It resembles the color of the rest of the body and is without pain in many dispositions; and when it is squeezed with violence, it feels weak like numbness.
And the amputation is not gathered deep within the body but rather under the skin, and it moves to every part, but does not extend towards the front or towards the back.
What is in the joints, therefore, should not be penetrated with iron.
Perhaps it will happen that there is a contraction.
However, if what is from them is in the head or forehead, puncture the skin with a lancet.
If the amputation is small, then hold it with forceps and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and strip it; then remove it, and bandage the wound with sutures; and care for it until it heals.
On the incision of an amputation that occurs in the abdomen.
Chapter LI. In some humans, amputations occur repeatedly in their bellies and in their other bodies, which are called Fungalia, similar to fungi.
Whose root is delicate, and the head of them is large, and their lips are turned over.
And it is one of them (pl.) that is small: and it is one of them (pl.) that is greatly enlarged.
I myself have seen a man, and within his abdomen were two things similar to fungi: they were larger than other items; there was no difference between them, being white and having small roots, their lips turned inward and closed, and fluid flowed from them continually.
I weighed one of them and it was about 8 ounces, and the other one about 6 ounces. And the operation in cutting them is that you consider if the patient is weak or sick, and the gallstone is white, moist, soft, having a small root: then cut it with a broad spatula, and have cautionery in your presence ready in the fire.
For many times blood is expelled during its section: therefore be careful if the blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
If you see a man who is weak, fearful and timid about cutting with iron, then take a well-made thread of lead, and bind it with that, using the method we have mentioned, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the binding of lead.
Therefore do not stop binding with lead as long as it presses against the gallstone, until it is separated and falls out by itself without effort.
If the gallstone is large-rooted, then there is some fear and timidity in cutting it; especially because it is in the abdomen.
However, it is possible to cut its half.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
And be careful not to cut a gallstone of dark color, few senses, foul appearance; for it is a cancerous abscess; and I will come back with the reminder of Cancer after this.
Treatment for protrusion of the umbilicus.
Si protruderit umbilicus, scinde huiusdem longitudinis intermediis lineis ab integumento omnis partem usque ad os pubis; si intra abscessum inveneris, recise abscessum et lavere caulem; si autem non invenieris, lavere umbilicum. Postea pone duas lineas longitudinales, una dextera, alia sinistra, usque ad os pubis, et scinde inter se perpendicularare a lineis longitudinalibus quinque partes; postea collige partes in loco ubi fuerat. Cum pectinet uterus cum foetu, si sicut est, nec sanguine infectus est, ponito manum super uterum, et scinde uterum usque ad os pubis, et recise totam membranam, quae circumdabit uterum, et dimitteto uterum e loco, cum quodam pondere, ut foetus in medium cadat; si autem sanguine infectus fuerit, ponito manum super uterum usque ad os pubis, et scinde uterum usque ad venae portas. Postea accipe catheterum ac uterum reponito in loco suo cum pondere de quodam pondere; si umbilicus fuerit mollior, ponito in umbilico aeneum catheterum et inmodicum, et sic omnis materia extinguetur. Si autem fuerit durus, ponito catheterum de plumbo et aperto, ut effundat urinam; si vero non possis accedere ad umbilicus, cum umbilico pondere, usque ad os pubis, protrudatur. Si intra abscessum inveneris, ponito manum super abscessum et scinde abscessum et lavere caulem; si autem non invenieris, ponito catheterum de auro ac uterum recide et perforare in loco ubi fuerat.
A protrusion of the umbilicus arises from various causes.
It arises either from the hernias called sifac, which are above the abdomen; or it comes out of althub (or intestines), according to what happens in other ruptures.
It arises either from blood flowing from a vein or an artery, as mentioned before.
It arises from the obstruction of gas within it.
If it is due to a hernia of the sifac and protrusion of the thirb (small intestine): then its color is similar to that of an abscess or body; it is soft, without pain; and it appears in various positions.
And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position (or orientation) with respect to what we mentioned is of a more violent variation.
Therefore when you press it with your fingers, it is concealed; then it returns and perhaps there is a sound; and it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath and causes severe pain.
If it is due to moisture, it is soft; then when you press it with your hand, it does not conceal itself or contract or increase in size.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs (swelling, hardness, and inflammation) an abscess appears on the side of the back.
If it is due to born flesh: then the abscess is severe, large, hard and festers in one place according to its size.
If it is due to gas, then when touched, it is soft. The operation in this case is to determine whether the protrusion of the umbilicus is due to blood from an artery or vein, gas, or moisture; then it is necessary to refrain from treating it.
For there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I said that abscesses are due to an artery or vein.
If the projection of the navel is due to intestine or hernia: then it is necessary that you order the patient, so that he holds his breath and stands extended.
Then mark around the navel with hot iron (encaustricum).
Afterwards order him to lie down on his back between your hands (on his back).
Then, with a broad-bladed knife (spatulam), circle around the navel over the place which you marked with hot iron.
Then stretch the midline incision upward with a large hook.
Then bind him around with strong thread or cord of silk; and let the knot be a reef-knot (alexandrine).
Then open up the extended midline incision above the ligament.
If you find it already detached from the ligament: then pull out the reef-knot, and insert your index finger into it, and push the hernia into the abdominal cavity; and if you find a hernia, then take it with a hook, and cut off its excess.
If however, it is an artery or vein (against you): then circle it very much.
Then return to your operation.
And take two needles and insert strong threads into them; and insert the needles into the circle you made around the tumor in the manner of a cross, causing them to penetrate through.
Then stitch the tumor in four places over the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles, and let the rotten flesh extend; and when it falls off by itself: or cut it when it becomes soft and rots.
Then care for him with what is necessary from ointments, until he is healed.
If the projection of the navel is from flesh sore or dampness on him: then make a hollow in the tumor, as we have said.
And draw out blood or moisture that you find in it.
Then take care of it with what solidifies the place.
On the treatment of cancer. Chapter LIII.
For I was not able to heal anyone from it; nor have I seen anyone before me who has reached that point.
And the operation on it, when placed as we have said, is to precede and loosen the weak one from black choler several times.
Then if you find phlebotomy (or bloodletting) with clear repletion, perform it.
Then prepare the weak one with a preparation where it is to be placed during the operation.
Then thrust the pincers that fit into Cancer into Cancer.
Then hollow out Cancer from all sides with skin, according to inspection, until nothing remains of its roots; let the blood flow and do not separate it quickly, but press out the places and remove thick blood completely with your hand or, if possible, there with instruments.
But if the flow of thick blood from an artery or vein opposes you; then cauterize (or tie off) the vein until the blood is cut off.
Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
[Section Title: On the Treatment of Hydrophobia]
[Chapter IV.]
We now narrate on the division of Hydropisis species and how the water accumulation occurs; and signs of all species, and cure of it with medications.
And that which is cured with iron, is only the species of scrotum; and it does not approach iron with the species of tympanites; nor deeply with the species of hypoascara, for it is deadly.
When you are already cured from this species of Hydropisis (timpanites) with medications and the treatment did not help; then consider.
For if weakness has already come to the sick person or there is another disease apart from Hydropisis such as cough or diarrhea, and similar ones; then be careful not to treat him with iron, for it is dangerous.
But if you see the sick person with excessive strength, and there is no other disease apart from Hydropisis alone; and he is neither a child nor an old man; then there is room for operation on him. You lift the sick person standing between your hands, and the assistant follows him, pressing his stomach with his hand to drive water down to the lower part of the neck.
Then take a pointed instrument (spatula), as shown in this figure.
Let it be made of two sharp parts, long and having a sharp point like the spatula.
Nevertheless, there should be something shortened in it so that you do not pass through it during the operation to the intestine and injure it.
Then consider.
For if the generation of Hydropisis is from the part of the intestines, then it should be stretched with a section of three fingers length downwards above the neck.
But if the generation of Hydropisis is due to liver disease; then your section should be on the left side from the navel three fingers length.
And if its generation is due to the spleen, then let the section be on the right side: and it is not necessary that the incision should also be on the side towards which the weak will lie, so that the superfluities do not run to the fragile place.
Perforate the entire skin with an instrument.
Then insert your hand into that incision and push the Spatula (or spatula-like instrument) under the skin, as if you are scraping it; let the amount scraped off be about the size of a nail or around that.
Then perforate the spatula (or spatula-like instrument), until it reaches the empty place; and that is the place of water.
Then draw out that part, and insert an instrument into the opening, of which this is its form.
And it is similar to a cannula: made of silver, copper, brass, tin, thoroughly cleaned; in its lower part there is a small hole, and on both sides there are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other side; and make the end of it slit, like the tip of a reed, as you see; at the upper end of it is a band.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately descends upon the instrument, therefore evacuate from the water a half-hour quantity.
Because if you evacuate more than is necessary from it, perhaps the sick person will die by resolution of his vital spirit; or it may happen to him that a syncope occurs which approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to its strength, and according to what the dispositions of the sick person indicate to you by his pulse, and by his condition.
Then draw out the instrument and retain the water.
Because it is retained immediately due to the skin which retains the hole that is on the spatula (or spatula-like instrument), of which I have told you to perforate it in that manner.
Then on the second day, if you see that the patient can bear it, repeat the operation and extract a smaller amount from water. Repeat the operation several times without fear, and be careful not to err until only a small amount remains in water.
If you fear for the patient and leave a large amount of water, then care for him with warm sand, frequent sweating in a bath and sun, and wait for thirst. And care for him with very strong medicines until he is healed. Then cauterize above the stomach, intestines, and spleen after the extraction of water, as I previously narrated.
Chapter on the care of infants born in places where their urethras have not been pierced.
Chapter 50. When an infant is born from the mother's womb and his head has not been pierced with a circumcision or the opening is narrow, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore, it is necessary to pierce it immediately at birth with a very sharp spatula in the following manner.
Then place a thin nail made of lead into the hole and tie it; hold it for three or four days.
When one wishes to void urine, remove [the nail] and mix [it].
Then bring it back [into place].
And if you do not insert lead, it is now possible that the urine flowing over the area will not allow the hole to close.
He whose hole is narrowed is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days until it is widened.
Those in whom the hole is not in its proper place are harmed.
For this reason, because the hole is located at the end of the spinal column of those born, one cannot mix it towards the front until he raises the spine with his hand to higher areas. It is not the procreation of such [person], because semen cannot reach the uterus in the correct manner; and it is a very foul disease.
And the method of operation in this case is for the sick person to lie on his back.
Then extend your left hand and stretch it with great force, cut the head of the spinal column from the place of priapism, with a sharp or pointed knife, similar to cutting a reed or grinding something, so that the medium comes out like the head of the spinal column; and let the hole fall in the middle as required.
And be careful during your operation not to allow bleeding.
For this often occurs.
Therefore press the place where the blood flows and take care of the wound until it heals.
On Albater that occurs in the foreskin and head of the penis, on decay, blackening, and adhesion.
Chapter 66.
These abscesses occur frequently in the urethra and are a prominent growth of foul flesh.
And from this one is malignant, and another is not malignant.
Therefore it is necessary to suspend the non-malignant one with a fine hook and cut it off until you cleanse it completely.
Then place upon it a shallow dish immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it yourself afterwards with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.
If the abscess is malignant and of a foul color, then it is necessary to apply cautery after its incision and its ligation.
If the abscess is in a circumcised foreskin and part of it is inside and part outside, then remove the abscess that is inside first until it consolidates, then take care of it externally; because when you treat it at the same time, the foreskin does not heal but rather exudates.
Also they occur in testicles, and the foreskin becomes black and corrupted.
Therefore, it is necessary to excavate completely everything that has become darkened, or what will soon be corrupted, or is already corrupted.
Then apply a linen cloth soaked with honey that has been beaten with wheat flour and sieved bran of grains and crushed herbs.
Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If there is a flow of blood, then apply cautery with a lunar cautery according to this shape: [draws a shape]
Because cautery is useful for two conditions at the same time, namely for a flow of blood, and when a wound is torn.
If the head of the urethra is torn and the whole thing collapses within an hour: then it is necessary to insert a tube made of lead into the bladder, so that the sick one urinates over it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis, and this adhesion indeed does not occur unless in him whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required for it: and sometimes adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess: therefore, it is necessary to excoriate it with a blunt Spatumil until the ligament dissolves, and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish it precisely, then it is necessary to excoriate something from the head of the penis and the foreskin.
Because the foreskin, when it is thin, may be easily perforated due to its thinness.
Then separate the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine linen cloth that has been prepared in cold water, so they do not adhere again.
Then it should be treated with wine steeped until it becomes firm. Section on the cleansing of infants and the treatment of errors that may occur to them.
Chapter LVII.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity, as with other wounds; however, since it originates from our operation, and its use is specifically for children, it is necessary to mark an improvement in the operation and a path leading more easily towards health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their books; because they do not use it in their laws, and there is only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I have found the majority of craftsmen and phlebotomists to use cleansing by circumcising with scissors and forceps; they use the treated, bound, and incised with a needle and knife.
And indeed I have already tested all these methods, and found no better cleansing with scissors, nor binding with thread.
Because in cleansing with scissors, the skin often escapes (or: slips away).
Because the prepuce has two layers of skin: perhaps the superficial skin is cut, and the lower layer is torn: therefore it is forced to make an incision again, and pain will result.
And with the cleansing done by alfecat, that is, by fingers, as shoemakers use it, it is not cut off at the end of the virile member, since it may enter its hole.
But in cleansing with the nail, perhaps iron may come out (or: slip in), and ruin your operation; and indeed the skin of a child is short by nature, and such things often occur, which do not require cleansing; and I myself have seen this.
The cleansing with scissors and binding with thread was found to be a good test for me, because scissors are proportional to the incision; therefore, the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below.
Therefore, when you press your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportionate and they cut according to one operation at the same time; and it forms a compression similar in shape, containing the skin of the member with a rod from all sides, so that no error whatsoever occurs.
The method of the operation is for you to assess, whether a child especially, if he understands a little, that you do not do, except that you tie thread on his member only; and let it be until another day.
Then let him rejoice and be happy as much as possible for you, from the fact that he receives his intelligence.
Then insert your hand into his member and blow on the skin, and pull it upwards until the head of the member emerges.
Then clean that part which has accumulated dirt upon it.
Then bind the marked place with double thread.
Then tie lower down a smaller ligature in addition. Then hold it with your index finger and thumb, and press firmly on the lower ligature to maintain tension, and cut between the two ligatures.
Then peel off the skin quickly, and extract the head of the member.
Then let the blood flow slowly (for it is better), and sprinkle flour on top; and place a cloth on top, which has been soaked with cooked mutton broth diluted in rosewater, pounded with fresh good olive oil; and leave it there until another day; and care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
The shape of the scissors for cleansing is as follows.
The two ends should be flat and curved, and no branch of the nail should project out of them; and the length of the two cutting edges should be equal to the length of two handles.
However, if an error occurs during cleansing, it is because the inner skin may have escaped entirely, or a part of it may remain near the incision. Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch it with your nail from your hour before the removal of the place; and cut it in equal parts.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a tweezers, and cut it.
If it passes beyond three days and what is beneath the belt is swollen, it is an abscess: then release it until the abscess sits down hot, and scrape it off easily, and cut it according to what is prepared for you: and be careful from the head of the belt.
It will not harm him that.
Therefore take care of it with him as consolidating the wound with the powders which we have mentioned in the treatise on powders: and if it is cut above the measure and goes to the upper parts, it will not harm him even then.
Therefore take care of it with him until it heals up.
Chapter on the extraction of a retained bladder stone.
Chapter LVIII.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an overfilling made from a stone, congealed blood, pus, meat born, and similar things from those which we said are cured in division.
And if the urine is not released and you see its retention is due to a stone that has already entered the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary for him to be weakened on his knees bent down.
Then place his feet on top of his back, and let him extend his abdomen from the upper part of his back and tighten his breathing as much as possible for him.
Therefore, with the neck of the bladder, he is compelled to expel the stone towards the back: whereby the urine is released.
If it is not released with what was said and the strong person is overpowering the weak one: then it is necessary to administer the extraction of his bladder with an instrument called a syringe, whose shape is like S. It should be made from silver, thin, flexible, concave like a feather quill in delicacy, long like the palm of one hand and a half: at its head should be a fine cannula.
The method of removing a worm is to take a doubled thread, tie one end of it with wool or cord, a good binding: and introduce the end of the thread into the lower part of the Syringe: and cut off if there is any excess from the wool, but force it into the cannula as powerfully as possible, like an arrow.
Then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and with egg white: and make the patient sit on a chair, and warm up the bladder, and anoint the worm with moist oils and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the worm gently until it reaches the root of the worm.
Then fold it twice above the navel. Then push the syringe into it until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it has reached an empty place: and this is not done according to this order unless because the passage through which it goes is twisted.
Then gradually stretch out the thread with the wool.
For the worm will follow the wool.
Then draw it out and make the worm run through the urinary way: and repeat the syringe, and do not stop doing that until the bladder is emptied, and the patient finds relief. Chapter on the quality of clepsydra of the bladder.
Chapter LIX (the number in Roman numerals).
It is deaf, that is, closed.
And in it there are three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
The hollow place where that which pushes is located should be of a size suitable for it without any addition, until when something else is drawn with it, it is attracted by humidities; and when it is pushed, it is expelled to a distance: as the balance does, which projects oil, that is, Greek fire in the wars of Mars.
When the force is to throw humidities into a hollow, introduce the end of the balance (clepsyra) into the humidity and draw that which pushes it upwards; for humidity is attracted into the depression of the balance. Then introduce its end into a rod, as we have said in the syringe.
Then push the humidity with that which pushes it; for that humidity immediately reaches the bladder, so that the sick person feels it. The form of the clyster (enema) should be subtle, with which the bladder is cleansed.
Then insert a thread into those holes, as they are turned around. Then gather a circle, just like it is gathered with a mortar and pestle: after you place within it what you wish from moist substances, oils, and waters.
Then tie it with an instrument, and do as you did with the bladder by squeezing it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter on the Extraction of a Stone.
Chapter Sixty. We have already said about the types of stones, their treatment with medicines and the differences between a stone formed in the kidneys, bladder, and its signs in general; we have also mentioned the operation on a stone that is performed with the hand or cut out; and that stone which is specifically generated in the bladder; and that which is fixed in the urinary channel; and I am telling this with clear explanation and abbreviation.
Therefore, a stone generated in the bladder, most often happens to children.
And among its signs is that urine comes out from the bladder like water in subtlety; and there appears white sand in it, and a sick person rubs his urinary channel, and labors with it, and often hangs down. Then it rises, and comes out together with the anus in many of them.
And the healing of children is easy until they reach fourteen years of age.
And it is difficult in old people.
But among young adults it is medium, because it is between that and the one whose stone is larger, healing is easier; and if small, its treatment is reversed.
Therefore, when we reach treatment, it is first necessary to clean the sick person with an enema, which extracts all the feces that are in his intestines; because at times it prevents the discovery of a stone during the examination. Then take the sick person with his feet and shake him, move him downwards: so that the stone descends to the depth of the bladder or jumps from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his loins, so that the bladder becomes completely inclined downwards.
Then examine him, and touch him externally.
If you therefore feel the stone in its place, then proceed immediately with cutting upon it.
If it does not come out with your touch at all, then you must clean the index finger with oil of the left hand if the sick person is a boy: or the middle finger if he is a man fully grown: and insert it into his anus, and examine it for the stone, until it is under your finger: and gently guide it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger, and push it out towards the outside against the place of its incision: and command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command another attendant, to pull up the testicles with his right hand to the upper part: and with his left hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part where the incision is.
Then insert a spatula like this:
And find it where it is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, on the left side of the boy: and make the incision over the stone, and your finger should be in the anus: and make the incision transverse, so that the incision is wider outside, and narrower inside, according to the amount by which the stone's exit from it is not larger.
Perhaps the finger presses the stone that is in the anus at the incision, and comes out without difficulty.
And know that, because it is from a Stone which has angles and edges, its extraction becomes difficult due to that.
And it is soft, like a gland, and round; therefore, its removal becomes easy.
To him who has angles and edges, add (a tool) into the fissure.
If it does not come out in that way, then it is necessary to apply force upon it; or to tie it well when dealt with properly, the end of which should be like the moon, which ties around the stone and does not escape from there; or to insert a delicate instrument under it, having a curved end.
If you cannot apply force upon it, then widen the opening a little.
If it resists you in some way with blood, cut it off with a cautery.
If the stone is larger than one, then push first a large one towards the bladder.
Then cut upon it.
Then push a small one after that; and do the same if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then ignorance is to cut above it with a large incision.
Because it happens to the sick one either with one of two things, that he dies or there is continuous urine discharge; therefore, because the place is not consolidated at all.
But administer its expulsion until it comes out; or apply force upon its fracture with levers, until you extract it piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with turpentine, aloe, and dragon's blood; tie it up and place upon it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water; so that an abscess may be set hot.
Then turn the sick one on his back upon his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
When therefore you dissolve it (the substance), anoint the place with rose water and much oil.
Then care for it with the ointment of dyafinicon and the ointment of basilicon until it heals.
If however a hot abscess occurs in the wound, add corrosives and similar substances: as when blood congeals in the bladder and urine is prevented from passing; it is known by the passage of blood with urine.
Insert therefore your finger into the wound and draw out that blood.
For if it remains (the congealed blood), it provokes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and apply against it every remedy that is suitable for its healing, until it heals.
And it is necessary in the entire course of treatment, that you tie together both thighs and bind them, due to the reason that medicaments which are placed upon the place must be kept warm.
If the stone is small and it is in the neck of the bladder and it is struck (with an instrument) and the urine output is prevented: then care for it with what I have previously mentioned before you reach the incision.
For often, after this treatment, you will be removed from the incision, since I have now proven it. And you are to take the Perforatorium from iron ladle, whose shape is triangular at one end, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take thread and tie it to the bladder stick beneath the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the bladder stick with ease until the Perforator reaches the stone; and turn the Perforator by hand in the very same stone gradually; and you will make the perforation of it, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
Urine is released immediately.
Then press your hand on the remaining stone from the outside part of the vein.
For it breaks and is expelled with the urine, and the sick person recovers.
If this treatment is not prepared for you for some reason that prevents it: then tie a string under the stone, and another string above the stone. Then cut across the vein over the stone between two ligatures.
Then draw it out (the stone).
Next, untie the ligature, and clean the frozen blood that forms at the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a string under the stone unless it does not return to the bladder: and tie another ligature above, unless when the string below is cut after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place, and covers the wound: and for that reason it is necessary for you to lift the skin above when you tie the upper string, so that it rises towards the surface, and returns to its original position, and covers the wound, as we have said.
Chapter on the extraction of stones in women.
Chapter 61.
A small number of stones are formed in women.
If a stone happens to one of them (women), then the treatment is difficult and forbidden because it involves many modes (steps).
One such case is that the woman may be a virgin. And secondly, because you will not find a woman who reveals herself to the doctor when she is chaste or married.
Thirdly, because you cannot find a woman well-versed in this art, especially in the operation with the hand.
Fourthly, the distance from the place of the stone: why it requires deep incision and there is fear.
If necessity compels [you], then it is necessary that you take a woman physician, well-versed: and she is scarcely found.
If you lack that [woman physician], then seek a chaste and skillful physician, and ask for a woman midwife who is well-versed in women's matters or a woman who knows the art in part: make her present, especially instructing her to do everything as you order regarding the stone. Firstly, that it is to examine if a woman is a virgin: then it is necessary for the finger to be inserted into her anus and the stone to be sought.
If it is found, twist it with his finger and then order the midwife to insert her finger into the weak opening and seek for the stone after she places her left hand on the bladder and presses it well with good pressure. If the stone is found, then it is necessary to move it gradually from the bladder opening towards the lower part with the utmost care until it reaches its root at the hip bone.
Then cut above it at the opposition of the middle part of the bladder near the root of the hip bone, wherever it is prepared for him, and he feels the stone in that part: and his finger should not be moved from the stone, twisting under it: and let the incision be small in the beginning.
Then insert the probe over that incision.
If he feels the stone, then let him enlarge the incision according to its size as the stone comes out from there.
And know, that the shapes of stones are many. From this, it is small and large, smooth and rough, long and round with branches.
Therefore know its shape, so that it may be indicated to you concerning the one you want.
If blood overcomes you (affects you), then add at the place zegi powder and hold it for an hour until the blood is cut off.
If the flow of blood overcomes you and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an incised artery: then place powder on the spot and tie it with suitable ligatures; do not move that, and leave the stone alone, do not remove it.
Perhaps a weak woman may die.
Then take care of the wound.
When the sharpness of blood subsides after days and the place becomes rotten, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter: On the Section of a Watery Hernia.
Chapter LXII.
A watery boil is not anything other than a gathering of moisture in the albuco of white scrotum, which contains an egg; and it is called albuco. And sometimes it is in the skin itself which nature has prepared for itself in the part of the egg, until it becomes ripe; this is another egg, and it is between the white scrotum and the testicle skin, as we said; and such a thing does not happen frequently.
And indeed the generation of this [watery boil] is from a weakness that happens to testicles; therefore this matter flows towards them.
And sometimes it occurs from striking upon the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. For indeed it is either of a yellowish decline, or red and blood-like, or dark and foul, black, or watery white; and this is what is more common.
For if it is in the white scrotum which we said, then the boil is round and somewhat long like the figure of an egg; and the testicle does not appear because moisture contains it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own skin, then the boil is round with a part of the egg; and for this reason man crushes himself because it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, then it falls under suspicion.
When one wishes to know the color of the moisture, then to examine the color of the moisture in a boil with a square probe, whose shape has been described previously.
According to that which emerges from the trace of the probe, judge about that which is between it.
When we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you command the sick man, if it is possible for him, to be bled; and observe his body full [of blood].
Then he lies down on his back on a somewhat high surface, and put many cloths under him.
Then you sit on the left side of him, and command the servant to sit on his right, who will stretch out his staff to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the bladder.
Then take a spatula wide, and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle in length, up to the groin: and make the incision according to the straight line that divides the skin of the testicles, until you reach the white part enclosing it (the cord): and scrape it off and observe it, or take care not to cut it off: and your scraping should be on the side that hangs more with the egg: and scrutinize carefully with the scraping according to how much you are able.
Then pierce the cord filled with water by a large hole, and drain out all the water. Then separate the two lips of the incision with tweezers, and stretch the cord upwards without touching the skin of the testicles enclosing it: and cut the cord in any way you can, either completely or partially, especially on its subtle side.
For if you do not examine carefully, there will not be safety in the incision lest the water return.
If however an egg comes out from its skin during your operation: then when you finish the incision of the cord, bring it back.
Then gather together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with stitches.
Then take care of it as other wounds until it heals.
If you find a rotten egg from blackness of some other kind, then it is necessary to tie vessels that support it, fearing bleeding.
Then cut off the testicle with the suspender, and remove the egg; afterwards take care of it as previously mentioned.
If water is found in two parts, then you shall know that there are two branches; therefore cut the other part equally as you did in the other one.
If it appears to you that the operation should be one, then do so; afterwards remove blood.
Insert a submerged wool in oil or rose oil; and place another wool outside which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles, and examine the intestines; and place double cloths on top, and there are lice; and tie them above with a ligament that has six knots according to this form.
Then two cloths are taken, washed and filled with carmin; their ends are pressed with wax or wet wool; they are tied together with a bandage in the loins; one end is placed on the anus up to the back, and the other on the neck part; the two ends below are placed on the two thighs, and the other two ends on the two groins; and the bandage is gathered in the loins of the arms.
And at times this branch is artificially treated with a cautery in the place of section with iron; it is such that you take a small cautery knife and cut the skin of the testicles with it; it is ignited as previously mentioned until it exposes the white matter containing water; then take the cautery, following this form.
It resembles Greek letters.
Then perforate it with that, and let it burn until all the moisture comes out.
Then stretch the sifac with forceps and scrape it with a small hot cautery, and cut into it as much as possible, until you completely excise it.
Do not let fire touch the egg.
And know that this operation is safer, more distant from bleeding, and better than the operation with incision.
If, however, it causes you a contradiction at the hour of incision, or at the hour of cauterization, an abscess becomes hot, or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary that you care for what causes the contradiction from it, with the treatment that suits it, according to what has been mentioned.
If, however, the patient is afraid and does not wait for this operation because of its horror: then administer a perforation as I tell you that it is.
When you are informed by that which we said about the meanings, that the purgative is watery: then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat.
Then perforate the abscess at the lower part of it with a broad lancet; and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide, until it drains all the water.
Then place a warm cloth on the spot; and bind it, and allow it to drain the remaining water; then care for it until the wound heals.
If, however, the contradiction is in the exit of water at the hour when you perforate it; and it is not this only because a white membrane causes the contradiction in the opening of the wound, and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary that you insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which the water of hydropic sores is extracted, whose shape preceded; or add a little in the operation of the wound.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or approximately those.
When it accumulates, then it is to be purged in the same way, and the patient passes his days.
On the care of fleshy roots.
In nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti, Amen.
Know that, in a section upon this Ramic [bone], there is, due to fear, often leading to danger in various dispositions.
Therefore it seems to me that its release [of the bone] would be beneficial from this [position].
And I remember the operation therein, and the appearance of the fistula.
I say therefore that many fistulas occur in the body, from which the testicles are formed, and this happens for various reasons, such as... Or through an excessive, sharp or acid substance that flows to the testicles.
Or from a blow.
And the fistula's color is according to the body's color, and it does not have pain; and it is a heavy fistula.
Perhaps it is a stone fistula whose color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it occurs through a swelling of the arteries and their inflation, as already mentioned in its remembrance; or from the inflation of veins.
What then is from these through inflation of the arteries, is known by the arrangement of the fistula, when you compress it with your fingers.
And one should not touch it completely.
However, that which occurs through the inflation of veins does not disperse anything from it upon compression with fingers. And now it is possible for a section to be made on this appearance, and over the remaining flesh; and there is, so that the skin of the testicles may be severed.
Then stretch the egg upward and remove it along with its sifach [sack] of white; and release the suspenders from the scrotum, and bind the scrotum; and cut the suspender after you have released it from every part from the parts of the egg.
If the egg is solidified with those born [testicles], then it should be drawn out and cut. And if there is adhesion between something from the intestine, or within what is between vessels: then it is necessary to release the entire adhesion and to make an incision in a circular fashion.
If it is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind (it): then it is necessary to make an incision over the entire thing and extract the egg, as we have said. When your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; afterwards take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter on the Care of Branches which are with respect to the Vine.
Chapter LXIV (64).
A tumor resembling a bunch of grapes is an aposteme enclosed by a certain enclosure, with the softness of testicles; it becomes difficult to move and exercise, and walking on it is hard.
And in its treatment, there is fear due to the memory of that which preceded it.
But we must say that the operation should be done as the first ones did. I therefore say that it is necessary to make the sick person sit on a raised seat.
Then make an incision with a broad, sharp knife cut across the vessels, until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape away from every side, as I told you in extracting arteries that are in the temples.
Then cut it in half at the midpoint along the length of the body, and extract what accumulates from corrupted foul humors.
Then treat the wound along with other wounds where pus is generated, so that the vessels which nourish one of the testicles fall out.
For it is not evil through that.
If, however, the vein occurs in all vessels, then they should be extracted for this reason: so that the testicles are not deprived of nourishment due to the incision, and it rottens or burns, and is no help with them.
Chapter on the care of intestines. Chapter LXV.
Why do the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles.
And this rupture is either from the bladder or its extension.
And these two types occur from many causes: either by blow, jump, shouting, lifting a heavy object, and similar things.
And the sign is when it is due to the extension of the bladder.
It happens gradually over a long time and does not occur suddenly; it is an abscess equal to the deep-seated swelling because the bladder compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a cut in the bladder because it causes a sudden intense pain at the beginning; and it is an abscess different, appearing near the skin; and that is due to the exit of the intestine and its flow to the outside of the bladder.
And sometimes it comes out with the yolk-like substance; and this is called the intestinal ramus and the yolk; and sometimes it occurs with fecal discharge.
And sometimes fecal matter runs into the intestine and is retained there; and it is with danger for the sick, because it causes great pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this type of illness with iron there is fear; therefore, one must be careful about any mishap during it.
The method of the operation is that you order the sick person to bring their intestine back with their own hand into the hollow of their cavity, if they obey the command.
Then it will be laid on its back over its neck between your hands; and lift up its legs.
Then extend the skin following the skin upward, and cut the entire skin of the scrotum along its length.
Then fix the scissors in two lips of the incision, according to what you need for opening the incision with them; and let the cut be according to the quantity, so that it is possible for the egg to come out from there.
Then scrape the scrotum, and what is under the skin of the testicles until the white siphac is exposed, hard from all sides; then insert your thumb into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white siphac, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the siphacs and without the adhesion to the posterior part of the egg.
Then move with the right hand to the internal skin of the testicles; and at the same time stretch the white siphac upwards with the left hand; and lift the egg along with the siphac to the part of the incision; and order the servant to extend the egg upward; and you solve the adhesion, which is behind the complete solution.
And examine with your fingers if there is nothing there from the intestine rolled up in the hard white siphac.
If you find anything from it, then push it down towards the lower stomach.
Then take the hook having a thick thread made of linen from ten threads, and insert it near the last sifach, that is, the tunica, which follows the skin of the testicles after section: then cut off the protruding ends until there are four threads.
Compose some of them over some with a figure in the form of a cross and tie it with alsifach, which we have mentioned, as it is the strong ligament under the skin of the testicles, until no fluid from the vessels that nourish them can pass through to them; so that a hot abscess does not occur there.
And place again the ligament beyond the first ligament, at least two fingers away.
And after these two ligaments release from the sifach, which is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity equal to the size of a digit: and cut the rest in a round shape and remove the egg.
Then cut off the skin of the lower part of the testicles with a section where blood and pus run, as we have said in that which was mentioned previously.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place a ligament as we have said.
And sometimes cauterize the white sifach that we have mentioned after its incision, fearing a flow of blood.
This often happens.
And release the ligament until it falls off by itself.
If the case does not heal quickly, then embrocate with hot water: and place over it what we have said until it falls off.
Then care for the wound with the usual treatment of wounds until it heals.
Chapter on the inflamed ramica (the scrotum).
Chapter 66.
In this Ramic case, I saw no one who dared to treat it with iron.
And as we previously stated, the same thing occurs in a Ramic case that is found among fig trees.
That is, to tie vessels after section on it with ease from below; then cut in the middle, and afterwards treat it with what opens it up itself, until the vessels fall out: and treat the wound, as we said before, until it heals.
Chapter on Dislocation that occurs in groins.
Chapter 67.
When a rupture occurs in the groins, as we have said, and the site is evident and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is of little consequence and returns in all hours: but if it continues for a time, a tear is added in the scrotum until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And this happens from the extension of the scrotum, which is in the groins, as we have said.
Because the scrotum is extended: then it is softened, and the site is loosened, and it protrudes.
The treatment of this is with a cautery, as its narrative has previously stated.
And at times it is treated with iron in this manner: and it is as if the weak one lies on his back upon your hands.
Then cut the site of the rupture and protrusion, with a cut in width, according to the length of three fingers.
Then tie the scrotum and what is beneath the skin until the white membrane that follows the scrotum is exposed.
Then take the rod and place it over the protruding site from the scrotum and press it into the deep abdomen.
Then cut two protrusions at the end of the radius from the scrotum and sew them together with a suture: then extract the end of the radius.
And do not cut the scrotum at all, nor pull the testicle, nor anything else, as I have taught you in the treatment of the intestinal branches. Then treat this with the treatment of wounds.
When you make sutures, clean it, and restore the wound until it is solidified.
The scrotum contracts and no more protrusion of rupture is added.
The cautery is better in this case, because it is closer to salvation.
On the softening of the scrotal skin.
Chapter LXVIII.
Many times the scrotal skin is softened in certain men, on account of which the flesh between them becomes soft, and its appearance is made ugly.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who is asked to cure it, that he makes the weak one lie on his back and cuts through all the softened skin over the normal skin. Then he brings together the two folds with suture: and if you wish, or rather excess of softened skin, three sutures, or four, and a firm stitch.
Then care for the healing of the other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall out.
Chapter on castration.
Chapter LXIX.
Know that castration is forbidden by our law: and on account of this it would be permissible for me not to mention it in my book; and its mention is not necessary, unless for two reasons.
One reason is that this should be known to a physician when he is asked about it; and so that he may know the cure for him whom it happens.
And another method is that we often need castration of certain animals, for our use from it, such as sheep, goats, and cats, and similar ones from the animals.
I say therefore, that castration is done according to two methods. Or by attrition.
Or by splitting and cutting.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of operation is: that we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and become limp and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and are no longer noticeable under touch.
In castration by splitting and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
And this method of castration is better than that by attrition: because attrition perhaps leaves something from the testicles, therefore the animal desires copulation.
Then take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter on the treatment of Hermaphroditus in two methods.
Chapter 70.
Hermaphroditus is from men according to two methods.
One of them is because there is a space or skin of the testicles where it is between two testicles, with a female-like figure, in which hair grows; and sometimes it runs urine from what is in the skin of the testicles.
But in women there is one species and it is a small female figure on the ridge like the small testicles of a man projecting to the outside; one of them is like a priapus of a man, and two are like two testicles.
And the cure of three kinds, two from men, and one from women, is: because it is necessary to make incisions in the added flesh, until the impression of them escapes.
Then, the treatment for these wounds is the treatment of other wounds.
Moreover, in the second kind from men, from which urine comes out, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is any cure for it at all.
§ On the incision of tentigo and protruding flesh on women's ulcers.
Chapter LXXI.
Tentigo may be added supernaturally, until it becomes foul and ugly to look at; and sometimes it is greatly enlarged in certain women so much that it expands like in men and reaches coitus.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold back the excess of tentigo with the hand or with a pair of scissors and to make an incision; not to the end in the incision, especially in the deep roots, lest there be bleeding.
Then, it is cured by treating the wound itself until it heals.
Flesh that comes out is the flesh that is born in the opening of the matrix, until it fills itself; and possibly it goes out to the exterior like the tail, and therefore some call the illness 'caudate'.
Therefore, it is necessary to make an incision in it as we do with tentigo and treat it until it heals.
§ On the treatment of alratic ulcer, which is a woman's unperforated ulcer.
Chapter LXXII.
Alratic ulcer is an ulcer in a woman which is not perforated or has a small opening.
And it may be natural or accidental.
Accidental ulcer is caused by an illness that has preceded it; and this ulcer itself may be formed from added flesh, or subcutaneous tissue, or from the spissus; and it may be in the deep of the matrix, or its sides, or on top of it, or below it; and it prevents coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and possibly menstruation.
The recognition (of it) is made by the obstetrician's observation, if the opening is apparent nearby.
If it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers, or with a probe.
If the opening is from the scrotum (sifach) fine and near two lips (labia): then approach it, and tear it apart.
And (it is) so that you place small pieces on the two lips (labia).
Then put your thumbs of both hands together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart.
Then spread the two lips forcefully until the fine scrotum (sifach) tears and the opening is opened.
Then take wool, and dip it in oil, and put it on the place: let the woman do this every day so that the place does not heal over with something else.
If the scrotum (sifach) is thick and swollen: then it is necessary to cut it with a broad-bladed instrument like a leaf of myrtle.
If the opening is from flesh born (fistula), then suspend it with hooks and cut it: and have medicines that stop the flow of blood without bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and pitch mixed with egg white.
Then administer a wide cannula made of lead to prevent the wound from healing quickly, hold it for several days: then administer linen cloth, dry it, then care for the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And sometimes a birth of flesh from other places occurs in the womb (matrix): it is necessary therefore to cut them according to this method: until it is not a cancerous boil, because a cancerous boil that is in the matrix should not be opposed to iron at all.
Chapter on the treatment of piles (hemorrhoids), by Athaehelil and Botheor for women.
Head LXXIII.
Hemorrhoids indeed are an opening of the veins' orifices, until much blood continuously flows out from them.
When hemorrhoids become ancient, they become piles: and I have already said in the division of their kinds, and the signs of them; and here I will say what receives treatment from them, and what does not.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb and do not appear to the senses, then there is no treatment with iron for him.
But those which are on the opening of the womb above which falls the sense, are those that can be treated.
Therefore, it is necessary to introduce a woman into a cold house.
Then extend the pile with forceps or with rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle powder over them in the flow of blood from one incision without biting: such as alum, dragon's blood, asafoetida and similar things.
Then push his feet against the wall at the hour of one o'clock.
Then lay her down in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and the rind of pomegranates, and walnuts, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and knead it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on his back.
If the blood is cut off with it, that is good; and if not, make adhesive windbags and breasts, without scarification.
Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of tarathith, or the juice of arnoglossum, or the juice of branches of aaloulat, that is, aglanter, Pontic wine, and make it adhesive on the wound.
When therefore an aposteme is quieted, then care for the place with ointments until it heals.
The Albarth (pustule) is similar to red scalps of al-hawassa, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore it is necessary to cut what appears from it, as I said in thelil equally; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter on Perforation of the Afterbirth that occurs in the Womb.
Chapter LXXIIII (72)
Various appearances of abscesses occur in the matrix, such as cancer, stone abscess, ulcers, boils, herpes, scabs, fistulas, hemorrhoids, ragadias, thelils, and warm abscesses.
And I myself have already said all these diseases and their appearances, their signs, and their treatments are divided: it is necessary that in this treatise I say about the warm abscess occurring in the matrix, which is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and to know how its opening with iron.
Therefore, you should consider.
If the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with impact, and burning sensation, and fever; and you see it reddening, if it falls upon the sense; then do not hurry with its perforation: and cure it with what helps for its maturation until the acuteness ceases.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a chair with two arms, and recline or lean against her back, and gather her feet to the lower part of the abdomen; and her thighs should be spread apart, and she places her arms under her knees, and tie both together with a suitable ligament.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and administer the tool for opening the matrix.
The shape comes in those that follow.
And it is necessary that when you wish to administer this tool, you mark with a deep rod the depth of the woman's matrix so that what enters from the instrument is not greater than the depth of the matrix and injure the weak one.
If the tool is larger than the depth, then it is necessary that you place pins on the cover of the depth of the matrix to prevent the entire instrument from entering into the depth of the matrix; and it is necessary that you place a rotating wheel on the upper side which holds the instrument and turns the minister wheel until the depth of the matrix is opened.
When it appears to be excised and is touched with the hand, and it is soft and tender: then it should be cut off at its head with a broad lancet.
When pus is evacuated, then it should be placed in the wound a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, in which there is some styptic substance: and place the linen cloth, and extract the incision deeply into the matrix.
Place it externally over the matrix and on top of the comb, a clean wool soaked in water in which malvae have been boiled.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment suitable for that, until it heals.
And sometimes the matrix and wound are washed, so that they are cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of the asafetida or long aristolochia has been boiled: then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the matrix, then it should be forbidden to treat it with iron, rather it should be treated with what I have said in the section on cauterization.
Chapter on obstetrics: how to treat living embryos that have been expelled abnormally.
Chapter LXXXVI (86)
It is necessary for the obstetrician to first recognize the shape of a normal birth.
Therefore, among the signs of this is that when you see a woman compressing towards the lower parts and desires to smell the air, and there is an urge to urinate over her as she is in labor, and she hastens the delivery of the embryo: then know that this birth is according to its natural shape, and it exits over the head and follows with it or suspended, or hanging from the navel. If you see these signs, then the abdomen of her should be pressed to hasten the delivery of the embryo.
But that which is beyond this birth is unnatural, unpraiseworthy.
For sometimes the fetus comes out with its feet first, and its body comes out before its head, and one of its feet or hand: or its head and one hand come out: or a belly comes out, and perhaps it turns over onto its neck, and similar unpraiseworthy shapes.
Therefore it is necessary for the obstetrician to be prudent, skilled in all matters, and take care to avoid error and deception: and I show every figure of them, and how there is skill in it, and it is indicated by that, and it will stand above it.
When the fetus comes out with its head in its natural delivery and becomes violent upon the woman and the delivery becomes difficult, and you see its strength already weakened: then have her sit on a chair, or women hold her: and heat up her belly with warm fennel water and moist oils.
Then the obstetrician introduces a small spatula between her fingers and separates the second one with it, and cuts it off with his nail until it flows from its moistness: and press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with fennel mucilage and sesame oil.
Then command her after the cleansing to be pressed: and make her sneeze with pepper, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour.
For the fetus will come out immediately.
If two hands of the fetus come out first, you must pull them back gently and gradually.
If (the patient) does not obey upon entering, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet upwards; then knock the seat on the ground; the woman must be held so that she does not fall during the blow.
If the hands do not come out and the fetus dies: then cut (the womb), and extract the remaining fetus; and tie the hand with cloth, and extract it equally; for it will come out by itself.
Exit of the embryo above its feet.
When the fetus comes out above its feet, then it should be pushed upwards; afterwards turn it gradually; finally equalize it (the position of the feet with the rest of the body).
Then take one of his feet and stretch it out slowly.
When they come out up to the hips, then command him (the patient) to press and make her sneeze with a blow; for it will come out if God wills.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then gradually bring the fetus back until you place it in a natural position.
For it will come out then with an easy delivery.
If it is forbidden as we have said (to perform the previous operation): then take some mastic gum, oil of sesame, and dissolved gum; and crush everything together in a mortar with good blows; afterwards smear the woman's womb with it and apply it below her belly.
Then let her sit in warm water until she becomes accustomed to it (the water).
When you see that her lower parts have become warm, then give her a sip of myrrh and place it (the myrrh) under her.
When an hour has passed since she drank the myrrh, then let her sit on a seat.
Then make her sneeze; and pinch her mouth and nose; and press the lower part of her belly gently.
The fever will immediately exit.
The exit of the fetus is above the knees and hands.
When it exits according to this shape, then he (the midwife) should insert his hands slowly.
Then the woman will lie on her back with her head down and her feet raised; she should be lying on the bed and clasp her hands together.
Then press gradually over the abdomen.
Then draw out what is below her feet from the anus, until it is prepared at the lower part.
If the fetus does not exit, then grab his feet and move them forcefully.
Then press gradually what is above the pelvis until the fetus rises to higher parts.
Then insert his hands and press the fetus gradually; and command the woman to compress herself until the fetus exits.
The exit of the fetus is hanging sideways from the hands.
He (the midwife) should insert his hand (to help guide the fetus).
If she cannot be guided, then turn the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed; and strike her legs with strong blows.
Then apply the ointment that you have prepared from resins.
If she receives delivery, then make her sit on a chair.
Then strive to guide the hand, and press the fetus according to its natural shape; and make the woman sneeze, and command her to compress herself until it exits.
The exit of the fetus is on its own head, with arms spread out, and its face towards the back of its mother.
The midwife must hold the baby's hand, then turn it gradually and gently guide it.
When it [the wound] is equal [healed], then place upon it what we have previously mentioned from oil and mucilages.
Then command him to move slowly.
When you have done that [applied the ointment], then make her sit on a chair and command her to lean towards the right side.
Then command him to be pressed: and make her sneeze with pepper.
Delivery of the fetus prepared on the side.
When it [the fetus] descends to the opening of the matrix in this manner with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your fingernail until it is expelled due to moisture.
If the fetus is suspended on its face and its neck, then cut it from the navel so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus into the interior until you place it as necessary: and command the woman to press herself several times; for it will exit with a gentle passage.
Delivery of twins or multiple fetuses.
Know that twins often give birth and sometimes three and four.
However, that is unusual and rarely occurs.
But five is a thing outside nature and they do not live completely; and it contains them, although the afterbirth is one for all of them; and they are separated by seifach, which distinguishes between them bound at the navel of each of them.
And sometimes they exit like a fetus exits with a natural and easy passage, and they exit with an unutterable passage as we have said. If some of them are difficult during childbirth and they reach what we have said with unnatural figures, then care for them as we have said: and let it be a subtle midwife, and let her do what she does with facility and slowness, and adapt herself to every figure with that which is prepared for her according to her ingenuity leading to safety.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it is confirmed among me that a woman has expelled seven and another fifteen, all of which were formed.
What was done by the measurement of the glorious sage.
Therefore, this entire matter should be in the knowledge of the obstetrician. Perhaps it will reach that one which is similar to his: offer him then what is necessary.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus with what I said in the division of medication, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then you must consider.
If the woman is healthy in virtues, and there is no accident that causes fear of loss over her: then she should be made to lie on a bed, face down, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised: and a servant should hold her from two sides, or she should be tied to the bed, so that her body does not come out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then wet the mouth of the womb with moist oils such as olive oil, marshmallow (althea), fenugreek and linseed. Then the obstetrician should wet his hand with these oils and mucilages, then insert it into the womb with ease.
Then he should look for a place where he can hook the forceps from the fetus, and places suitable for that.
Therefore, consider then if the fetus is prepared to descend upon its head: then hook the forceps in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its arm pits, or near the ribs and under the hypocondria.
If there is a descent on his feet, then make an incision in the chest and in the middle of his ribs.
And it is necessary that he holds the hook with his right hand, and places the sore on that which is between the fingers of the left hand; and introduces (it) with his hand easily, and presses the hook into one of those places which we have said, until it reaches a hollow place.
Then stretch it with an equal extension and not only along the straight direction, but move it to all sides to relieve its outlet; just as is done with a tooth when extracting it.
It is necessary that the extension (be) softened in what is between them (the hooks).
And if a part is retained within it, then the midwife must insert certain fingers with oil into that place, to turn (the hook) with them which is retained.
If a part of the child comes out, then change the hooks to another higher place; do this until the whole child comes out.
If a hand comes out before the other (parts) and it is not possible to return it because of its swelling, then cover it with a cloth.
Then remove (it) until when the whole comes out, cut (the cloth) at its joint of the foot or elbow; and you must do this in both hands and feet.
If the head of the child is large or there is swelling at its outlet, or water has accumulated on it; then insert a pointed probe between his fingers and crush (the skull) with it, and draw out the water; or tear it apart with an instrument called Almisdac, whose shape comes with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter that follows.
Likewise, if the fetus has a large head by nature, then it is necessary to cut through the membrane: or pull it out with forceps, as we have said.
Then draw the bones with forceps.
If the head emerges and becomes stuck at the neck, then it is split open until the moisture within the chest is expelled.
But if it does not swell or obey to emerge: then cut the head roughly, as far as possible for you.
If there is a tumor below the abdomen or it has hydropsy within it: then it must be pierced until the moisture runs out of it.
If the fetus is positioned above its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction to the maternal bone is simple.
If it becomes stuck in the abdomen or chest: then it must be pulled out with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and open the abdomen or chest until what is inside runs out.
If the rest of the limbs are removed and the head returns: then the midwife shall insert her left hand. If the maternal bone is open, then insert your hand deep into the mother's cavity and seek the head with it, and pull it out with your fingers up to the maternal bone: then insert a hook or hooks and pull it out with them.
If the maternal bone is stuck due to a hot tumor that has occurred there: then it is not appropriate to strain on it, but rather administer an effusion of moist substances and ointments, and sit in water that softens and moistens.
If the fetus is on its side, it may be equalized: then administer what has been said for a living fetus.
If it is not possible to do that, then make a series of shallow cuts and extract it.
And it is necessary that you leave nothing inside the second incision at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what was said about hot boils that occur in the uterus.
If there is a flow of blood, then go down into warm water, and administer the rest of the treatment.
I myself have seen a woman whose womb had a dead fetus; then she became pregnant again on top of it, and afterwards another fetus also died.
After a long time, an abscess appeared on her navel, which became swollen until it burst, and began to discharge pus.
Therefore I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time; but the wound did not heal.
I therefore applied certain strong adhesives on it; and bone came out of the place.
Then several days passed, and another bone came out.
I was amazed then, since there is no bone in the womb.
Therefore I thought, because the dead fetuses were made of bones.
I therefore asked for the wound, and extracted many bones from it, while the woman was in her best physical condition; and she lived in this way for a long time, and emitted only a little pus.
And I did not hold this foreign object here unless there is knowledge and assistance for that which the medical artist administers with his hand during treatment.
Chapter on the shapes of essential instruments needed for fetus extraction.
Chapter 77.
Below is the shape of a Clamp, which equalizes books, having two equally positioned screws at the ends of two wooden pieces.
The vertigo should be more delicate with a strap; and it can be made so, either from ebony or from balsa wood.
The width of all the wooden parts should be about two fingers; and the edge of each is like one finger, and the length of each is a palm and half; and in the middle of the two wooden parts are two additions of the same kind of wood which are already fixed in both, whose length is half a palm and less; and the width of each is about two fingers or less.
These two additions are inserted into the hinge, so that it opens with them when you rotate the two vertigos.
The form of the vertigo which opens the hinge.
Another form similar to this, but more delicate and lighter.
It should be made from ebony or balsa wood, according to the shape of forceps.
However, at the end of it, there should be two additions as you see here above; and the length of all the additions from these is about a palm; and the width of each is about two fingers.
When you want to open the hinge with it, then make the woman sit on the bed, with her legs apart; and open what is between her thighs.
Then insert these two additions together into the vagina; and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighs.
Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, equally according to the size of opening of the vagina that you want; until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of another vertigo different from those described by the ancients, namely the impeller, by which the fetus is pushed.
The form of Albucasis by which a small head is crushed. The form of the scoop having one spike.
The form of the scoop having two spikes.
The shape of a forceps with saw-like teeth, by which a fetal head is crushed.
The shape of the spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
The shape of two broad spatulas as well.
All these instruments are exercised, and the more their species multiply, and they are prepared by craftsmen, it is quicker for their operation, and higher among men, due to their quantity.
Therefore, do not despise from them an instrument, which should be prepared by you.
Indeed, the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Chapter on the second extraction (childbirth).
Chapter LXXVIII.
When the Afterbirth (Secundina) is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary to order the weak woman to retain her breath.
Then make her sneeze with snuff: and press your hand over her mouth, and her own nostrils.
If therefore it exits through this (method), it is good.
If not: then take the pot and make a hole in the covering; and put in it herbs opening the womb, such as camomile, rue, anise, chamomile, wild carrot wood, centaurium, and hops: take all these herbs or some of them, and immerse them in water, and place them on fire.
Then place the arrowhead of an reed over the hole of the pot's covering, and another end into the womb: and hold it until the vapor reaches the hollow of the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we said before.
For the Afterbirth will go out easily.
If it remains after this treatment and does not go out: then order the Midwife to immerse her hand in sesame oil or marsh-mallow root. Then insert (it) into the womb and search for the Afterbirth with it.
When you find it, then take it and slowly unfold it.
If it is attached deep within the womb, then insert the hand as we described earlier, until when you find the Afterbirth and pull it out slowly according to right direction so that it does not fall from the uterus due to violent attraction: rather, it should be moved easily from side to side: after that, add more to the amount of attraction.
For then it will obey, and be saved, and go away from the adhesion.
If the bone of the matrix is dislocated, as we have already said: treat it with stimulation, and with medication from an oil pot with herbs.
If it does not come out as we have said, then beware not to tire yourself with the repetition of extraction.
However, it is necessary that what comes out towards the bone of the matrix from there, you tie it to the woman's hip.
Then, clisterize her with the four-ingredient ointment.
For it will rot her after days, and dissolve, and come out.
However, when it rots, raise the smell of foulness to her stomach and head, and damage that weak part.
Therefore, they should administer suitable fumigations for that purpose.
Some of the ancients have already been experienced with fumigation using nasturtium and figs.
The shape of the instrument used for fumigation during the retention of the second birth and periods.
Make it similar to an alms basin or a dish; and place its broad end over the fire; let the fumigation be placed on plums; hold it until that fumigation is consumed; then repeat another one.
Chapter on the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Chapter LXXIX.
Many boys are born, and their anus are not perforated, whom a subtle siphak has already cauterized.
Therefore, the midwife must perforate that siphak with her finger; and if she cannot, let her perforate it with the sharp spatula, and let her be careful not to touch the muscle.
Then place upon him a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil.
Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
If one fears that he will burst, then place a lead pipe into the opening for many days, and let it be removed when the boy wishes to pass urine.
Moreover, anus bursting also happens due to the consolidation of a wound or abscess.
Therefore, that consolidation must be cut, then treated with what I have said concerning healing and lead. Chapter on the treatment of fistulas occurring in the lower part.
Chapter 80.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are nodation and swelling that happen near the anus outside; or in a space of one part; and there is one fistula, or several.
When that nodation becomes old, it opens up, and watery liquid white or subtle pus runs out of it.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
And these fistulas are when they penetrate into the space up to the bladder, and up to the root of the penis.
And these fistulas penetrate up to the junction of the hip, and up to the node of the tail.
The fistula that is recognized as penetrating the anus can also be known if you insert your index finger into the anus; and insert a probe of thin metal or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
If there is a twist [in the surgical site], then introduce into it a thin probe made of lead or a horsehair [bundle], until you feel the probe, or a hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it completely, and nothing is expelled from the incision or a gas discharge or worms as I said: then you will know that it is impenetrable; therefore proceed to treatment.
And when the Fistula (tube) penetrates to the bladder or the meat of urine: then its sign is the discharge of urine from it, and the prevention of it by this means that the location should be made firm with medicine.
But if it penetrates to the joint of the hip or to the hip bone: then its sign is that the probe reaches it, if there is no twist up to the bone; and the finding of pain around the part, and that pus always discharges from it; and that medicine does not work in it, nor does it become firm with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all; and the treatment of them is labor and futility for him, over whom it is formed [the disease], from foolish physicians. In the one which is not penetrating, and not ancient, hope of healing with a knife; according to what I tell you, and I have already proven: and it is, that it lies weak under your hands on its back; and lift its legs up to its own hips, and its hips should be inclined towards the abdomen of itself.
Then introduce a probe made of lead or air, if there is a twist in the fistula, until you know where the probe has reached.
But if the weak person feels it around the anus, then it is necessary that you introduce your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel that it has already pierced through your finger by itself, which is evident to you, and you also feel something between the finger and the bone or flesh: then you will certainly know that it penetrates; do not labor on it, because there is no healing in it, as we said.
They say that the flesh heals in some people and there is benefit from the medication applied to it, so heat a cautery of fine size according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before, and introduce it into the fistula while burning until it reaches the anus.
Then do this twice or three times until you know that all the added flesh surrounding it, which is similar to a bird's feather pen, has been burned off.
Then treat it with linen bandages soaked in butter until the burned flesh comes out; then treat it with ointments that generate and solidify skin.
If it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
If it emerges and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick membrane of flesh or bone between the piercing and the wound: and you see that the fistula follows the skin surface; then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula and you cut with the piercing as it goes into the fistula until the incision reaches where the tip of the piercing ends, and the piercing is released and falls out.
Then clean the burned flesh that resembles a bird's feather quill, so that nothing remains from it.
If blood defeats you and dissolves the flesh between you and your operation so that the burned flesh remains: then it is better to cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Since cautery with fire brings good conditions, burning of those added tissues, removal of blood and drying up of moisture.
Then treat that with swaddled linens in butter, or boiled leeks, until the place emits pus, and the burned tissues come out into the pus.
Then treat the wound with hardening ointments, which produce tough flesh; there are some medicines that contain styptic and drying agents.
For when it is being healed, then it is already healed; do not fear repeated treatments. If the fistula has already reached the depth of the anus and extends beyond the body's excess: then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
If you feel a tentative swelling, and there is a membrane of sheep's skin or flesh between you and it, and it is near to penetrating: then the operation should not be performed on it, unless it is done by way of trust and hope.
That is because one of three methods is administered in it: either to cauterize the very thing itself, as we have said; or to excise it until you follow the concavity of it, so that it may be possible for you to insert linens and treatment from nearby.
And do not proceed much with the excision, lest you cut the muscle containing the anus, and there occurs a bad discharge of excrement without will. Then treat that as we have said. Perhaps it will heal; or stretch the membrane itself, and clean it after you have cut it near the anus, as we have said, either with a swelling or with another sharp tool at the end.
Then clean those fleshy parts that are cut, until you can with examination.
Then attempt the restoration of the entire wound with a section, and at the superior part where it is consolidated: and a fistula remains open in the internal part of the anus, and it will be lighter on the weak.
And sometimes a Fistula is cauterized in this manner: and it is when you insert the probe into the Fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus: then take a perforated probe, which is like an aleskef, that is, prepared leather, in this form.
And insert into it a rolled thread of five strands, and about that size.
Then insert the probe with the thread into the Fistula until it reaches its concavity.
If it penetrates into the internal margin of the anus, then remove the thread from that opening: so that you insert your finger into the anus and withdraw the end of the thread, and tie both ends together: and tighten each one and leave it for one or two days: and as much as the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well, until those tissues that are between the two ends of the thread fall off and fall away: then care for the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
For you do not have the ability to do this for the sake of the arm, so as not to cut it.
Then do as I said until it is healed.
The shape of the Spatulis spini for finding a Fistula, whose sharpness is very strong and one part is not sharp, so as not to cut what is not necessary, as you see.
On stitching hemorrhoids, from which blood flows upon their incision; and on treating fissures.
Chapter LXXXI.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds.
Or they are within the anus, like black lentils or prunes; or they resemble the seeds of apples.
And some are small, and others large; and blood flows from them continually, and there is one, and there are many.
Those outside the anus and at its extremities.
However, those which are outside the anus, are for the most part few in moisture, from which flows citron water or a little blood with continuous flow; and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is within the anus, is to advise the patient to sit in warm water; and it is expressed, until it comes out of the anus, and appears to you as athelia.
Therefore, and fasten them with hooks; or hold them with your nail.
Then incise them at their roots.
If they cannot be held in place with hooks due to their moisture and softening; then take them with a rough cloth or a glove made of double wool, and extract them with your fingers.
Then incise them, and sprinkle some hot powders on them after the incision, so that they remain in place with a cautery.
Or cauterize them according to what was stated in the previous chapter on cauterization.
Then treat them with the rest of the treatment, until they are healed.
If the anus does not obey excretion, then enema the patient with a little purgative enema so that he may be washed out of what is in his anus, and quickly comply with excretion when he purges himself.
If the athelils are external from the anus, then their condition is light and easy; it is as if you capture them with your nail, or capture them with a tweezers, and cut them.
Then take care of them with what I said until they are healed.
And for one who shuns the incision with iron, then it is necessary to administer suture in this manner.
Take a rolled thread and insert it into the point.
Then extract the athelil towards above and make it penetrate with the point into its root on the other side; and roll the ends of the thread around the tip of the needle, and let them be wide; and tighten the athelil strongly with a strong suture.
Then knot the thread, and extract the needle.
Do this with all the athelils, and leave one out; do not tie yourself up with it, so that excess blood may drain away from it.
Then place a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch on the anus and put it on the anus; and tell the sick man to rest.
Then release him until he falls asleep.
When the athelils fall out, take care of them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
Chapter on the treatment of fissures.
For it often happens due to removal of feces and constriction by nature.
When they have become chronic and medicine does not work for them; then it is necessary to shave with punctated spatula or with your nail until they become moist, and the superficial layer which prevents consolidation is removed from them.
Then take care of them until they consolidate as required.
If they do not consolidate; then repeat the treatment with a more vigorous shaving than before, until they bleed much and are opened up again; then take care of them until they heal.
"On the treatment of inverted sores, and not of normal ones: and of Athelil's wounds, and ants.
"Next, treat it thus: and if you wish to cauterize it as mentioned in the previous chapter.
"From Athelil's wounds, one is a small, rough, filtered outgrowth, round on the surface of the body.
"And they often occur in the hands of children.
"And its treatment is to stretch out Athelil, and to cut it open; or to sew it with silk thread; or with hair until it falls off."\]
"And if you wish to cauterize it as mentioned before with fire or sharp medicine, it is now uprooted Athelil, both inverted and not inverted with the tool I will mention. "Formica is also a small, filtered outgrowth, coarse on the surface of the body, extending deeply; when it is found cold, it feels similar to an ant bite and occurs throughout the body; it often appears most in the hands."\]
"And its treatment is to take a reed from a goose's feather or a strong bird's feather; and place the reed on Formica until it forms a ring around it.
"Next, rotate your hand with the reed until you cut off what is around Formica; and insert it deep into the flesh and uproot Formica from its root."\] And if you wish, do it with an air cannula or iron cannula, in this shape.
Place the upper end of the cannula so that it stretches to its limit and encloses the ear, so as to soften its grasp and its return.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant in the manner described for cauterizing Athelil in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter on the shapes of instruments used for enema treatment in diseases of the anus, and solutions of the stomach, and colic.
Chapter LXXXIII.
When an enema is made of silver, or gold, or brass melted, or beaten.
And sometimes it is made with these small and large instruments, according to the ones used for administration.
Therefore, what is administered for the treatment of small children should be small; and for those with weak or painful anus, the enema should also be small.
Large enema.
Small enema.
The upper part of the cannula, that is, where the uterus is attached, should be wide according to this method; and it should have a division so that the uterus can be tied as you see, and the lower end, which enters the anus, should be closed, that is, not open, soft, very fine, stretching to subtlety; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And the size of the hole should be according to the thickness of the ray, and less thick than a little finger, and it should contain the medicine from an animal bladder; or from the membrane of an egg, which is shaped like a small syringe: whose root is one palm.
When placed within the uterus, a cataplasm made of strong purge is to be tightly wound around its head with two distinct constrictions.
Then apply the purgative.
And this is the circle form here depicted and its holes. The quality of the purgative to be applied with it is as follows: fill the bladder or the bag made of medicine that has been warmed according to the tolerance of the sick person; and take care that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then the sick person lies on his back and raises his legs towards the top; and place under him a sheepskin or a cloth, that is, the covering people lie upon.
Then anoint the end of the purgative with oil, or with white goose grease, or with mucilage of fenugreek, or something similar.
Then insert it into the anus with ease.
Then the servant takes the bladder with both hands and squeezes it forcefully until everything contained within the purgative is expelled into the intestine. Then remove the purgative, and the sick person raises his legs towards the wall. If the medicine forces it out, then hold it as much as possible.
And if he sleeps with this all night, it is more helpful for his recovery.
If the purgative is used on him for diseases of the abdomen and he quickly expels it; then apply the purgative again until he recovers.
If there are hemorrhoids or sores wounding in the anus; then the purgative should be very soft and gentle, like those used to purge children.
And let this be the form of the subtle plaster for a closed wound.
On the treatment of head wounds without bone fracture.
Head LXXXIIII.
In the Treatise on Wounds, as I have previously stated, it is appropriate to speak of their treatment by hand and with medicine; here, I will describe their treatment according to completion.
Therefore, wounds are distinguished according to the cause by which they occur, and according to the place upon which the wound falls.
Therefore, wounds are often caused by the following: a thrown stone, or a cut from a sword, or a knife; or a thrust with a spear, or wood, or an arrow; and similar occurrences of various objects.
Wounds that occur in different parts of the body are as follows: a wound on the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or back; and similar wounds on other body parts.
And I will describe the treatment of some wounds, so that I may provide reasoning and a rule for treating other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the composition of remedies is discussed at the beginning of Chapter Three.
Therefore.
When a simple head wound occurs and no bone is broken, consider whether it was caused by a thrown stone or something similar, and if only the skin has been broken; if the wound is large and there is a concern about postematic abscesses forming, then apply hot poultices immediately. Do not delay this procedure and extract from his blood according to the strength of its virtue; if nothing prohibits phlebotomy, particularly if the blood flowing from the wound is scant.
And let phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side of the wounded part.
And be careful to avoid filling himself with food or drink of poor quality.
If something forbids a decrease (minution), then it should be reduced from food, and it should not approach flesh nor wine.
And place on the wound if it happens to have a hot abscess, boiled vinegar infused in rose oil only, or with wine in which there is a sticky substance.
If you are free from a hot abscess, then place on the wound if it is recent with its own blood and has not changed the air around it; and if the air around it has already changed, then place certain ointments on it until it heals.
If the wound is large or from a sword cut and similar ones: and its edges should not be joined together by blisters, then join them with stitching, as I will tell you about in abdominal wounds regarding their stitching.
If the wound has already been exposed by bone and hangs, and there is no retention of it unless in a small suspending device: then cut it.
Then take care of the wound with medicines, and restore hard flesh to it where the skin is, and instruct the sick person to eat coarse foods in which there is thickness, such as heads (of animals) and boiled wheat, until it becomes soft; and similar things.
And if you find putrefaction (rot) in the skin that does not adhere to bone: then cut out the entire rotten part and throw it away; then care for it.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows, and it cannot be separated by medicines, then seek over the artery.
If you find it not cut, then cut it with a spatula or tie it.
And if necessity compels when that which was said cannot be conferred, then cauterize it until the blood separates.
Method of applying powder to heal wounds.
Take one part of olibanum, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime: grind it thoroughly and sieve it: and fill the wound with it, and bind it well until it adheres well to the surface, and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it on top with small pieces, and leave it, do not remove it until it has healed completely so that it does not open up again.
For the medicine shall not be removed from him until he is healed.
Then continue to treat the remaining parts until they are healed.
Chapter on neck wounds.
Head LXXXV.
If a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in its treatment compared to a simple wound of the head.
If the nerve or artery of the neck has been cut: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill in its treatment except to divert the care from it, as with sinnum, zygomatic bone, and similar things.
Because nerves cause harm and contract them.
And do not put anything cold on the wound at all: because the substance of nerves is cold and its continuity is with the brain, which is higher than organs; let it be treated with warm remedies such as lime mixed with sweet water several times infused with oil, or rose oil, and turpentine, when cleaned even with sweet water; and other mineral stones, according to this method, and moist unguents.
If the wound is large, then administer suture; or apply oiled strips of linen with threads.
Then care for it until healed.
If the wound has depth or if a cavity occurs in its lower part, where pus accumulates, then pierce it at a deeper location in that place.
If the artery has been cut in the wound and there is a flow of blood from it: then separate, or cut and tie it; or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
If the trachea has been cut or the whole has been saved and larynges have been saved: then apply the lips of the skin with suture on top of the throat, and do not touch the throat; instead, lift it and reduce it to its natural shape.
Then tie it up with a suitable ligature, and let it be for several days.
Then treat it with ointments containing styptic properties and drying agents until it heals.
If the wound has made an impression on the bone, then examine it carefully; if there are fragments of bone within it, remove them all or as many as you can; and whatever cannot be prepared at that time, let it putrefy, and allow the discharge from the wound to separate and subside.
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle powder over it as I have mentioned.
If it appears that there is bone in the wound and a fistula forms: then treat it with what has been described in its respective chapter.
Chapter LXXXVI.
If a wound discharges pus when the sick person is breathing heavily, then know that the wound is fatal.
If the wound is not deep and is fresh with its own blood, then do not apply powder immediately or tie it up to prevent the blood from remaining deep inside and returning to the heart and killing the sick person; instead, place an attracting ointment on it and change it twice a day.
If you do not have ointment at hand, then place a heated, old brick over the wound to dry out the discharge; and make the sick person lie on the wound so that what is accumulating in it can run off.
If three or more days have passed since the wound occurred and there is no spasm, no bad heart tremor, no constriction during breathing, and the other aspects of the wound appear good, then know that the wound is well.
Treat yourself and with linen cloths, and the rest of the treatment, until you are healed.
If it is cut open (of the wound) and healing begins again, then know that it has become a Fistula.
Treat it from its own (source).
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple on the chest or back surface, then treat it with what came before (the first treatment) if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
If (the wound) has made an impression on the bone and cut off fragments from it: then inspect the wound, and hurry to remove those fragments if they are separated.
If they (the fragments) are not separated, then leave them until the wound rots, because it is easier to remove them when the wound has rotted.
For other wounds caused by accidents on other limbs, the judgment for treatment is the same as we have said.
Chapter on Wounds of the Abdomen, and exit of the Intestines, and their exits.
Chapter LXXXVII.
Rupture that happens to the abdomen is great, middle, or small.
From a great rupture, it sometimes exits the intestine, or the number of intestines.
Therefore, their introduction and sewing is forced and more difficult.
A small rupture is also difficult in another way.
Therefore, its reduction is more difficult if you do not hurry to introduce it to its place immediately; because it swells, opens up, and becomes enlarged; which makes the entry more difficult.
Therefore, a medium rupture is better because when it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is more difficult in these two types (great and small).
You should know that stitching of the vein is according to four modes.
Two stitches commonly join in the stitching of the abdomen, and in the stitching of other wounds on the body; and two other stitches properly belong to other wounds.
Nevertheless, they are more proper for the stitching of the abdomen; and I tell you one by one with an explanation and a declaration. I say therefore, that when a wound is small and something from the intestine comes out of it, and it is difficult to reduce it back; then that is for one of the two modes.
Or because of the smallness of the rupture, as we have said; or because there is inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
When it is like this, then it is necessary that you heat it, so that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in warm water alone.
Or boil in water of squills, and cyperus, and spike, and wormwood with it, until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes it makes wine in which there is bitterness; and that is better than water alone for the resolution of inflation.
When you see that the inflation has already been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which wormwood or mallow was boiled.
For this reason, it opens the opening of it when the injury is small.
If, however, there is an exit again after this treatment; then sew up the rupture with a tool that is used to cut hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared than cutting; and there is no need to force it to cut after necessity and lack of tools.
Make one part of it twisted, sharp, and another not sharp, and the end should not be delicate like spatula, but rather blunter; and that is similar to a thong, as you see.
When the wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction should be according to its own natural shape in its own proper place, if possible on top of it; because it is better.
When the wound is wide at the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary to make the patient lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head.
And if it is at the upper part of the abdomen, then put the patient's head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly, if the wound is at one of the two parts of the abdomen, then direct your attention and consider that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other part.
Therefore, you must insert it into large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then let a faithful servant be present among your hands who will hold the entire wound with his hand and bring the edges together.
Then cut something from that which follows for suture material; this is the common method of suturing one thing.
And it is to take a needle or a number of needles according to the size of the wound.
Then take a finger's breadth from the end of the wound, that is to say, the doctor's; and insert one needle beyond which you will introduce thread into both sides of the skin, with both ends of the suture that is beneath the skin from inside, until it penetrates from the other side, and you have already brought together the two edges of the skin and the two ends of the suture; and there are four rows.
Then sew with double thread around the needle several times at both edges together until the two lips of the wound are joined with a proper stitching.
Then release the thickness of the digit and also fix another point in them; afterwards draw it straight with thread, as you did with the first point.
Do not cease to do that with the points required from the needles, until you complete the constriction of the entire wound.
Let the points be of medium thickness between coarseness and finesse; because very fine needles deeply pierce the flesh quickly, and coarse ones are difficult to enter the skin; therefore it is necessary that they should be of medium thickness both in finesse and coarseness.
It is not advisable for the needle to be bent at the ends close to the skin much; so that the flesh is not pierced quickly and the wound opened before its consolidation, and in order that they do not elongate even when sutured, preventing consolidation of the wound.
Then cut the tips of the needles so as not to injure a weak person in his sleep; and place small pieces of cloth from all sides on them, which will hold the ends of the needles; and release them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of suturing with needles in such a way is more suitable for small wounds.
Because it is sufficient for their suturing one or two needles, or about as many.
The second suture is the common one, so that you gather with the suture the ends of four: the ends of two skins and the ends of two threads in place of one, with a needle in which there is a thread wound equally fine and coarse.
Then, when you pierce with the needle these four ends, pull back the needle from the part from which you started so that the thread, retained at the top of the wound, falls out; so that the suture is like the suture of cloth where clothes are sewn together, and place between every stitch a quantity equal to the thickness of a small finger.
This suture they know (humans).
And with this suture, I myself sewed up the wound of a man in his belly, who had been wounded by a knife, and the wound was larger than one palm: and out came from the intestines about two palms of the middle intestine, and the rupture was in the midst of the abdomen.
I therefore brought it back after the intestine of his remained outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound was therefore consolidated in a space that was about fifteen days: and I healed it, and it became well: and he lived after that for many years, converted to his customs.
And the physicians had judged, that it would not heal.
And by a miracle, I did not heal (it) with an ointment.
Because I was in a place where no ointment was found nor any medicine.
I therefore put warm cloth on the wound twice a day, and I was attending to its cleansing with water of honey until it became well.
I will however say two types of suture according to the narrative of speech.
And it is, that you begin with sharp suture: and thrust a needle from the outside to the inside part.
When the needle penetrates into the skin and goes through according to the length and width of the entire body: then release the end of the suture on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate into another end from the inside to outside in the other extreme.
When you make it penetrate (again), then make it penetrate according to this in the same extreme from outside to inside: and release the end of the suture which is on that side, and make the needle penetrate into another end from the inside to outside: and make it penetrate with your thrust as you are making it penetrate in the other end of the suture, which is in that part, until it penetrates through all.
Then also begin from the same side, and take it along with its extremity, which is from sifac in another side, and extract the point that has penetrated the skin.
Reduce it to the same skin, and take it along with its sifac extremity, which is on the other side, together with this extremity of mirach: extract it from the skin on that side, do the same for the other side: and do it alternately until you have completely extracted it according to that example.
The sum of this suture is that the sutures of the skin are more superficial than those of the flesh: thus, one of the sifacs should be sewn with the extremity of the skin on one side, and release it with the other side until you have completed.
The second species of suture mentioned by Galenus.
This speech is said to be like the method used by some physicians, so that they gather together all parts fitting by nature and bring them together: and apply the extremity of the sifac to another extremity, and the extremity of mirach to another extremity.
And this is done as I have told you.
It is necessary that you fix the point of the mirach on its extremity that is near to you on the outside, and make it penetrate to the interior in that alone, and release the two extremities of the sifacs.
Then turn the point, and make it penetrate from the outside to the interior in both extremities of the sifacs.
Then turn both and also make both penetrate from the inside to the outside, in the two extremities of the other mirachs that are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common and easy one, and is the suture of which the preceding recollection was mentioned.
This is therefore the discourse of Galen as well.
And certain ones said.
The stitching of the abdomen is to be adjusted with two points.
It is to insert one thread into each of them: and begin with the introduction of the needle, from what is with you, and make it pass through to the other side, according to the stitching of those who sew skin equally.
And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the abdomen: then the stitching of it is more difficult than in any other place of the abdomen.
The judgment of the medicine for a wound, is the judgment for other wounds.
It is that when you catch a new wound with its own blood, before it changes by air: and reduce the intestine and suture it and prepare it: then place it on a bed of powdered meat.
If air has already changed the wound: then place on it some ointments that are present with you, so that they make pus: and let the threads fall out, and be tied together with sifak, and covered with mirach.
Then take care of it as is the treatment for other wounds, until it heals.
If there are no medicines present with you, then place on it immediately, as soon as it begins to emit pus, old bread: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it heals.
If you fear that the wound may communicate with principal limbs on injury, then it is necessary to immerse a soft wool in warm oil or rose oil: and place it around the area of the loins and under the armpits.
If he feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then cleanse him with a mixture of stiptic wine, black, warm: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and an opening has been made penetrating to the depth of its concavity.
And know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal, and that which is from the small intestine is harder to heal.
The intestine which is called Jejunum, does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is from veins, and the size of them, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of the proximity of its nature to nerves.
If what comes out from the wound is pus, and you grasp it fresh: return it according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if space has passed and it has already become green or black: then you should stitch it with thread above the place that has become blackened, so that there is no bleeding.
For in pus there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of the thread hanging from below on the lower part of the wound outside it: so as to be relieved of its attraction towards you, and extraction of it in case of pus discharge, and emission of pus from the wound.
Reminder for a wound that occurs in the Intestine.
When there is a break in the intestine and it is small: then it can be restored in some people: because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a lance blow, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old: and it became a fistula, and it discharged excrement, and gas.
I therefore carried out the treatment, until I was confident in its cure; and I did not cease to probe it (the wound), until it was healed and the location had become solid.
When I saw the location solidified, I feared that something harmful might happen to it (the patient), lest something bad occur within him (the wound); and nothing of that sort happened to him from that (incident).
And he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking, urinating, taking a bath, and engaging in his daily activities.
And some experimenters said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner.
And (there are) those who take large-headed ants.
Then gather together two lips of the wound, and place one ant with an open mouth over the two lips of the wound.
When it (the ant) bites on that (the wound), and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it will stick and will not be released.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing that, according to the size of the wound in total.
Then reduce (the patient) and suture the wound.
For those heads remain attached to the intestine until it is eaten, healed and no harm comes to the patient thoroughly. And it is now possible to tie the intestine even with fine thread; which was removed from the intestine of the animal and attached to it when introduced into the point.
And (there is) that you take the end part of this thread from the intestine and scrape it much.
Then tie a fine linen thread at the end of it (the scraped intestine).
Then insert that thread into the point and also with it the intestine.
Then reduce it to a rupture. And this method of sewing with worms and the intestine, is not but according to the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is large and wide, especially if it is on one of the slender intestines, then there is no remedy but subtlety; nor is its healing altogether.
Chapter on the Care of an Ulcer (Zuchemen) and Abscesses (Fistulae).
Chapter LXXXVIII.
Know that every wound or abscess which becomes old and turns into an ulcer and does not heal and discharges pus continuously and does not burst: then it is called universally in whatever member it may be a Fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a Fistula is indeed according to truth a filtering knot, hard, white; with which there is no pain, but a hollow like the feather of a bird: and for this reason some call it Risati, that is, feather.
And there are certain hours that emit pus which is moist.
Perhaps moisture is divided at certain hours.
Sometimes this moisture is abundant and sometimes it is scant; it is coarse and it is subtle.
And I have already mentioned the division when I said wounds; for any sore that does not heal is not born in it unless because of one of nine causes.
Of which one is, or because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or because it is malicious; or because there is hard flesh between it and its surface, preventing the birth of flesh; or because there are many sores and pustules; or because the sore itself is putrid, and the matter that is emitted to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for its healing; or because the corruption falling in the region is a kind of plague, or by nature, as happens in Caesaraugusta; in which the digestion of illnesses becomes difficult, and the healing of abscesses is delayed through nature; or because there is one bone, or the number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and the cures for them with medicines in the division; here it is necessary for me to make you know the cure for a fistula (fistula) and zukan (a type of abscess or ulcer), which is done by means of operation with the hand.
Therefore you know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body.
For among them are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, nerves, or sifac; or the intestines, or bladder, or one of the ribs; or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the joints composed in a composition; such as the hands and feet; and among them are those that go to the proximity of the main member and similar ones.
Which of these fistulas is managed in this manner, is difficult to cure from diseases, and does not receive treatment; occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If any of these fistulas has a depth not reaching the places I mentioned and you hope for its cure, trust in it and wish to reach knowledge about it, then take the probe from air or iron if the fistula is straight; explore it with it.
If there is a twisting in the fistula, then examine it with a probe made of soft lead.
Since lead, due to its softness, is bent around the twist.
If the fistula has many openings, it will not be possible for you to sign over it with a probe.
So anoint the opening from its openings (with clisteria).
For the moisture you apply as a clisterium flows through other openings and runs out from them.
Then examine carefully according to the method that is possible for you, so that you may know whether it is bone or nerve and the fistula is a deep one, far or near; or if it is a single fistula with many openings, standing on top of everything, with all your strength, by questioning the sick person, and by feeling pain under compression with your hand at the place, and similar signs and causes of the affliction.
When you are stationed over all of it (the fistula), then go to its treatment according to your confidence; and consider whether it is a fistula near the surface, or in a distant place from the junction, from nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places mentioned to you; then cut the fistula as stated earlier in my narrative, remove what is in it from filtration, and what grows corrupt flesh, or pus, or similar things from its opening; take care of it until it heals.
If a fistula is deep-seated and straight: then it is necessary to cut (or excise) it as deeply as possible for you.
Then cleanse it from all the corrupted flesh of it.
Then apply a linen cloth soaked in sharp medications and insert it up to the depth of the fistula that you have seized with an iron; do this several times, until the sharp medication corrodes all that remains in the hollow of the fistula due to corruption.
Then restore it with unguents that generate healthy flesh until it heals.
But if it does not heal by this, then cauterize (it) as we have described before.
If the cause of the fistula is a bone, and you are certain of this: then find it and cut it according to what I have told you; if it does not forbid you something from the vein, or nerve, or principal member as we have said.
If a bone is discovered and there is something corrupt and darkening (blackening) in it: then file (smooth) it until the entire corruption is removed.
Then treat it with that which causes it to heal, until it heals.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as it did before: then know that you have not reached complete removal of the corruption.
Discover (or examine) above it again, and excavate its cause, and cleanse it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it.
If it heals, that is good; if not, then know that the corruption is in a deep remote part of the body that you did not reach.
You do not have skill in it, unless you abandon (it) to nature.
If a small bone is corrupted and it is possible for you, draw it out with fine forceps that fit it.
If there are many bones, then carefully draw out all of them, do not leave anything behind with your strength.
If something hinders you from it due to some humidity and there is no fear or error in the incision of them: then cut those humidities and flesh, if there are any there, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones from your time, then place something over the wound that rots it and let it go until it rots what is around the bone's circumference from flesh and humidity.
And keep the wound so that it does not heal.
And tighten the incision which you made in your operation.
Or place on it, if you fear, a linen cloth soaked in crushed sulfur mixed with oil, or a linen cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any green ointment.
For when those (humidities) have rotted, and the bones are separated from them, the removal of them is alleviated, and the drawing out of the bones.
If there is a large bone such as the leg bone or hip bone, and what has become corrupt from it is a large part: then shave it with the final plane, until that blackness and corruption is removed.
Then restore the wound.
If what is in it has become corrupt and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it must be sawn and cut through entirely to the place where the corruption has come, then care for it until it heals. And I tell you zuken, which happens to a man in his leg: place it as an example and assistance for your operation.
A man of about thirty years old had pain in his limb, which was caused from within his body until the matter reached his leg, and it was cut out with a large incision; and there was no external cause for it.
The time extended with the error of physicians until the abscess was opened, and many substances gathered with it.
His treatment was delayed until the leg became fistulated, and many openings were made in it; all of which discharged pus and bodily fluids.
A multitude of physicians treated him for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands until I was summoned, and I saw his leg, and the materials that were flowing from those openings in a large stream; even the entire body of the man had turned into ulcers, and his color was jaundiced.
I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and it reached the bone.
Then I examined all the openings; and I found that they were connected to each other from all parts of the leg. I advanced, and cut through one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone; and I found it corrupted: which was already rotten, blackened, decayed, pierced, and had penetrated to the marrow.
I then sawed what was exposed to me, and prepared it from the rotten bone.
And I concluded that there was no part of the bone other than the corruption which I had removed and sawed off.
And I had already excised it.
Then I set the healing of the wound with consolidating medicines in a long space.
And it is not healed.
I then attempted the restoration of it.
And it is not restored.
I then restored it with medicines, and it was quickly consolidated and healed: and this iteration in the operation of it, and section of it, was not necessary except for the disposition of the patient's weakness, and his small tolerance, and my fear over him about death: since bad fainting frequently occurred to him at all hours due to an excess of evacuation.
Therefore it is healed completely: and new flesh hard has grown in the place of the bone, and good was made the arrangement in his body, and his strength returned: and he turned to his dispositions: and no harm at all was done to him by walking.
But if the prominent bone in the body is already broken: then it must be cut as follows: and this is: to take a ligament, and tighten it at the end of the prominent bone: and command someone to extend it upwards: and place another thicker sinew ligament below the first. Then bind it on the flesh that is under the bone: and extend its end so as to pull the flesh downwards: and you will open the flesh where you want to cut, so as not to wound the knife the flesh.
Place wood or a board under the bone below: because when you do that, it is not forbidden to cut the corrupted flesh.
It is necessary that the Trepan (Serratura) be above the damaged area slightly, so that the corruption of the bone does not occur in concavity: and it should not appear to the sense in its appearance, and it compels another (for its function). If the bone is corrupted and it is not projecting but rather continuous with another part, and the corruption is in its middle or a part of itself: then cut off all the flesh from every side.
Then place the lever below.
Then cut with the saw from one side where there is corruption, until the lever comes to meet it from another side: and let the lever be slightly beyond the corruption, as we have said.
If the corruption is at a joint, cut the corrupted joint itself and saw the bone where it continues on the other side.
But if the corruption is at a connection of two joints, then there is no remedy for it except to abrade (it).
If the corruption is at the beak of a hand or foot: then the matter is very difficult in that case.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to investigate the nature of the corruption as it appears to you.
And abrade it and clean it as well as you can according to whatever position it presents to you and with whatever tool is available to you: when it does not cause you harm by the vein or nerve.
And know that the instruments for cutting and sawing these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their subtlety, their size, their smallness, their hardness, and their scarcity.
Therefore, it is necessary to prepare every kind of instrument suitable for the operation.
And know that these operations signify to you the type of instrument you need, when your study requires it for a long time.
and the knowledge of the modes of this art, is evidence of the modes of diseases: for then indeed you will find what suits it from yourself, concerning all afflictions with instruments.
Form of the Saw.
Form of another Saw.
Form of another Saw.
Form of another Saw.
This form of the Saw should be well made. Let the upper part of its arc be made, and its edge from iron: and its handle from boxwood, and let it be pyramidal.
Form of the Razor for Joints.
The head of this rasp should be shaped like the head of a star-shaped nail: and its points should be shaped according to the form of pointed file nails.
It does not suit it unless that it rubs against the heads of joints when they are broken, or a large and thick bone.
Form of a larger Razor.
Form of the middle Razor.
Form of the wide Razor.
Form of a rasp with a hollow.
Form of another fine Razor.
Form of another Razor with a curved end.
Form of the small fine rasp.
Form of the rasp for cutting bones.
Also, form of a large rasp.
It resembles a saw and its end is like a rasp: it is used in many places for the reason of bones.
The form of a rasp that suits for cutting it which has been pierced by bones.
Its end is triangular and sharp.
It comes from India.
And similarly, it is necessary that everything we have said be made from files, cutters, and saws.
Section on the incision of extremities, and the setting of bones.
Head LXXXIX.
Rotten ends, either from external cause, or internal.
When you have been treated for that corruption with medicines and the treatment does not work and you see that the corruption is spreading into a limb which has no reaction: then it is necessary to amputate that limb until the spread of corruption stops, so that the weak part can go out through it either from death or from the greater malignancy which is due to the loss of the member.
The mark that happens to it is what decays the limb, until it seems burned by fire, or rots after blackness: until that rot reaches the following limb and creeps through the whole body.
Approach therefore with the incision of that, and likewise if the cause of corruption is from the strike of certain venomous creatures such as marine scorpions, weasels, nettles, and similar ones.
If therefore the corruption, or strike is at the end of a finger, then incise the finger, and do not leave any space for the rot, so that it may reach the remaining hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then incise it from the root of the palm and do not leave any space for the rot, until it reaches the forearm.
And if it invades that, then incise the arm near the elbow at its joint. If however the rot passes through and you see him about an elbow, then it is the death of a weak man.
And beyond that in cure, is the amount of virtue.
And similarly do with the foot when rot invades a finger, then cut it at one knuckle: and if it reaches the bone of the toe, then cut the entire foot.
If however it rises to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
If however rot has reached above the knee, then there is no remedy for it, but to release and abandon the weak to death.
And the manner of cutting a limb, or of binding it is, to tighten the ligament at the lower part that you wish to cut and to tighten another ligament above that place.
And extend one of the ligaments downwards, and extend another ligament upwards towards the top.
Separate the flesh that is between two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until all the flesh is exposed.
Then, it should be cut or tied.
And it is necessary that you place a linen cloth on all parts, and not touch the healthy place with the knife; and an injury added to the weak should happen, and the abscess warm.
If there is an internal bleeding during the operation, then quickly cauterize the place; or put some powder that absorbs blood on top of it.
Then return to your medication until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligament, and take care of it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot, this same thing happens as I told you.
This is because there is blackening in his foot, with a burn resembling fire burning; and the corruption first happens in his toe, until it began to affect his entire foot.
Therefore, the man moved himself away from it, after he saw corruption happening in his limb with great pain, which he found out through pain and burning; and he cut it off at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long period of time, the same corruption happened to him in his index finger of his hand. Therefore he came to me, and I tried to recover that loss by placing some medicine on his hand after cleaning his body; but the loss was not recovered, and it began to affect another finger; until corruption began in the hand.
He then called me to cut off his hand; but I did not want that, hoping for the recovery of the loss from me; and I also feared death for him at the cutting of his hand.
The virtue of a man was above his misfortune.
After he had given up hope in me, he returned to his own land; and reached me concerning that matter, because he hastened, and fell on his whole hand; and he was healed.
I bring this narrative only as help for that which falls under the genus of this disease; and it is a signification to be understood, and according to which it should be done.
Chapter on the cure of sinuses, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Chapter XC (Roman numerals).
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends until it collects pus; then it breaks or perforates, and what is in it exits through the pus, and leaves a vacant place as if it were a vessel; and the skin that is on top of it has become thin like a piece of cloth which has been woven fine; and it does not progress to complete corruption nor press into bone, nerve or ligament: it should be called a Sinus: and it is not called a Fistula; however, if its space extends until corruption presses into one of these members, then it is called a Fistula or ulcer.
And its treatment is to incise the entire skin as it rolls; and especially when it has become thin, and made like a piece of cloth; and trust that it will not adhere because of its corruption.
If you hope that the skin will adhere, and this final corruption does not follow as a result; and if there is thickness in the skin from the flesh, then treat it with clisterium: and consider for a sinus.
If it is large, and the pus that is emitted from it has a foul odor; then clisterize it with medicine from Egypt, which is vinegar, oil, and zinziber; parts receiving equal amounts should be combined in a vessel: and boil it over fire, until the medicine turns red: and let it become thick like honey.
Then take that which is necessary for you: and dissolve it with water and honey, and enema it with the mixture; and sew up its opening, and leave the medicine within for two hours quantity.
Then extract it with expression: do so for days until the sinus is purified and the stench removed.
And when an enema with ashes of water is to be administered, if this medicine is not present at hand: and it is that you receive the ashes from vinewood or from hollywood; and cast upon her the water.
Then cook it and give an enema with it until you are confident that the sinus is purified.
If the patient is not able to bear the Egyptian medicine or water and ashes, then give an enema with water and honey, which has already been mixed with something from crushed onions.
Or give an enema with honey and wine mixed, for the property of honey is to purify and cleanse; and wine makes the sinus adhere, particularly when there is excess dryness and dryness in the wine.
When you have done that several times and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has been removed: then give an enema with it which produces flesh within it.
And it is that you receive dyafinicon from the plaster; and dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic wine; or give an enema with certain medicines, and other ointments, whose properties I have written in the treatise on ointments.
If the opening of the sinus is narrow and it does not accept an enema cannula: then expand it slightly with iron; or place linen wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment within it until it expands.
And likewise, if there is also a large opening, then gather its lips with suture; and leave within it an amount for the enema to enter without addition.
And similarly, if there is an opening from which pus flows, it should be elevated towards the higher parts; then cut it at a lower location within itself, so that the pus can run out towards the lower parts; because when the pus is obstructed in depth, it prevents flesh from forming in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the Sinus approximately below it as you wish; then try to prepare the member with a preparation by which the pus can flow out easily according to what you are preparing yourself.
Try not to retain anything from the pus at all; and receive consolidating medications that are placed on the sign, appropriate for what you wish.
And spread them on a linen cloth.
And let the cloth be of such size that it allows communication of the entire Sinus.
Then cut with scissors directly into the opening of the Sinus a hole larger than the opening of the Sinus itself.
Then spread a layer of soft ointments on another cloth according to the size of the hole; and place it above it at a distance from the opening of the Sinus so as to facilitate the exit of the pus; do not remove the large cloth unless after several days, once.
The one who is above the opening of the Sinus, that is the one you should remove at any hour to let out what has accumulated in it from the pus; and so that you know whether what runs out from it is much or little, digested or undigested.
And again consider the location of the Sinus itself, whether it feels pain to its master or not, and whether there is a boil in it or not.
When therefore your treatment is thus extended and you see the matter which comes out of the Sinus, then know that the Sinus already adheres or approaches to adhesion: then therefore dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change the cloth, and renew the ointment. If for a long time a subtle virus comes out of the Sinus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, since there are some people who heal slowly in their wounds, and there are others who act contrary to that.
If for many days an undigested pus comes out of the Sinus, then know that the Sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the adhesion of the Sinus is delayed and its treatment prolonged: then add drying medicines in the process, but let the physicians do so that the medicines be in their substance humid and in their virtue dry, such as dyafinicon ointment when excess is added to it from zegi.
And from the last remedy to be used, it is that you take dyafinicon ointment and dissolve it with rose oil, and stir it over it old wine equal in substance.
Then make a mixture of these ingredients and use the remedy.
And make a similar remedy to this, when you do not have dyafinicon ointment at hand, honey, when you boil it until it thickens, and use the resulting mixture.
Or take myrrh, aloes, and frankincense; grind all of them together and powder it over honey while it is above the fire.
Then cover it with a cloth and press it on the Sinus: and cover it with honey that you have boiled until thickened, powder over it and place it on the cloth, and press it.
And at times aristacularia longa (long caltrop), roots of the celestial lily, and the lily are administered; and wheat flour, and chicory.
Use these simple remedies, or compound them, grind them and sift the powders; and powder over honey as I have said, and use it.
If the ailment in the sinuses persists and is not cured by this treatment, you should know that there is corruption deep within it; or it has already made an impression on the bones, or other hard parts of the body, or ligaments; then treat it with fistula treatment, as previously mentioned. Chapter on the treatment of warts and the worn nails, and incisions and amputations.
Chapter CXCI (111).
Warts are boils that appear under the nail of the thumb or big toe; perhaps they may also grow on other fingers.
When the wart persists and is neglected and treated with boiling water, it may rot away and emit pus until it erodes the root of the nail; perhaps it rots completely and the corruption reaches the bone, so that there is a foul smell and the tip of the finger becomes wide and turns black.
When you treat the wart as I have said, and your treatment does not help; then it is necessary to cut off the entire overgrowth that remains from the nail with a knife.
Then cauterize the wound after that.
Indeed, cautery is very beneficial.
If the bone is healthy and the nail is also sound, and there are no additional overgrowths on the nail; but the flesh has become compressed beneath the nail and begins to hurt and wound it; then place a fine radium under the angle of the nail which wounds the flesh, and push it upwards; and cut the flesh easily with a knife, and apply medicines for burning, corrosive substances on what remains of the flesh until it is completely removed.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If pus already presses into the bone, then it is necessary to make an incision in that bone and extract it; for a bone does not heal while there remains pus-filled bone.
If you see pus and decay advancing towards the finger, then cut it off at a joint, according to the previously mentioned reminder of this procedure.
Then treat it, until it heals.
If there is a nail injury or blow and a violent pain occurs, then it is necessary to use leeches first.
Then cut the nail off with a sharp Spatumil, from below towards the surface.
And ensure that the incision does not reach the skin beneath the nail, for you will cause a violent pain to arise above it, and this will be the cause of the growth of new flesh at that location.
Then treat the place with something that alleviates the pain.
The finger that is born in some human hands may be entirely fleshy; and it may have bones in some of them, and a nail in others; and it may be born at the root of the joint or its growth may occur in some of the joints of the finger.
Therefore, a finger that is born at some joints does not move; and one that is born at the joint of the finger may possibly move.
The one who has flesh, therefore, can be easily cut.
Therefore, make an incision at the root with a broad Spatumil.
The treatment of one whose growth is at the root of the joint is difficult.
Therefore, refrain from making an incision on it.
In the finger that is born at the end joint, then it is necessary to make a round incision in the flesh until the bone.
Then cut the bone with a saw that fits among those fitting to it.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
Consolidation, however, which often occurs in fingers, happens either by birth, that is, it is born with it, or from consolidation of a wound, or from burns, and similar things.
Therefore, one should remove that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
Then place between them linen or gauze soaked in rose oil to prevent consolidation or separation of the fingers; or place between them a thin lead plate until the area heals as it should.
And similarly, if there is consolidation on some fingers with the palm, then remove that consolidation as appropriate and in accordance with the shape of the member.
[Section title: On the vice of incision.]
Chapter XCII.
Ulcers are veins twisted, thick, filled with melancholic excesses that occur in many parts of the body; and their most frequent outlet is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers and laborers, and those carrying heavy loads.
Therefore, it is necessary to administer the expulsion of the body from black cholera at times by means of a strong purge.
Then let the patient's vein be opened in the basilic (vein).
The treatment of these is with iron, according to two methods.
One method is, to cauterize and draw out black blood.
And the other method is, that the vein is raised and all (the blood) is drawn out.
The section of this (vein) is according to this method.
Anoint the leg with warm embrocation and much water until the thick, filthy blood is resolved.
Then bind the sick person's leg from the upper part of the hip to the lower part of the thigh with bandage.
Then cut the vein at one, or two, or three places with a wide incision.
Then cut the fingernail down as far as necessary: until a sufficient amount of blood is expelled, and as much as the strength of the sick person can bear.
Then tie it up: and order him to abstain from foods that cause black cholera; and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and this is harmful for the sick person.
Raising (the vein) is according to this method.
Shave the leg of the sick person if there are many hairs.
Then insert it into the bath or apply embrocation on his leg with warm water until it turns red and veins swell; or exercise it by strong movement if there is no bath available, until the limb becomes warm.
Then dry the skin along the vein's incision lengthwise; or at the end of it near the knee, or at the lower part near the heel.
Then peel off the skin with combs and scrape the vein from every side until it becomes visible to touch; and at its appearance, you will see it turn from red to blackish purple.
When the vessel has been reached through the skin, you see it as white like a cord.
Then insert the Ray under it until it raises and comes out of the skin; hang it with a blunt comb.
Then make another incision near that one with three fingers.
Then peel off the skin from above the vein until it appears.
Then lift it with Rays as you did before, and hang it with another comb as you did at the beginning.
Then make another incision or multiple incisions if necessary for that one.
Then peel off and cut the last incision at the heel.
Then draw it out to the incision above that one.
And do this until you draw it out from the incision above that one or all the higher incisions, until it comes out completely; then cut it.
If it does not obey you to be drawn out and lifted; then insert a sharp awl with a strong thread and tie it and draw it out itself; or insert the Ray under it and turn your hand over every part until it comes out.
And be careful not to cut.
For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult for you to lift it out and an injury may enter the patient from it.
When you have extracted [it] completely, then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or olive oil, on the wound site, and take care of it until it heals.
If it is a wound from a vine with twisting and spiraling, not straight as we have said, then you should open it completely along all its twists and the places of the spiral.
Then hang it with hooks until you have extracted it entirely; beware not to cut the vein or wound while making the incision, for it will be difficult for you to extract or remove it.
Therefore, exercise caution.
The shape of the incision for healing a wound from a vine.
The shape of the blind hook.
Its not like the other hooks with sharp tips that might cut a vein; rather it is thick and curved but not too pointed. If it were delicate, it would pierce the vein through its delicacy; on the contrary, it should have unnecessary thickness as we said.
On the extraction of the leg vein. Chapter XCIII.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands, as Alizegi and the Arabs say, and in dry, hot lands with little softness, that is, where no plant or tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
Its generation is indeed from putrefaction that occurs beneath the skin, as it does within the bodies of snakes and worms called ascaris, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of its incision is that it occurs when there is a very hot inflammation in the leg.
Then let the location be bled.
Then, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal, the vein begins to come out from that bled location.
When its end appears, then it is necessary that you wind a piece of lead around it, whose weight should be one keil of a drachma, up to two drachms and knots; and let go the suspended lead from the arm.
Whenever something comes out of it towards the outside, wind it with lead and knot it.
If it extends a lot, then cut off its part, and wind the remainder.
And do not cut off its root before it has come out completely.
Because if you cut it, it contracts and goes into the flesh; it causes an abscess to occur, and pus in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be treated gently and drawn out gradually until it comes out from the end of it, and nothing remains in the body from it; and from this vein, in some people, something comes out that is five fingers long and ten.
And now it has reached me, for a man of twenty palms has come out from it.
If it is cut during your treatment: then insert a probe into its opening and pierce it with a long hole, together with the body, until all that is in it from the matter is evacuated; and apply a poultice to the place with medicines for some days. Then treat it with treatment for abscesses.
This vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot, or on the foot itself; and many openings occur to it, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Therefore treat it as we said earlier, and with what was mentioned before.
On the section made over worms generated beneath the skin, and it is called Bouina's illness.
Chapter CXIIII.
This illness is named among us Bouina's disease because it frequently happens to cows and there is a small worm born between the skin and the flesh.
And it moves throughout the body, ascending and descending; and it is detected by the sense when walking from limb to limb until it bursts at any point where it bursts on the skin surface and comes out.
And its generation is from the corruption of certain fluids.
As worms and snakes, that is to say, leeches and roundworms occur in the belly.
And it is feared due to its malignancy.
Because when it moves within the body and rises to the head and reaches the location; then possibly it opens there and comes out and destroys an eye; and this happens frequently.
When it is desired to cure him and extract the worm itself; then this cannot be done except during its walking and the appearance of the worm to the sense.
Therefore, it is necessary that you compress what is above it and what is below it with a strong binding.
Then cut through it and extract him.
If it is probed into the flesh and the worm cannot be found; then place a cautery over the location with fire until it dies.
And the greater one that is feared, is its corruption which destroys the eye, as we said. If you see it has already reached the head near the eye; then compress above it with a good tightening band.
Then cut through it and extract him.
And the sick person should use self-cleaning of his body, with remedies that dissolve corrupt fluids.
And let them avoid foods causing putrefaction to themselves.
On incision for the illness of Nakir.
Chapter CXV.
This illness is called Nakir on our land: it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, then changes from one limb to another.
And I myself have already seen it, as I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman in certain villages.
She rolled up her arm, and I saw a swelling smaller than the vein of the arm.
And after staying for one hour, I saw a swelling crawl with a worm-like motion, ascending to her shoulder more quickly than possible: it was like liquid silver flowing from place to place.
The pain therefore has receded from that place, and it was fixed in the shoulder.
Then it stayed for one hour, and ran through the rest of the body, until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that he was turning all over his body, as I saw.
I was therefore amazed at the speed of his change from one limb to another.
And indeed, before that, I had not seen this sickness with my eyes in such a manner as it was now.
Nevertheless, I saw many who found pain change from one limb to another; and I did not see it as I saw it in a woman.
And I do not think that it was anything other than because the woman was from those who are driers of bodies, detached veins; whence it appears that the windiness (ventosity) was changed.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and moist bodies, hidden veins.
Therefore, when you desire to cure it and the patient feels that pain; then if it appears to you as we have said, then press on top of it quickly and below it; and cut above it until the windiness compressed is expelled; and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your eyes: then cure it with the expulsion of the body, and with that which expels the windiness, and crushes them with stinking pills, and pills of mastic, and similar things.
Chapter on Extraction of Arrows.
Chapter XCVI. Arrows are diversified according to their kind, and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
The diversity of them is because there are some that have large points and small; concave and blunt.
And among them are those which have three angles.
And among them are those which have tongues.
And among them are those which have stars.
Those indeed which are among the limbs, fall according to two modes.
For indeed the limbs are hollow from principal members, such as the brain, and heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar things.
When therefore it falls among any of these limbs and the signs of death appear to you, which I will tell you afterwards, then it is necessary that you turn to the extraction of this arrow, for death follows him in whom it is, in many dispositions.
And when these signs are not evident to you and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb, then draw it out yourself and care for the wound.
Among the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and pierces the bone and comes out from above the brain is: because strong seizures, fainting, dizziness, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion of intellect, and vomiting of cholera can occur.
And perhaps blood comes out from the nostrils, or ears.
And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed.
And from the wound place whiteness similar to plaster comes out.
And it comes out like a boil-like tissue from there.
If these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment, and pull out the arrow if it does not come out.
The signs of an arrow when it falls in the heart are: that it is close to the left breast and feels as if it is fixed in a hard place, not in a soft one.
And perhaps there is an arrow movement similar to heartbeat: and blood runs out from the wound black.
And it follows that coldness of limbs, cold sweat, and fainting occurs.
Therefore, you should know for sure that death is approaching.
The sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is that sputum comes out from the wound, and the containers following the neck should be removed, and the person's complexion becomes weak.
And it breathes out a large, deep breath and seeks cold air.
If the arrow falls into the chest, which is in the lung: then it is close to small ribs: and a great panting occurs with very strong pain, with sighing, and all the shoulders move.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested comes out from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the abdomen and sticks there, something like feces comes out from the wound, or pus, or a broken intestine.
Therefore, there is no hope for treatment of this person or for extracting the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and urine comes out: and something proceeds to the outside, and the pain is greater than the illness: then you know that it is fatal.
The remaining limbs, like the face, neck, throat, spatula, assistant, dorsal spine, crossbar, thigh, and similar members are saved according to several arrangements when the arrow does not hit an artery or nerve, and the arrow is not venomous.
And I tell you what I saw about these arrows to indicate by that for your cure.
That is, because a man fell with an arrow into his tear duct of the eye, at the root of the nose.
So I extracted it from the other side, under his ear fat: and he was cured, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had fallen upon him under his lower eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not find any part of it except a small portion that adhered to the wood: and the arrow was a large one from Turkish arrows with a soft iron, in which there are no ears.
Therefore, the Jew was cured, and no harm came to his eye. And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
The arrow was Arabic, and it had ears.
I cut it then across the two wings: and it was already sunken into his throat.
I sharpened myself with it until I extracted it: and the Christian was cured.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who fell upon it on his abdomen: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed over him and nothing changed in his condition, I cut across the arrow: and I sharpened myself upon it, and extracted it: and he was cured, and no harm came to him.
And I saw a man whose arrow fell upon his back, and the wound was healed over it.
After seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman whose arrow fell into her womb, and the wound was healed over it; and the arrow remained within her, and no change occurred in her disposition or any harm to the woman from her own natural operations.
And I saw another man whose arrow fell upon his face; and the wound healed over it, and remained, causing him little pain; and many such things happened.
And I extracted an arrow from a man of the king's princes who had it fall upon his nose in the middle, and already it had turned slightly to the right; and the arrow was completely hidden.
I was therefore called for his treatment until three days after the loss of the arrow.
I found then a tightly closed wound of the arrow.
Therefore I asked it with fine probing, and it did not feel it; but he himself found pain and a puncture on his right ear.
Therefore I hoped that this was the wound from the tip of the arrow.
I applied then the place with a plaster containing attracting and digestive properties, confident that the wound would open up and reveal the sign of the arrow so that I might cut it; but this did not happen at the place where something happened, indicating that the arrow had missed the spot.
I remained then with the plaster on him for many days; but nothing happened at the place; and the wound healed over in the meantime, and he remained weak from extraction of it until one day he felt the arrow in his nose.
And he told me that.
I therefore laid an acidic medicine on the wound for many days until it was open; and when I tested it, I felt a subtle arrowhead tip which stuck to the wood.
Then I added into the wound opening that sharp medicine until we could see clearly the arrow tip; and it passed by me with a space of about four months.
Then, when the wound was swollen, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move it, and it did not obey to come out; then I did not stop trying, and devising means over it with various methods, until I began on a certain day with well-made forceps, according to the shape that comes in the end of the chapter, until I pulled it out.
Then I healed the wound.
And indeed physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
I therefore healed it, and the wound became firm and was healed with complete health; it did not harm him at all.
And I tell you the quality of the extraction of some arrows; put this rule and meaning on what I have not said.
Because the parts and distinctions of this art are not comprehended with a narration; nor does the book include it, and the skillful craftsman compares little to much; and with what is present, to what is absent; and he discovers a new operation, and a new instrument for descents of foreign things in this art when they happen.
I therefore say that arrows do not come out from the members on which they are fixed, unless in two ways. Or by attraction from the place where it entered.
Opposite part of another.
And that which goes out where it entered, is either an arrow passing through flesh and is drawn out, or it is a foreign body inserted into a cavity, such as a splinter or stone, that cannot be extracted.
If it does not come out within the hour that it fell: then it is necessary to let it be for some days until the flesh surrounding it rots; and its attraction will decrease, and it will come out.
And similarly, if it impales a bone and does not come out for you, then let it be also for some days; and press and move it every day until it comes out.
If it does not come out from you after days, then it is necessary to bore around the arrow in the bone from all sides with a fine drill, until the arrow enlarges.
Then draw it out and extract it.
If the arrow is fixed in the skull bone and has already penetrated one of the ventricles of the brain and some symptoms are observed that I have mentioned: then refrain from pulling the arrow and let it be until its course becomes even after days.
For if the arrow has reached the heart, death is not prolonged for him.
And if the arrow is not fixed, except in the body of a bone only, and does not penetrate to the heart; and it remains sick for some days, and nothing of those symptoms occurs to him: then apply your skill in drawing out the arrow.
If it is firmly fixed and does not obey you to be drawn out: then administer a drill around the arrow as I have told you; then care for the place until it heals.
If the arrow is already concealed in a part of the body, and hidden and concealed from sensation: then search for it with probes.
If you feel it (the wound), then draw it out with certain instruments that are suitable for drawing it out.
If you cannot pull it out because of the constriction of the wound and because the arrow is deep, and there is no bone, nerve or vein there: then pierce it and let the wound swell up until it can be pulled out the arrow.
If there are ears attached to it (the arrow), then free the fixed flesh from them on all sides as much as you can, with every skill you have, and the skills, if it cannot be pulled out by force of the flesh in breaking or twisting the ears, until it comes out.
And when you draw out the arrow, wherever it is, then use the twisting of your hand with forceps in all directions until it comes out: and carefully and skillfully, so that the arrow does not break, and its drawing and extraction become difficult for you.
If you cannot pull it out within an hour, then leave it for a few days until what is around it begins to rot.
Then return to it: for the wound will heal itself. But if blood flow opposes you, then administer what I said in the chapter on cure: and keep your skill away from cutting a vein, nerve or tendon.
And apply all your skills in every way possible to draw out the arrow: and let it be done with ease, calmness, slowness or firmness, as I told you.
It is necessary that when pulling out the arrow, it becomes weak in the shape it was at the time of the arrow wound.
Because it is more helpful.
If this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the shapes (of the arrow).
Arrow that emerges from the opposite part of another, already proceeds to something exterior: or makes a hump at the tip of the arrow by sensation from the upper part of the skin nearby, and you see it protruding: therefore cut above it, and let the section be according to the quantity so that forceps can grasp it.
Then draw it out; for indeed, it becomes easy to remove.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the arrow presses into the bone and swells itself: then draw it out.
And if not: leave it for several days; then repeat drawing it out until it comes out.
If there is wood in the arrow, then push it along with it.
If the wood has fallen out, and you wish to apply pressure: then insert a concave instrument into it so that it enters the concavity of the arrow's tip; then push it along with it.
If the arrow is concave, then push it along with the inserted instrument.
The arrow is held by that (thing).
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut away all the concave flesh where the poison is; if you can do that.
Then care for it with whatever suits it (the remedy).
If the arrow falls into the chest, or stomach, or bladder, or side: and is near that which you touch with your fingers, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut above it, and take care not to cut a vein or nerve, and remove it.
Then heal the wound, if you see one, and care for it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are extracted.
Extremities are similar to the beak of a bird, which have been made like iron: when they seize upon an arrow, they do not release it.
They become numerous, large, small and medium, according to the size of the arrow, its smallness, and the width and narrowness of the wound.
The shape of the projectile is concave.
The shape of the projectile is dull.
This is a dull extremity like a radius so that it may be guided into the concave arrow and propelled with it.
The concavity of the projectile-extremity is concave like a bird's feather: so that it may be guided into the arrow and propelled by it.
Chapter on Phlebotomy of Veins.
Chapter 97. The veins to be bled, whose course is accustomed in the body, are thirty.
Among them, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins, which are behind the ears, called two Herbs; and two arteries, appearing in the two temples; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein that is at the end of the nose.
And two Gudgi veins, which are in the neck.
And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth.
And two veins that are in the lower lip.
These are the veins that are called Algecherich.
And two veins that are under the tongue.
However, the veins to be bled in arms, there are five veins in each arm.
One of them is Cephalic, and it is from the forest side; and the people call it vein of the head.
And Black.
And it is the Middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilica, and a branch of the Cephalic; and the people call it vein of the body.
And Basilica, and it is located on the domestic side; and it is also called Titillicar.
And the people call it vein of the belly.
And the cord of the arm, and it is placed on the elbow; and this is where it is bled, and this is the one that appears above the thumb in a visible manner.
And Savaliar: and it is the vein which is between the ankle and malleolus; and it has two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins.
One of them is which is under the nail curvature from the forest side.
And second is the Saphenous: and its place is near the heel on the domestic side.
And vein of the ankle: and its place is near the heel from the forest side.
And on the other leg there are three similar veins.
Section on bloodletting of two veins after the ears.
Indeed, bloodletting of two veins which are after the ears is beneficial for old catarrhs, and hemorrhoids, and old sores of the head.
And the quality of bloodletting is as I have mentioned.
It should be shaved that the head of the sick person; and it should be rubbed on the place of two veins with a rough cloth rubbing well.
Then the sick person should bind his neck with a bandage until the two veins appear.
The places [of these] are behind the ears in two depressed locations on the head.
Therefore, seek them with your finger and when you feel their pulse under your finger, mark that spot with hot wax.
Then take a lancet-shaped phlebotomy instrument, and it is called "Incisor".
Then insert it [the incisor] beneath the vein into the skin until the phlebotomy instrument reaches the bone.
Then lift up your hand with the vein and skin to the top, and cut the vein along with the skin incision.
And let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers joined together, or about that much: and allow as much blood to come out as you wish.
Then tie it up with thread, and let it heal.
And now the incision of them [the veins] and their cauterization has come to an end in the beginning of this book.
Chapter on phlebotomy of two arteries in time (of illness).
The phlebotomy of the two arteries which are in two times [of illness], is useful for ancient migraine: and for sodom, prauvam, obtalmia assidua, and for the course of superfluidities effused acutely to the eyes. And the quality of phlebotomy [of the arteries] is as I have told you.
Let the sick person tighten his neck much, until two veins appear to the senses by a clear manifestation: and their pulse should be demonstrated under your finger.
Then mark them with hot wax.
Then lift up the skin over the vein to the top with your finger as an index and insert the phlebotomy instrument from below, and lift the vein to the top.
And cut it [the vein] as you did with the two other veins: and allow as much blood to come out according to your need. Then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the hour vein.
Then put on top of it [the wound] and the fingers, and bind it tightly from above with a strong constriction; and release it until it heals.
And now let us leave the memory of them [veins], and their cutting, and their extraction; at the beginning of the book.
Chapter on the vein of the forehead after the vein of the head.
But the remedy for the vein of the forehead is after the vein of the head, for old diseases of the face, and for migraines, and redness; and for fetid ulcers.
And the quality of its [the vein's] bloodletting is as I told you.
The patient constricts his neck with a ligature until the vein appears.
Then take the tool called Fossorium [Lancet].
This is its form [Description of lancet's shape].
Place the sharp point that is on the head of the Fossorium [lancet] on the vein, and strike it with a mallet or another tool in the same manner; and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish.
Then loosen the perforation of the patient, and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide bloodletting tool [Leech].
However, it is not necessary that the bloodletter be of sharp tip, as the other bloodletters, but rather wide-tipped.
And the bloodletting is to be performed across [the vein] because the bone is close by; and perhaps the bloodletter will break it when it is sharp.
Chapter on Bloodletting of the Veins in the Two Tear Ducts.
But the remedy for the two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes is for the eye with scabs and redness; and swelling in the eye, and diseases of the face.
And the quality of venesection [phlebotomy] is that it tightens the sick man's neck with a ligature.
Then, for the venesection [phlebotomy], you shall be standing above his head.
And the venesection [phlebotomy] shall be made transversely, slightly longer than usual, with a small incision, narrowly, because there is no flesh at that place.
If the venesectioner [phlebotomist] is subtle in his point, perhaps he may break it.
Then, let blood run as much as you need.
Put a bowl over them [the incisions], and tighten them at night, and untie them.
Chapter on the venesection of Nasal Veins.
The venesection of the nasal veins is for acute fever, severe headache, facial ailments such as hemigraine and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
The quality of phlebotomy in this case is to tighten the diseased neck.
Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a sharp and long phlebotomy needle; and fix it in the middle of the leper's nose, between that which distinguishes the nose according to its straightness.
Since the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you should hold your hand with the phlebotomy needle a little; and let blood flow according to your need.
Then tie [the leper's nose] up at night.
For it heals quickly.
Chapter on the phlebotomy of veins (Guidegu).
Guidegu's phlebotomy has two advantages: it helps in constriction of cough and onset of leprosy, melancholic diseases, impetigo and bad ulcers, and those that consume, i.e., herpes or eomenias.
The quality of the phlebotomy for them is to tighten the diseased one under each neck with a bandage; and let the craftsman stand above the sick person's head, and the sick person be seated on a seat.
Then the phlebotomy needle is slightly longer than usual for the vein phlebotomy.
Then draw out a measured amount of blood or as much as you see is necessary for that purpose.
Then do the same with another vein.
Then loosen the bandage, and tighten two veins with a constriction in the middle; so that the sick person does not faint.
And let [the sick person] go until morning.
A wound heals.
Chapter on the phlebotomy of veins (Algeberich).
Algeberich's vein phlebotomy has the advantage that it contributes to the alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums; bad ulcers; cracks in the lips, and bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you should make the sick person sit before you; and tighten his neck with a bandage.
Then roll back his lip, and look at the two veins; one is on the right side of his lip, and the second on his left; and the demonstration of each is through their blackening (or darkening).
And that is true: because around them there are small veins, black ones.
Cut (or make an incision) therefore in both places with a cutting instrument. If there is doubt over you and you do not know which one it is (the vein): then pay attention to the larger incision and make a more obvious one.
And similarly, do the same with the two veins that are on the upper lip; and most commonly it is done in this way; and cut the two veins which are on the lower lip.
[Heading or Title:] Phlebotomy of the Vein under the Tongue after the Phlebotomy of the Head.
But the advantage of phlebotomy for the veins under the tongue is that phlebotomy of the head (or cephalic phlebotomy) is for affections in the throat and diseases of the neck and mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is that the sick person should sit between your hands before the sun; and open his mouth, and look under the tongue on one side for a vein, and on the other side for a vein; and the color of each declines to blackness.
Cut (or make an incision) therefore both (veins); and be careful not to damage your hand while phlebotomizing them.
For there are arteries under it (the tongue), and perhaps blood will flow from these arteries.
[Heading or Title:] Three Veins on the Arm.
The three veins that are to be cut for bleeding are found in which, and the practice of bleeding from these veins is common in all men.
And the cutting of them (the three veins) is performed in two ways.
Or by piercing it with a wide-mouthed lancet (myrtinus): or by oiling to soften the edge of a decline: or by cutting with a small knife (cultellus), and this is called Alnesil.
And this is its form.
Thus, Alnesil is what is suitable for cutting.
And from these (the three veins) there are wide and narrow forms according to the width of the veins and their constriction. The form of the lancet (myrtinus) should be wide, as you can see.
And it is suitable for opening hollow veins, full, extending, appearing, thick ones and those that contain coarse, turbid blood.
And this lancet (phlebotomus) is of lesser width and sharper at the tip.
And it is suitable for the bleeding of fine veins that contain thin yellowish blood.
[Section title] On Bascilica Bleeding.
The Bascilica (one of the three veins) is beneficial for bleeding. Because it draws blood from illnesses that are located under the throat and neck, since it follows the chest and abdomen, and it is suitable for the lancet (phlebotomator) to be cautious when bleeding this one, because beneath it there is an artery.
If therefore the lancet (phlebotomus) makes a mistake and adds in the puncture, it will cut the artery, and there will be a flow of blood.
Therefore, the lancet (phlebotomus) must not puncture it: instead, it should be cutting with Alnesil.
If the Basilica does not appear by clear manifestation, then it is necessary to remove it and move to another or seek one of its branches; or to use a ligature on the arm in its place.
For indeed it is clear and when you cut it with a lancet as we have said.
If you wish to perform a phlebotomy on it, then it is necessary before the ligature of the arm, that you touch the place until you know the pulsating spot.
Then mark the spot with hot iron, afterwards cut the vein with a concave lancet as we have said.
And beware that the blow does not fall into the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see that, while you tighten the ligature, swelling in the place which you marked with hot iron, then that swelling is the swelling of an artery; therefore avoid it.
If you see blood rise at the phlebotomy, like the urine of a boy, and it is subtle, red; then know that it is from an artery's blood.
Then hurry, and place your finger on it in a long space, afterwards remove your finger.
If the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off), then tighten the arm and release it; and let the weak avoid moving it; and beware of fearing it.
And do not move it for several days until it is healed.
If the blood does not flow off and binds you; and if medicine is not present to you at the moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you.
For its ends contract and the blood flows off.
Or take the bark of a fig tree, and grind it; take one half portion, and tie it over the place of the vein's constriction with a ligament and piles until another day.
If it is cut off (the blood), it is good.
If not: then the care of him with that to whom it preceded is remembered at a place removing blood flow: and removal of blood from him is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the smallness of the wound location, and the possibility of binding from the arm.
Chapter on Phlebotomy of the Vein Fusca.
The assistance of the vein Fusca for phlebotomy is that it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body, because it is composed of a branch of the Basilica, and a branch of the Cephalica, as we said.
And it agrees with the phlebotomist that she (the vein) is above the fear of phlebotomy, for under her is a nerve.
If therefore it adds (in the phlebotomy) in a puncture and finds a nerve, stupor occurs in it, and the healing of it becomes difficult, and perhaps it is not healed completely.
And this nerve often appears to sensation.
If it is concealed in certain men and is subtle, and does not show itself: then one must place the phlebotomy of you with which you will phlebotomize it, section with Alnesil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then pierce the vein in length.
Chapter on the Vein Cephalica.
The assistance of phlebotomy of the Vein Cephalica is that it draws blood from the head and contributes to eye troubles.
And in this vein it is necessary to use olive oil or myrtle oil if you wish (to phlebotomize), because it is safer than all the veins since it is neither an artery nor a nerve. It is fitting for you during venesection (phlebotomy), that you ask the barber only to cut the arm, and seek a more lenient spot: it does not harm him if no such place is found on first striking, but he should return to the same spot with venesection several times. Perhaps a boil occurs in some people when not venesection is performed on first striking, but it does not harm him the boil in any case.
Chapter on the utility of venesection (phlebotomy) and the precautions to be observed in it.
The qualities and accidents of venesection (phlebotomy), and the correction of which you should consider.
Firstly, you should know that venesection (phlebotomy) is not administered except in the conservation of health and its persistence, and with caution against the approach of diseases.
And that venesection (phlebotomy) should be performed on one of the three veins that are at the elbow, namely the Cephalic, the Radial and the Median Cubital vein.
And that venesection (phlebotomy) should be performed at the beginning of spring after fasting, in summer and autumn and winter after food intake, when signs of fullness appear.
And that venesection (phlebotomy) should be performed on the first or third day after passing three hours since the previous day.
However, venesection (phlebotomy) administered for illnesses does not have a fixed hour: but when it is appropriate and necessary for that purpose, it may be done at night or day, and in every hour, and in every time.
And it is not fitting to venesection children until they have reached fourteen years of age.
And women in childbirth should not be venesected from the fourth month up to the seventh.
Seniors are not to be bled who have passed sixty years.
If anyone wishes to be bled for any reason: it is necessary that they clean their intestines before the bleeding with a soft enema, if there is much retained feces in them; so that no putrid waste from the intestines may attract during the bleeding harmful substances to the main limbs.
The patient suffering from gluttony (toctina), that is, satiety and nausea, should not be bled; nor the drunkard, nor the one who has just come out of drunkenness, until that state has been removed from them.
The sick person with dropsy should not be bled.
Care should be taken not to bleed again after a colon accident, or vomiting, or diarrhea, or increase in sexual activity, or labor, or exercise, or sleeplessness, or fasting, and all that dissolves the power of the body or an animal.
Then, consider with subtlety the humors before that, if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medications; if it can be done for him.
Then enter a bath, if there is nothing to prevent it; or exercise in some way, so that the blood may be made more subtle.
And place the bleeding of him in the chest on the third day, as we have said; and try to have his chest evacuated by all bad animal accidents that day: such as anxiety, anger, fear; and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, punishment, excess, and similar things.
And he shall have present the things with which customary use of man is accustomed from aromatics, fragrances, perfumes and similar things in quantity according to possibility.
Then let the phlebotomist sit on a stool higher than the phlebotomy stool; afterwards he shall draw out his arm and rub it with his hand twice or thrice.
Then tie the ligature with a linen strip and wrap it around twice.
And let the ligature be moderated, because an uneven ligature, either by excessive tightening or by loosening, then it prevents the flow of blood; or in softening, then even it prevents the flow of blood.
Then after ligating, it is necessary that the person being bled rubs his hands together simultaneously until the veins swell and become apparent to the touch.
Then the phlebotomist cleans the place of bleeding with a little oil, traditionally.
Then he places his index finger of the left hand on that vein at the place where he wishes to make a cut, slightly; so that the vein is not driven away and the blow is cushioned.
Because the veins are as thin and elusive as strings at the place of bleeding; and from them is that which is full of wind, and when you put the lancet on it, it contracts under the lancet, and it deceives the lancet-wielder, and he does not open the vein; and if he opens it, it is constricted; for this reason therefore, the lancet-wielder should be firm and careful in all these matters.
Then lay aside the lancet.
And if not, then do it again with the other vein at that place slightly or above it quickly; if not there.
And if he faints or is weak, then dismiss him for a day or two; and do not tie the ligature.
Perhaps a hot abscess attracts (it).
Do not enter the bath.
Then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
If the wound is small and the blood flows thinly, fear that the required amount of blood will not come out: then perform another phlebotomy in the same vein according to correct procedure, and add a little more in the operation.
And perform it quickly before the abscess is removed, for in many people an abscess site is dangerous during a small operation.
If therefore you see the abscess itself, then do not repeat (the procedure) over it at all, for it does not excuse anything on your part. Place something made of oil on top of it, because it promotes the flow of blood.
It is better in this place than olive oil itself and other oils.
And similarly administer oil ointment in every phlebotomy of yours where you phlebotomize the veins against the flow of blood: and they do this with Tyrian alfrache and sagzenea when it is placed on the site.
Blood becomes thin and dissolves when it is thick.
If a large abscess occurs at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens especially for those who are not used to phlebotomy or where there is a small wound in the vein, then hurry and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated slightly, on the site, and keep it on for an hour: because it dissolves.
It is necessary that you do this after the blood leaves from the vein itself when it has finished, or from another vein.
And indeed often occur abscesses and swellings at the venepuncture site in the Basilica (Church).
Place your hand upon it (the swelling), then if you find a soft spot beneath your pressure, then that swelling is bad.
Be careful, so that you place something on it from what we have said.
For perhaps blood of the artery may flow out from it.
But make an ointment for it with the substance containing styptic (a substance that stops bleeding), so that the place hardens.
Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
It is necessary that you draw out blood from every person according to the quantity of its virtue.
And what appears as a color spreading on top of the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it turns red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it flow out until it becomes thin; and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
It is necessary for the one who is full, strong and requires bloodletting, that it be done once, to increase the venepuncture of the vein, and that the bloodletter be on the side; and for the weak one, it should be the opposite.
It is necessary that it be drawn from the veins and that the opening be narrow; and better that which is administered in venepuncture, that it be a cross-section, not a puncture.
This method of bloodletting is safe from bleeding and from cutting a nerve; and it is more praiseworthy, and safer than bloodletting by width and length.
And to the one who often faints upon venepuncture, it is necessary that before bloodletting he eat a little bread soaked in water of mulled honey; or if he is warm, let him drink cool water; and draw blood from three or four veins.
If it is of cold constitution, then let it take bread soaked in honey-syrup or in scented honey-syrup with spices, or in fragrant aromatic syrup, before phlebotomy.
If it occurs that syncope happens during phlebotomy and the cause of this is excessive bleeding, then it is necessary that one drinks meat water and subtle aromatic syrup, and uses aromatics with alum and linens his chest with it, and uses the rest which we said in the division on syncope through evacuation.
He who wishes to dislocate his arm and release blood through the second method: it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is for great evacuation and whose strength is weak, that he releases blood gradually by the amount of its strength in continuous days.
But he who wishes to dislocate his arm and release blood through the second method, and his body is strong: then let him do this after seven or nine hours following his first phlebotomy.
He who wishes to draw blood from his body towards the opposite side of which it inclines: it is necessary that this be done on the second or third day.
In a body where much blood is already heated and sharpened and causes a fever: it is necessary that the blood comes out once and a large quantity is extracted from him; the opening is enlarged until syncope occurs; after which you should observe all conditions of phlebotomy; and you should place your hand on his pulse during the flow of blood, so that death does not occur in place of syncope.
For it often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and falls due to neglect.
It is not appropriate when you wish to cut the arm, and to let out blood when the opening of the vein is already closed, and the exit of the blood becomes difficult, that you press strongly upon it and the bruised area is quickly extended.
This is bad indeed, rather let it be, until it is bled again with the lancet.
Either remove with the sharpness of the lancet that which has coagulated from the blood in the opening of the vein, and place something dissolved in water over it.
Place something made of turpentine (tyriaca alfaroch) or sage (sagzenea), and place it gently on it until the blood comes out.
But if the vein is already tied off (apostemata), then let it be and do not cover it up until the tumor subsides.
If there is a need to let out blood by piercing again and no excuse for it, then either lance the same spot or pierce another vein on the other arm.
The ligament of the arm is lanced where Fusca and Basilica are located, and they cannot be found because they are composed of them.
And the quality of lancing (phlebotomy) is that an unhealthy person should immerse his hand into hot water until it turns red, and the vein appears clearly.
Then it should be tied with a cord of moderate tightness on top of it.
Then the lance should be pierced across slightly, not widthwise or lengthwise; and the opening should be wide, and your lancing should be at a joint of the hand.
Much more is the course of blood in hot water during winter.
And this vein's phlebotomy is safer than all the others, since it is not a pulsating vein and there is no nerve under it.
However, phlebotomy of the little finger on the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that you should tie the thumb with a ligature or your hand after you insert it into hot water, until the vein is inflamed and shown very clearly.
Then, make an incision across it (the inflamed vein).
And if you cut it entirely, it will not harm him in any way.
Keep it (the instrument) so that you do not lose your hand with the phlebotomy.
For under it (the incision) there are exposed nerves of the fingers.
Then dip your hand again in hot water and let the blood flow out in it.
For if you do not repeat it (the procedure) in hot water, the blood coagulates in the vein's opening and prevents its flow.
Therefore, when you extract the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt on the vein to prevent it from clotting quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary that you do this with every constricted branch (of veins).
However, the benefit of this phlebotomy from the left hand is that it is beneficial for spleen diseases; and do the same in its phlebotomy as you did in the second one equally.
The benefit of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases, menstrual retention, kidney weaknesses, and old sores of hips and legs, and similar diseases.
The quality of phlebotomy is such that the unwell person should immerse his foot in warm water; and he should make friction over it until the veins swell; and tie above the joint of the foot with a ligature.
The vein location is at the heel, appearing towards the thumb; and it branches out from there into many veins on the face of the foot.
So, phlebotomy should be performed in a larger vein branch or at the heel in its accumulation; because it is better and safer.
If phlebotomy is performed on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves which are under it on the surface of the foot.
Place your phlebotomy instrument across [the vein], as if you want to cut it; and the phlebotomist should be named Nesil.
If the exit of blood is forbidden, then immerse his foot in warm water; and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
If the phlebotomist misses a vein during the first attempt, then he should move the phlebotomy upwards a little; because it is safer and you need not fear harm from it, as long as you are careful around the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
The location of the Sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel from the forest side.
The aid for this phlebotomy is for pain in the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
The quality of this phlebotomy is that the unwell person should enter the bath and hurry; and tie his leg from the side of the ankle up to the heel with a thin, long bandage, without it being apparent except for that reason.
When it appears, then perform the venesection according to whatever skill is possible for you, either by transverse or longitudinal manner: and it is better, or as if you cut it with an incision, or sever it with a section.
Its position is safer, and it is very much hidden in many people.
If you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the senses: then perform venesection on one of its branches, and that which appears on the back of the foot and turned towards the auricle: and avoid the nerves, and let the quantity of blood flow as much as you wish.
Then dissolve the constriction, and place skin over the venesection site, and tighten the area.
It heals quickly.
On Ventosection, and the quality of its use.
Chapter XCVIII.
They are made from horns, and from copper, and from glass.
And Venosection is done in two ways.
With scratching and bloodletting; and the other is venosection without scratching. And this Venosection which is without scratching, is done in two ways.
Or it is with fire.
Or it is without fire.
And the venosections that are administered with scratching and bloodletting are fourteen in number on the body.
One is Ventosection of Alnocrates, and it is the last of the head; Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; ventosections of Alhagdahim, and they are two plates of the neck from both sides simultaneously; ventosections of the brain, and it is under the mandible on the lower jaw; ventosections of two spoon-like areas; ventosection of Alachosos over the end of the tail; ventosections of two faucets, and they are in the middle of two arms; ventosections of two legs; ventosections of two ankles.
And Ventosatio does not draw blood from you from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore its virtue does not fall out of them, as is the case with that accident from phlebotomy.
It is not necessary to administer ventosatio, whether with fire or without it, in any disease that occurs due to congestion, until the whole body has been evacuated.
If necessity requires ventosation due to disease or custom, we administer it at the beginning, at the end, and in the middle of any month, and at any time whatsoever.
Because there are some people who, when their blood multiplies, until it requires the extraction of it by ventosation, find in their head a heaviness and swelling.
And among them are those who find congestion and redness in their face, head, and neck.
And among them are those who find itching in their face, forehead, and darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And among them is one who scratches the place of his ventosation. And among them are those whose laughter is increased.
And among them are those who find the taste of blood in their mouth: or their tongue is pushed out, and the blood is spat out.
And among them are those whose sleep is increased.
And among them are those who see in their sleep blood and redness, and the dead, and wounds, and similar things. When we see something from these, especially if it is during the middle of the third month: then we order ventosation to be done, after two or three hours have passed since that day. The advantage of ventosation for the neck is that it relieves heaviness in the head, and what is discharged goes to the eyes.
