After I have completed the book for you, sons, which is the last in the knowledge of medicine with its supplement, and having reached the end in it, through expositions of it, and its declarations, it seemed to me to complete it for you with this Treatise, which is a part of operation, that is, surgery, with hand.
Since operation with hand is laid low in our region, and at our time entirely deprived of it; perhaps until the knowledge of it has perished and its trace has vanished, and only small descriptions remain in ancient books which have been changed by hands, and error and hesitation occurred, so that the intentions have been closed and the will was dispersed; It seemed to me that I should revive it with this Treatise according to the way of expositions, declarations, and abbreviation, and also that I come with the forms of iron tools of Cautery and the rest of the instruments of work, with the addition of declarations and the need for it.
The reason why a good craftsman of this art with his hand is not found in this time is that the art of medicine is long and its author must be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galen described, until he knows the remedies for the limbs and their shapes, and their conjunction and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, their number, and their exits, and the vessels of pulsation, quiet ones, and their locations.
And for this reason, Hippocrates said that much is the name with its name, but little is the work, and especially in the art of hand.
We have indeed said about it at the beginning of this book.
Because he who is not knowing what we have said about anatomy, is not purged from already falling into error, in which men are slain: as I have seen many of those who are formed by this science, and boast themselves about it without knowledge, and without experience.
Because I have seen a foolish physician follow an aposteme (boil) on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in her neck: wherefore the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead in his hands.
And I have seen another physician presume to extract a stone from an old man, which had grown, and the stone was large. Therefore he came to him, and extracted it with a piece of bladder. Wherefore the man died on the third day.
And indeed I had already been summoned to extract it; and I saw from the size of the stone, and the condition of the patient, that he would die.
And I have seen another physician receiving a fee from some Duke of our land because of medicine; and a black eunuch was with him, who had a fracture near the heel of his leg: and the physician in his ignorance, bound up the fracture on a wound with awls and strong needles, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he cured him according to his own devices. Afterwards he sent him away for some days and commanded him not to loosen the bandage; and it stood thus until there was an abscess on his leg, and his foot, and it reached its destruction.
I was then summoned to him; and I hastened to loosen the bandage; and there came peace, and he was delivered from his pains.
Nevertheless corruption had already been confirmed in the member; and I could not arrest it.
Apply [the ointment] so that the corruption may stop spreading in the member until it perishes.
And I saw another physician who pierced a malignant apostema; and it became ulcerated for days, until the wickedness of it was manifested with its lord.
Because when the cancer is pure due to black bile, then it should not be approached with iron at all unless it is in a member that can endure it, so that the whole of it may be cut off.
And because of that which is said in O Filii, it is necessary for you to know that the operation is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation associated with safety; and the operation where danger is present in many arrangements.
And I have already aroused myself in every place of this book, wherever there comes an operation where there is fear and dread.
Therefore it is necessary for you to be cautious of that and to separate it: so that the foolish may not find a way to speak about it and shameful things.
Take therefore the measurement with caution and protection, and your sick ones with ease and firmness, and make use of a better way leading by the grace of God to salvation and praiseworthy succession: and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal; and separate yourselves from what makes you fear, so that hesitation in faith and comfort may not enter upon you.
For it is more becoming for your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your ranks.
Galen indeed said so in some of his warnings. Do not treat an evil disease; lest you be called a bad physician.
Now, however, I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters. ¶
First Chapter.
On Cautery with fire, and Cautery with sharp medicine, is treated, and ordered from head to foot, and forms of the instruments, and tools for Cautery: and all that is necessary in the procedure.
De Arte Circumcisionis, sive Preputiorum Sectionis.
On the Art of Circumcision, or Preputial Section.
Chapter third.
On restoration, displacement, and treatment of twisting and similar cases: a chapter arranged from head to foot and forms of instruments.
Before I remind you of the operation with it, it is necessary to say the quality of its remedies and its harms, and in what composition it should be displayed.
I say therefore, that the discourse on the quality of the remedy of the cautery, and its harm, is a long, subtle, knowledge, and secret hidden matter.
Also there was a multitude of wise men who spoke about it and disagreed on it; and for me enough is said from their discourses, fearing prolongation.
I say therefore, that the cautery applies universally to all compositions, which are with matter and without matter; except for two compositions, which are a hot composition without matter and a dry composition without matter.
In a hot and dry composition with matter, they disagreed. Some said that the cautery is beneficial in it. And others said the opposite, that is, that the cautery is not suitable in the disease which is of heat and dryness; because the nature of fire is heat; and it is inconvenient to heal from a hot and dry disease with heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite said that the cautery is beneficial in every hot and dry disease which occurs in the bodies of humans; because when you compare the body of a man and its humidity to the composition of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
And I myself say by his speech: because I have often seen that proven to me.
However, it is not necessary for that to come up, unless the one who has been proven and experienced in the exercise of the final chapter on cautery, and knows the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of diseases in themselves, and their causes and accidents, and the space of time of those diseases.
From the remaining compositions there is no fear for you: and particularly in diseases that are cold and moist. For they all agree among themselves on these [matters]: and they do not disagree on the use of cautery with them.
And know, my sons, that from the secret of healing by cautery with fire, and its goodness over the cautery with medicine burning, it is because fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member which is being cauterized: and it does not harm another member joined to it, unless by slight damage.
But the action of burning medicine reaches to that which extends from the members: and perhaps it causes difficulty in healing disease in the member, and perhaps it kills.
Fire, however, on account of its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not do that unless it is excessive.
But now it has become clear to us by means of experiment, because of the length of service and diligence with the art, and because of its firmness in matters of truth: and for that reason I excuse myself from the length of discourse.
And if it were not forbidden to this book of mine, I would bring to you the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies, by which it expels diseases through philosophical demonstration, which would become clear to your minds.
And know, my sons, that they themselves differ in time when it is appropriate to make a cautery, and they put the better time in truth.
And I say that a cautery is appropriate at any time: because damage occurring due to time is submerged in the benefit, which is attracted by the cautery. And particularly if a cautery is for pains from necessary pains, strong, sharp ones which cannot tolerate delay: because it is feared that what happens will be greater evil than slight damage due to time.
And let it not enter your minds, my sons, that which is not believed except by the vulgar and foolish physicians, namely that there is no return for the sickness which is cured by cauterization, and they put forth this consequence, but things are not as they think: therefore because cauterization is not, except in place of medicine, which alters complexion, and removes humidities which are the causes, why pains occur.
Cauterization is unnecessary over medicine on account of the swiftness of its health, and the power of its operation, and the vehemence of its dominion: and it is possible that sickness may return at some hour according to the complexion of the sick, and the location of the sickness, and the power of the sickness: and what is prepared in the body from accumulation of superfluities in it, and what reaches it in acquisition from food, and similar things from causes, unless sickness occurs, in which cauterization is administered.
A subtle sickness in a member of small superfluities and humidities, as cauterization of a tooth, due to pain, and similar things, it is possible that that pain will not return in him. But this happens in few cases.
However, the speech of the vulgar is true again, that cauterization is the last medicine, it is a correct speech, not in what they intend by it: because they believe that there is no cure which gives with medicine, nor with anything after the falling away of cauterization.
But things are contrary to theirs, and their intention, that cauterization is the last medicine, is not, except that when we administer modes of cure in any sickness, and they do not give those medicines: then we administer caution at the end, and it gives: then it comes about that cauterization is the last medicine, not according to the intention which the vulgar and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that a cautionery with gold is better than one with iron; and they did not say this, if not for the equality of gold, and the loftiness of its substance; and they said that it does not cause pus at the site of the cautionery. That is not entirely true; for I have proven that it does not do so in certain bodies without others.
And a cautionery with it is good, and better than one with iron, as they said. However, when you make the cautionery with fire from gold, it is not apparent to you when lit according to the amount that you wish, due to the redness of gold; and when it reaches the same, and if you add more heat to it, it liquefies in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls into trouble from this; and because of that, we use cautionery with iron more quickly and closely in our operations, for its accuracy.
And I myself have organized this chapter according to the cautery, following the chapters; and I have arranged it from top to bottom, so that those seeking it may find what they want from it.
Chapter II.
Here the cauterization is applied for the dominion of humidity and coldness upon the brain: these two are the causes of soda, and the flow of abundance of fluids from the head to the parts of eyes and ears, and abundance of sleep, and pain in teeth, and pain in throat: and universally all sickness, which occurs due to coldness, such as paralysis, sodae (an ailment), epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The method of cauterization is that you instruct the patient: to evacuate in the first instance with dissolved medicine purifying the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, and his age, and his custom.
Then instruct him (the patient) to make heat on his head with a hot stone. Then make him sit between your hands in square form, so that he now places his hands upon his chest.
Then place the palm of your hand on top of his nose root between his eyes. Wherever therefore your middle finger comes to be, mark that place with an unburned (area).
Then heat the cautery iron with oil: this is its shape.
Then put it on the marked place without burning, while gradually pressing your hand down and you turn it (the cautery). Then lift your hand quickly, and look at the spot.
If you see that a piece of bone of the skull or vegetable matter has been uncovered, then lift your hand. And if not, keep putting your hand with the iron or with another until it becomes cold; until you see the bones that I have told you about.
Then take something from salt, and dissolve it in water, and immerse the cotton in it, and place it on the spot; and leave it for three days.
Then place on top of him a woolen cloth soaked in butter, and let it remain on the spot until the burn is destroyed by fire. Then treat that with four-ingredient ointment until it heals.
It has been said that the longer an open wound remains, the more it discharges pus; therefore, it is better and more helpful.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone; and hold the cautery until something of the bone's thickness is burned.
Then grind down the bone after it has been burned, then treat it.
Others say that when the cautery is applied to the end, it should make an impression on the bone for as long as the bone falls out, so that it becomes like a pierced hole: or an instrument that women put in place with a small amount of alphabet solution: and they think that vapors from the head are exhaled through this place; and the open wound is left for a long time.
Then it is treated until it hardens.
But these two types of cautery do not seem to me at all effective except in some people according to the way of fear.
And let it be released from there, it is better for his health with me.
For the head is weakened by the continuous solution of its own; as we have testified in other members; and especially when the head is naturally weak and frail; and the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use it: so work with it for safety.
Chapter III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the head and it persists in an unwell person, and they use honey, vinegar, cupping glasses, oil, and plasters. And particularly if the head has already been burnt with a cautery once as we have mentioned, and none of those things help him, then consider it. If the head of an unwell person is strong by nature and not weak, and it finds a very intense cold, then burn it with another cautery slightly. Then burn the entire horn of his own head with a cautery, so that the skin is not penetrated and the amount of bone exposed, as we have mentioned. Burn the entire head with one cautery at the occiput of his own head, at a place called the "was", and it is a place where the bladder is placed; and squeeze your mother's milk into this, and do not expose the bone. For the sick person finds a very intense pain there due to that, and different from the pain of all the other cauterizations of the head.
And I say that this cautery should be in its place, and it must be a cautery with which the horns of the head are burnt, and the occiput more subtly with the cautery with which the middle of the head is burned.
Chapter 4.
When pain occurs in part of the head and it swells or spreads to the eye, and the head is treated with cleansing medicines and the rest of the treatment, as I have said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve altogether, then cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterization with a burning medicine or with iron.
The cautery with burning medicine is, that you receive one tooth of garlic, peel it and cut off its ends from both sides. Then cut the painful location at the time with a broad leech, until there is a place under the skin where the tooth can be captured.
Insert it into the same under the skin until it is hidden; then bind it over it with a decent bandage and leave it for fifteen hours, then dissolve it, and remove the garlic, and leave the wound for two or three days; afterwards place a hot iron submerged in butter on it until a pus is formed; then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do that with certain burning medicines which I wrote about in the twelfth treatise on poisons.
However, cauterizing it with iron is as follows. The form of the burning iron is as follows.
It is called a Clavilus, because the shape of its head resembles that of a nail, in which there is some sharpness, and in the middle of it there is a small protuberance.
Then place it on the location and hold your hand; and you rotate the iron slowly with speed; and let the quantity that is burned be of the thickness of the skin, just like half of it. And lift your hand so that an artery, which is below, is not burned and there is a blood flow.
Then immerse the iron in brine water, and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; then immerse the iron in butter; afterwards care for it with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemicania (hemiplegia) with the second part of the Cautery cutlery. caution against cutting an artery during this hemicrania (not the ancient one specifically)
On the method of cauterization in the ancient hemicrania.
When treating hemicrania as previously mentioned in treatment and as stated in the division of ailments, and treatment is not effective; and you observe from the disease that what was said about cauterization with the first cautery or cauterization with fire does not suffice for him, then it is necessary to use an iron cautery, until it becomes white after marking the place of pain with a line, whose length is half the digit, or approximately so; and place your hand instead, and press it tightly until you cut the artery, and reach the bone.
But it is necessary that you be careful to avoid the continuous jaw movement during chewing, so as not to burn the side or the nerve that moves it, in order to prevent a spasm.
And let there be caution and care regarding the flow of blood from the cut artery. Indeed, fear arises in its incision, especially for those who do not know what is being done and are not attentive or experienced; and above all, they abandon the procedure first.
And I shall come with a reminder about the management of bleeding from the cut artery according to its own method and in its proper place within this book.
If you observe from the disease that this iron cautery does not suffice for him, and if you see a weak body tolerating the cautery in the middle of the head as we have said, then treat the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery as we have said in the chapter on artery extraction with a cautery having two blades. Cauterization is indeed better this way and more suitable.
On the method of cauterizing in ear pain.
When there is pain in the ear due to coldness, and it is treated with solutions, and the rest of the treatment as we said in division, and the pain does not subside, then cauterization with fire: this is what is called Punctum, whose form is as follows.
Then, after burning the punctum around the entire ear as it is rolled, or around both sides if pain is present on both sides. And extend the cautery from the root of the ear slightly after marking the spots with wax; let the amount of cauterization be ten punctae for the entire ear, and approximately so.
Then, care for the areas until they heal.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Torture.
Chapter VII.
Treatment with cauterization for tortures only pertains to those types that arise from phlegm, as we discussed in the division of diseases.
And avoid cauterization for the type that arises from exhaustion and muscle spasm.
If the treatment of this type of torture with herbs, purges and gargles does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the sick person with three cauteries: one at the base of the ear, and the second a little below its time, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
Place your cautery on the weaker side (of the body). Since softening does not occur unless in the healthy part.
And the shape of cauterization is to cauterize oneself with the cautery along the extreme tip of the upper edge of the ear lobe, slightly below the skull's horn; and in another place at the time, whose length should be similar to that of a thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of half the thickness of the skin is burnt.
And this is the form of the cautery and it belongs to the species of a knife, whose shape was given earlier; but it should not be too fine, as you can see; and it is necessary that the knife has a little excess coarseness in it.
Then treat the locations with what was previously mentioned until healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for apoplexy (ancient).
If the apoplexy is ancient and the treatment with what was said does not help, and the sick person does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on all of his skull's horn, and with a cautery in the middle of his head, as was said, and with a cautery at the back of his head according to what was previously mentioned; and the method of cauterization should be as previously described.
Also cauterized on the face of the stomach with a Cautery; and it is more extreme.
Then it is cured with what preceded.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in drink there be first of all large amounts of hysso and brain-purifying pills.
Then shave the head of the sick person entirely, and place upon his occiput an ointment from synapse as described in the treatise on ointments; and apply it frequently.
For this is the method of cautery; and do this in accordance with the same order as I stated there.
If therefore he is cured by it, that is good. If not: then make three cauteries in the back part of his head, which extend from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye; and place between each cautery a thickness equal to a finger.
Then care for the cautery, with what preceded.
If you wish an additional measure, and the sick person can endure it; then make a cautery in the middle. If you wish an additional measure: then cauterize him on both horns.
Then care for him until he is cured; let the cautery be anointed in the manner as stated before.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter X.
It is necessary that you proceed with the mundification of the head with hyson, and with what I said.
Then scrape the head of the sick person: afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over the entire horn of the head, and with a cautery over the back of it, and three over the spine of the neck.
If, however, you need softening of the body with more of these [substances], and the person is weak and the illness is strong: then cauterize it with four cauteries over the spine of the back, and the last one with a cautery, until it burns through most of its skin, and loosen your hand. Then take care of him until he is well: and in this way cauterize with oil.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
A epileptic is not cauterized unless his epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary that you clean the brain of him first with hyssop, and also with the remedy that we have said in the division when the sick person is severe or tolerant to medication.
If it is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer gargarisma, and cleaning mouthwash for the brain, before that many days with good food purification.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize him with one cautery on the middle of the skull as previously described; and another cautery on the back of his head, and over all the horn of his skull with cautery. If the sick person is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with cauteries as previously mentioned in the presence of paralysis, and soften the body on the spine of the neck, and the spine of the back; and let the cautery be oiled according to the previous method.
If the sick person is a child, then place the subtle cautery in this manner:
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of declivities leading to melancholy and the body of the sick person is damp, then give him a drink that cleans his brain as previously mentioned in the division; then shave the head of the sick person, and make a properly centred bandage of linen like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the skull; and the sick person sitting squarely should be held from all sides.
Then present the liniment. And it is more fitting from ancient goat butter. And heat it over a gentle fire with measured heating that the finger can bear when introduced into it. Then evacuate it from the middle of its head in a circle, and let it cool down.
Do this to the sick person once a week with good care otherwise, until it is cured.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small punctures in it, provided that you hold the hand with a cautery; it should be fragrant.
For this type of cauterization moistens the brain with its nature.
Then place it on top of a cotton cloth soaked in goat butter or chicken fat.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for falling water on the eye.
Chapter 13.
When you are informed of the start of water in the eye through the signs that I mentioned in the division, then begin and rinse the sick one, with it to clean his head.
And keep him away from all moistnesses, and make him sit in a bath for several days in fasting.
Then order him to shave his head, and brand him in the middle of his head. Then brand him on both temples with two brands, if there is an obstruction of water flow in both eyes at once: or from one side, if there is an obstruction of water in one eye: and cut with the cauterization all veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the brands be long in the width of the temples: and avoid bleeding.
If you see something from him (the patient), then cut it off immediately with any medicine that is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them off, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes he (the patient) should be branded on the neck, under two bones, with two brands brought to their extremities.
Chapter on ancient methods of branding in tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and constant: and they are over veins, and arteries that are manifest on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is from excesses of cold, phlegmatic fluids: then brand with a cauterization as I described in the obstruction of water flow, branding in the middle of the head, and with two brands on both temples, and with two brands on the neck under two bones. And if it is necessary to add something, then brand him carefully on all sides of the eye with a small brand at the edge of the eyebrow.
Method of cauterizing in the stench of the nose.
When you treat it, as we said in division, and the medication does not help: then rush, and for three nights give to drink infirmocochia: then shave its head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with the cautery oiliver. Then cauterize it with two cauteries and a claw-shaped cautery on top of the eyebrows slightly below the hairline.
And be careful not to cut the artery.
And this is the form of the claw-shaped cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for swelling of the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is swollen due to illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery using this crescent-shaped cautery.
If you wish, cauterize it above both eyebrows with two cauteries in all places; let them extend from the temples and have a length equal to that of the eyebrows; do not place your hand with the cautery at the very edge but rather according to the amount that is being cauterized, the third eyelash.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for eyelashes growing into the eye causing pain.
The cautery is in it according to two modes: either a cautery with fire; or a cautery with a burning medicine.
In the cautery with fire, order the patient to shave before it, if he is among those who shave, until they are extended and matched. If they prick him at its root: then bind his eyes with a plaster, so that they do not move until it grows out.
When they grow out and are matched, then place the head of the patient in your lap: afterwards mark on the eyelids of his eyes with wax, marking that it is in the shape of a myrtle leaf; and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a wetted dish on sheep's wool or on flaxseed mucilage over the eye.
Then heat the cautery, whose shape is this.
Then burn the cautery gradually on multiple places until the surface of the skin, which is like a myrtle leaf shape, appears entirely.
And the mark of your health is that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting and the hairs growing up at the prick of the eye.
Lift up your hand then: and let it go for three days.
Then place a dish with butter on it until the eschar is removed. Afterward care for him with an ointment until he is healed.
If any hair returns after an hour and the eyelid softens: then repeat the cautery on that place as you did at first.
If there are hairs below it: then burn it until the hair grows out to its natural place and matches so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
It is to be ordered for the sick one that he lets grow and trims his hair until they extend and match. Make from cloth of linen a shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take some known soap and undyed chalk from one or the other pound weight, about that much; then grind them together well with good grinding, and make it quickly, so as not to cool it. Then from this compound spread it on the cloth that you have made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it upon the eyelid of one eye or both. And place under the eye a cup filled with yolk of egg, and let the head of the sick person be in your lap.
And place your index finger upon the medicine and press it slightly. And you move it as often as the sick person feels a bite of the medicine; because its bite is like fire.
While it thus continues to bite as the sick person feels, then release the medicine and move it with your finger. When the bite ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
Then observe if the eyelid rises as it rises under contraction with fire or incision, this is good; and if not, then repeat over the same place from the medicine where the medicine does not press, and does not darken, until your operation is equal and the eye contracts.
Then place it upon the cup with butter, until the skin of the burn is removed. Then treat him with an ointment like diaphine or another one, until he is cured.
And it is necessary for you at the operation that you keep the last guard, lest something from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes softened after days and something fights from hairs within the eye, then repeat the medicine on that place which has become softened from the eyelid, as you did first. Then treat it until it is healed.
And this is the form of myrtle leaf.
And know that human eyes vary in size and shape. Therefore according to this your consideration should be: and the path of rightness for him who is devoted to this art should not be hidden.
[Chapter Title] On the method of cauterization in lacrimal fistula.
When you treat the fistula, if your treatment does not improve as we have said in the divisions of diseases, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Command the sick man to place his head in your lap, and have one of his attendants hold his head thus, so that it is not moved or shaken with his head.
Then place the cotton soaked in alcohol or psyllium mucilage over his eye: then take the hot iron cautery, whose form is this.
It should be concave, like the shape of a goose feather quill from one end, with which the cautery is made: and if you wish it to penetrate to the other end, and if you wish it to be extended upwards in this way.
However, this concave form is better for your work.
Then squeeze the fistula if it is open and extract the pus from it, and excise it: and if it is not open, then open it and extract its pus.
Then place the hot cautery on it.
And hold your hand near the cautery for a short time close to the eye, near the nose, so that your hand does not wander or the sick person is disturbed: and place the cautery on the fat of the eye and break it.
If therefore you reach at the beginning of your cautery until the bone, it will be well. And if not: then repeat the cautery once, or twice if necessary; and leave it for three days.
Then place a piece of wool with butter, and care for it with an ointment made from dry resins, until it heals.
If it exceeds forty days and does not heal: then apply a sharp corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed; and shave it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for a fistula, which some of the first ones said. Direct yourself to the place of the fistula, and cut it; then put a fine camel's-hair probe into the fissure, that is, a fine probe, whose shape this is. Pour into it a quantity of lead melted as a drachma, and hold your hand with good retention on the probe, and let it not move at all, so that the melted lead does not run or reach the eye.
It is necessary that you place a warm woolen cloth over the weak eye or in water.
For lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it with marvelous healing.
If the fistula heals as we said by cautery and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to open the nose passage and redirect the fistula to the nasal passages, according to what comes in its proper place.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in lips' cracks.
Multiple splits occur in the Lip, which are called Pilae, and particularly in the lips of boys.
When you take care of these splits, as I said earlier for the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then use a small cautery, shaped like this.
And let its hollow be shaped according to the subtlety of a knife.
Then place it (the cautery) quickly into those splits until the cautery reaches the depth of the splits.
Then care for it with pitch until it heals.
Method of Cauterizing a Mouth Split.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or at the roots of teeth: then pus forms and bursts; later it becomes old and the pus runs and it becomes a split; then care for it and treatment does not help in this case, then one must use fire cauterization according to the size that can fit into the split. Then insert the fire into the hole of the split and hold your hand until the iron becomes hot to its depth and end; do this once or twice.
Then care for it after that, as I said earlier about treatment, until it is cured.
If the pus separates and heals, it will be good. And if it does not, then it is necessary to expose the place, and remove the corrupt bone according to what comes in its head.
Method of Cauterizing in Softened Gums and Teeth.
When the gum becomes soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and care for it with medicine but it does not help; then put the head of the sick person on your chest.
Then place the cautery, whose shape will come later, on the tooth; and introduce in it the heated cauterium hastily; and hold your hand for a while, until the weak feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And move your hand (away); then repeat the cautery several times, as you wish.
Then let the weak fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour; and spit it out.
For the tooth moved strengthens (itself), and the gums, softened, are tightened, and moisture is dried out.
[Title: Method of Cauterizing Tooth Pain]
When the tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is coldness in itself, or worms, and the treatment with medicines does not help; then the cautery should be used on it according to two methods: either with butter [and charcoal] or with fire.
The cautery with butter is such that you receive freshly churned butter, and boil it in an iron cauldron or a copper one. Then take a linen cloth and fold it over the tip of the wound. Then immerse it in melted butter and place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it becomes cold; then repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth; then put iron heated red-hot over it until the heat of the fire reaches to the hollow of the tooth.
However, cauterization with fire is to be done using a pipe made of brass or iron. And let there be some swelling in the body so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the weak bone.
Then take a hot firebrand of the shape that will come; and place it on that tooth and hold your hand until the firebrand becomes cold.
Repeat this often for the pain to be removed, either on the same day or another day.
And when applying the impression of the cautery, the weak bone should be filled with good butter and held for an hour; then spit it out.
And this is the shape of the firebrand.
Use any end of the cautery as possible; and this is the form of the pipe.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing bladder stones.
When Worms are with phlegm, and from cold moistures, and not obedient to digestion by medicines, and desire digestion quickly: then, to the concave Cautery, whose shape is this.
Having two open ends so that the smoke leaves the cautery from one end: and place it heated upon the ulcer once, and again, if needed, until it reaches the depth of the ulcer.
If the ulcer is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the ulcer.
Then leave it for three days, and place upon it a cup filled with butter, until what the fire burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment, until the form of the cannula heals.
[Paragraph about the method of cauterization in throat swelling and constriction of breathing.]
When moistures press upon the windpipe, and especially when it is with coldness of complexion: then a sick person must be evacuated first with loose medicines.
Then cauterize it at the root of the throat in a hollow place depressed: and beware not to come with the cautery to the throat, nor on the skin, unless something of its substance.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the end of the last rib of that side: and let the cautery be a nail in accordance with the method which was previously mentioned.
Then care for it with what has been previously mentioned, until it is healed.
[Paragraph about the method of cauterization in diseases of the lungs and cough.]
When cough and disease of the lungs are from cold moistures, and a sick person does not have a fever, nor consumption, and the disease is old: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the clavicle at hollow, easy, vacant places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two breasts: and let the cautery be in the shape of a tube as described before.
And if your cauterization is by pricking with a cautery named Punctum, whose shape was described before in the piercing of ear pain; let these punctures be thirty or more.
Then care for it as was described before, until it heals.
And let the cautery have three branches; according to this shape. Therefore, when you use a cautery in its place instead of three cauteries.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head of the arm is dislocated due to assistance and it does not recover within an hour after its displacement, until this becomes a habit for it, then it should be dislocated slightly, as described previously, then you must reduce the dislocation first. Then the sick person lies on his back on his own back or on the healthy side. Then scrape the skin that is inside Titillico towards the upper part with your left hand fingers; and if it is dislocated towards the internal parts.
Then take a cautery with two holes. Its shape is as follows.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the shape of the cauterization will be as described with four cauteries.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a cautery having three holes, therefore the shape of the cauterization becomes that of six cauteries; and there are holes according to the fineness of the attempt.
And this is the shape of the cautery with three holes.
And sometimes one more is added to this method, therefore there are eight cauteries.
Then place a hot iron (cautery) over squeezed leeks with salt. Then make the sick person quiet and still so that a limb is not moved at any time until it is healed.
If the dislocation is towards the upper part (shoulder), which rarely happens, then cauterize it with a hook-shaped iron or several needles puncturing.
For joining strengthens and removes moisture, and the sick person is healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and much moisture appear in the stomach until it is removed from its composition, and catarrhs multiply towards it, and persistent methods of treatment do not help; then the sick person should lie on his back, extend his legs, and stretch out his arms. Then cauterize with three irons: one hook-shaped iron of the size of a finger under the concavity of the chest and another hook-shaped iron, and two smaller irons below the sides of the single iron, until the figure of the cautery is triangular. And stretch it apart so that they do not join together when pus appears.
The depth of the cautery should be equal to two thirds the thickness of the skin.
The figure of the cautery should be in this shape without any additions; and if you wish to cauterize with a large iron in the center of the stomach in this shape, then let the iron that forms this cautery be one circular in shape according to this form.
The stomach is cauterized by pressing it with the cautery and making marks on it according to the desired size with encaustic; then cauterize it with the iron of that point; then care for it with the treatment that preceded until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing an earlobe with cold cautery.
When there is pain in the shoulder from cold and dampness, or from a thick wind that has not been expelled by its natural discharge, and the sick person cannot recover with what was said earlier: then the sick person should lie on his neck and mark three places on his earlobe with hot cautery according to this shape, and the same amount below the hips, where a man's elbow reaches: and let the space between each cautery be as wide as a finger's width: and let the cautery be as long as the body straight: and do not press your hand tightly with the cautery.
And let the amount that is burned be according to the thickness of the skin, half its width not added: and let the sick person stand on his feet.
If he is not standing, then he should be lying down, who has already stretched out his legs and raised his arms.
This is the shape of the cautery.
And it is possible for you to use these cauteries with a small cautery when skill and wisdom are with you in the art.
Be careful that you do not burn the entire thickness of the skin in cauterization, for the body is burned in its entirety, and it reaches the intestines: because the skin there is thin, know this.
On the method of cauterizing abscesses in the shoulder.
When it comes out and you want to know if the abscess is in the shoulder muscle or its sheath: then if it is in the shoulder muscle, pain and heaviness without sharpness appear: and if it is in the shoulder sheath, with pain there is strong sharpness: and you see that the treatment of this has exhausted the doctors.
The sick person should lie with his head on his chest. Then the place of the boil must be shaped like a caustic (with) encaustic: then heat the cautery that resembles a rod. And this is its shape. And cauterize (it) with one cautery until the whole skin is burned and reaches the subcutaneous tissue, until all pus comes out: then care for it by treating it with ointments until it heals.
And one should not use this cauterizing method unless his devotion to the art of medicine has been prolonged; and whose hands these diseases often accompany along with experience: then he may dare to perform such an operation.
But it is better for me to let it be (as it is).
Chapter on the method of cauterization for pleurisy.
The ancients said, cautery with roots of Aristolochia for a cold pleurisy, according to this method. And it is, to receive from the dried roots of Aristolochia, one longer root, which can be found among them, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil, and set it alight in fire. Then cauterize with one hot iron on that which is between the union of the collar-bone and the neck, and with two small irons near the area under the chin.
And with two more irons on that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly towards the back, and with another iron in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach. And with three more irons from behind: one on that which is between the two scapulae; and with two more irons from the sides of the chest, with the lower iron being between the two scapulae.
And it is not necessary that you press your hand with the iron, rather let it be clearly smell of skin.
And certain ancients have said that there are men who use a cautery made of iron similar to a ray, and they burn it and insert it into that which is between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess, and pus comes out: as we said in the case of an abscess in the liver.
But in this perforation with the iron there is a fear, that either the sick person dies immediately, or a fistula occurs in the place, which has no healing.
Chapter 32: On the method of cauterizing the spleen.
When you treat the sickness of the spleen, as we said in the treatment of diseases, and your remedy does not work, then there is a need for cautery in it according to three methods, which are all correct.
One of them is to make three or four cauteries, extending along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the cauteries of the liver, whose previous figure it follows.
And let each cautery be of the thickness of a finger or more or less.
Let the mode of cauterizing, as I have said in the cauterization of the liver, be equally distributed.
And do not press your hand with the cautery; let it be weak and lying on its back on its own back.
Another method of cauterizing is: holding the cautery with two prongs, as we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; and scrape off the skin which is directly on the spleen where the arm of the weak person reaches; and let your scrapping be according to the width of the body so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert two prongs very hot until they penetrate the skin on the other side; then withdraw the cautery; thus there will be four cauteries.
And if you want to cauterize with a cautery having three prongs.
Then take care of the cautery after you release it to emit pus for many days; for this is more beneficial than the rest which have come before in treatment.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in hydropsy (edema).
A cautery does not fall in hydropsy unless it is specifically the head.
When you are treating hydropsy with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary to cauterize the person with four cauteries around the navel, and one over the stomach, and another over the liver, and another over the spleen, and two behind the back between the vertebrae, and one on the front of the chest, and another on the front of the stomach; and let the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then let the open cautery emit pus for a long time.
Do not evacuate the sick after cauterization with it: this must be done so that two intentions are applied to him, and healing will hasten towards it with God's help.
The form of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be clavilis, as has been described before; and the one used for cauterizing the back should be olive-shaped, as has been described before.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing feet and legs.
When amputated in hydropicus and filled with citrine water: it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot at the navicular bone, which is between the auricular and annular; then lift your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it; then lift your hand again, and do not touch it at all.
The citrine water will evaporate, and let the cautery be in this shape.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be of the form of a short knife at its end; let the cautery on the thigh be long, one below the knee, and the other lower than that, about halfway down the leg; and over the whole hip make two cauterizations; let the cautery remain open without treatment for a long time to allow some water to evaporate, then cure it as we have said.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in the resolution of the abdomen.
Chapter 35.
When the abdominal solution is due to cold and moisture, until it weakens the powers of retention and digestion in the stomach and intestines; when this is cured according to the methods of treatment but does not heal; if you see a sick person tolerating an excessive cautery, then cauterize the abdomen with a large cautery on the stomach, as has been described before for cauterizing the stomach with a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the umbilicus with a fine clavile cautery; and with a large cautery or two cauteries over the alcatin above the hips.
If you see excessive moisture and a weak patient enduring it, then cauterize him with the cautery on the forehead and on all of his buttocks; and perhaps add two small cauteries near the stomach.
The treatment is progressing successfully, whose benefit does not stray.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing Hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, either one and they are composed of thick, cold or corrupted fluids, and have been treated as described in the division, but the cure does not improve: then cauterize with three cauteries on the lower part of the buttocks slightly below the almoidate triangularly, and with a cautery under the navel about two fingers.
And if you consider that his stomach is chilled and his food is not digested, and you see his face pallor, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery as described earlier; and cauterize on his liver and another on his spleen along with a cautery in the loins: and leave the open cautery for some time; then care for him until he is cured.
Chapter 37.
When you remove althelul, then heat the cautery similar to a rod. Then introduce the heated cautery into the removed althelul; and hold your hand last until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows: do this once or twice.
If there are many althelul, then cauterize each one with a cautery as described earlier. Then care for them with the aid of the ointment that is suitable for them until they are cured.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery upon oil, it is more final in its benefit.
On the method of cauterizing an anal fistula.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the weak [patient] does not obey cutting and surgery as we have described earlier, and fears it, perhaps he can heal with cautery.
When a fistula occurs and becomes old, pus flows from it, and corrupt humors. Therefore, as is fitting, one should examine it with a thin probe. Then determine the depth of its size with a probe.
Then heat the cautery, which resembles a rod.\] Si autem humectatum sit, calefac, donec sint in eo If it is wet, heat the cautery, until [the cautery] is hot.\] Then insert yourself, heated, into the fistula and measure the depth up to which the claw has entered.
And repeat the cautery on it until all the corrupted bodies are burned, once, twice, or three times, according to your need.
And beware of burning the nerve or major vein if it is present; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or the intestine, then beware of these places altogether.
Do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place; and remember that it does not penetrate.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
If the place is sealed and the matter is cut away from it and remains for a long time, then you will know that it has healed completely.
If the matter is not cut away from it, then you will know that it is penetrating, or that there is rotten bone deep within it, or like that of those [other cases] whose memory will come back to its place.
On the method of cauterizing the kidney.
In what cases and for what reasons should a clyster be applied? When there is pain in the kidneys due to cold or because of thick effusion, and it decreases due to illness of the body, then you must cauterize it on a coal-bed over the kidneys, with a cautery over the entire kidney along with the cautery hook, whose preceding explanation has been mentioned earlier.
And perhaps we should cauterize it again at the second time on the same coal-bed. Why do three lines appear? Therefore, they will be more beneficial in the end.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
In what cases and for what reasons should a clyster be applied in the bladder? When there is weakness or softening of the bladder due to cold and moistness, and it does not retain urine, then you must cauterize it on the lower part of the back near the bladder, where the hair of the beard begins, and with a cautery from the right side of the back, and another from the left; and let the length of the cauterization be according to the size of the knuckle of the little finger; and you must cauterize it with a cautery on the lower part of the back or with two cauteries if necessary, as was previously explained with the cautery hook.
On the method of cauterizing the uterus.
In what cases and for what reasons should a clyster be applied to the uterus? When there is coldness and moisture in the womb, which prevents conception, and its menstruation is corrupted and their provocations are delayed, and pain occurs near their arrival, then you must cauterize it with three cauteries around the navel as was said for the bladder, and with a cautery below on the lower part of the back or with two cauteries; and use the cautery hook.
On the method of cauterizing an ankle in dislocation.
If the tibia is broken and the ankle joint has been dislocated, when mucosal fluids flow towards the plaster on the ankle, and this causes it to come out of its place: and a sign of this is that the leg extends beyond the other side when they are compared with each other: and the location of the dislocation is found to be empty in this case.
Therefore it is necessary to burn the weak spot on the plaster of the ankle with a similar cautery in the shape of a circle: after you mark with pitch around the plaster, as described above: and let the plaster fall into the center of the circle.
If this cautery is not present to you, then burn the same spot with three cauteries, using a deep cautery made of oil and with a depth according to the thickness of the entire skin.
Then take care of it until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in sciatica.
If sciatica is in the hip joint, and when a pain occurs on the ankle plaster and the cause of this is cold and fluids: and it is treated according to what has been said above for dislocation, but treatment does not help, and the condition worsens: then it is necessary to dissolve the weak spot with foul pills or artificial pills and similar ones. Then burn the same spot.
The method of cauterization is as follows, in two ways: either with a cautery with medicines accompanying it or with fire.
The cautery with fire is according to many methods.
One [of these] is to cauterize upon the bladder stone with three triangular cauteries according to this shape. Make a good or bad depth for them. Let the space be between each cautery of the size of a finger; and let the cautery be anointed with oil.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is made in the middle of the bladder stone itself. Why are there four cauteries?
If you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form preceded the cauterization of the bladder stone displacement, one: so that the circle contains the whole bladder stone.
Burn the thickness of the skin all over.
This is the method of cautery for sciatica, when pain is attached to the bladder itself, and does not extend to the hip and leg.
But if it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize the same on the hip with two cauteries at the place where the sick person indicates, where there is pain; and cauterize your knife four fingers deep into the outer part: let the cautery be a small knife.
Let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the sick person indicates that pain extends almost to the toes, then cauterize it there where he indicates with a pointed cautery, three, or four, or more if necessary.
If he indicates that pain is turned towards the leg below the knee, then cauterize it there with a small knife cautery.
Take care of yourself in all your cauteries, so as not to burn the nerve or large artery, and attract harm or contraction through it onto the sick person.
And I myself have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the shin, and burned too much in their cautery, and the leg swelled until it reached the foot, and was pierced through, and the entire foot rotted; then there follows loosening of the abdomen, and death after that.
If pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this method.
Some wise men have said in cauterization of anus (a rectum), this is the method of cauterizing it. Make a similar iron tool (cautery) whose diameter is half of a palm; and it should be at the orifice according to its size, equal to the circumference of a finger's knuckle, or slightly less; and within that iron tool, there should be another smaller iron tool.
And let the space between all iron tools be equal to the size of the knuckle of a thumb; and let these iron tools be open at two sides; and their height should be equal to or slightly more than a knuckle, or two knuckles; and make a handle from iron suitable for holding in these iron tools.
Then it is heated in fire until it glows and sparks; then it is placed on the pillow of the anus (a rectum), leaning weakly on a healthy side. Therefore, cauterize him with three rounded iron tools at once.
Then leave him for three days. Afterwards, apply ointment with butter; and let the open wound remain for many days. Then care for him with an ointment until he is healed.
Says Albucasis, with this shape of the cautery, we have used it insufficiently because of its terrifying appearance; and therefore, because few are found who dare to use it.
Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries for him who endures it, and it finds its place with him.
But cautery with drugs is to be made by you into two iron tools having a perforated strap, on which descends the key of its door from brass or iron, whose length is equal to the height of the walls; and in their height, there should be two knuckles, or as if they themselves.
And let the space be that which is between each quantity of finger thickness, and let it be open below and above; and let it contain one another, according to this form.
Then place it on the boxwood plank, with the weak side lying on the healthy side. And press your hand upon the boxwood plank hard. Then pour between two circles of warm water, which has been slightly heated by fire, and hold it for the length of an hour; let the weak one endure its bite and its burning, for he finds the bite as a fire does, until the biting stops.
Then clean your hand with the instrument, and wash the whole boxwood plank with warm water and sweet water; then let it be for three days.
And place butter on it until the soot of burning is removed; and let it be for some days, and pus will flow out from it. For it is the final remedy.
Then treat it with ointments, until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg, make a splint for him in which there is water, as you made for the boxwood plank equally.
And this is the method of hot water; and I have already written about it in the tract on the correction of medicines. Take lime and unburnt chalk of equal parts; grind each of them well, and put them into a new pot whose lower part is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters the radius; and place another earthenware pot below it; and pour over the lime and chalk from sweet water, so that both are submerged by one finger; then press them with your hand firmly; and let the pot be until the acid water descends in the lower part of the earthenware pot.
Then gather all that water and throw it over another limb; and let it coagulate until it returns.
For indeed, it will then be very strong and sharp, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and also in the cauterization of other members. Because it performs the operation of fire itself.
And among the medications are those with which the ulcers are cauterized, also like teesie, and honey of cardamom, and chalk with soap, so that both are mixed together. ¶
And Galen indeed reported the cure of a certain man from ancient times, who was cured of the pain of an ulcer and sciatic vein; and he highly praised its effect. And he said that no other treatment was necessary for him, and that he was cured from the disease in one day until he reported that perhaps he himself had gone into a bath, and came out of it already well.
It is to be taken from the green seitaragi; and if it is not found, dry one should be taken, fresh: and grind a great deal with some fat, and place it over the ulcer, where there is pain, or leg, or hip: and bind it, and leave for a quantity of three hours, or until the weak feel the sensation of burning. Then introduce it into the bath.
When his body becomes hot, introduce him onto a bed. For the pain disappears and is cured.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medications, unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides himself said that the droppings of goats, when it is cauterized with the sciatic vein, give to it; and it becomes a cautery in this way. Take flax, and immerse it in old oil, and place it on a deep place which is between the big toe of the foot and the ball of the foot, and is closer to the ball of the foot.
Then take dry goat's dung, and heat it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the flax, and let it burn out. Then repeat this process. Therefore do not stop doing this until sensation reaches the edge through it and the pain ceases.
And this method of cauterization is called cautery of the cow hoof.
Section on the Cauterization of Back Pain.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various causes such as accidents, blows, excessive evacuation and similar conditions caused by the injection of cold and wet matter; and cauterization does not apply except in this one case which is done through the injection of cold and wet matter.
Therefore after the evacuation of the sick with foul pills and similar substances, three lines should be drawn on the back where there is pain, according to the width of a palm leaf, after marking them with encaustic in each line five times or more according to the amount that comes from the tolerance of the sick person; and cauterization should be done with cautery points.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries along with the medial nail cautery, in this manner.
Section on the method of cauterization for hump-shaped growths.
This illness often occurs in small children.
The sign of this hump-shaped growth in children is that it occurs on the child when a stridor occurs during elevation and movement; and you will find at the end of the spine of the back and the nodes of it, which has already begun to protrude above the other spines.
When therefore you see that thing and wish to do it, then cauterize it with a cautionery which is in the shape of a circle.
And let the cautionery catch over all the mussel-shell equally; and if you wish to cauterize around the mussel-shell with a pointed cautionery, let there be two or three points, and they should be close to one another.
Then take care of the place until it heals as we have said.
And beware, do not administer the cautionery on a swelling which is caused by a muscle spasm.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for gout and for joint pains.
When the joint pains are caused by cold moistness that spreads to any part of the body, then when they occur in the feet, it is customary among doctors to call it gout properly.
When the treatment for cold-caused gout has been used without relief of pain, then the cautionery removes them.
And it is that you should cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the foot with many cautioneries; and let the cautionery be Olivary.
And if you need to make points on the sole of the foot, then do it with a pointed cautionery. If the pain ascends to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it over all the knee with three or four cautioneries from all sides, with the same clavicular cautionery.
If you need more of this cautionery, then cauterize it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautionery, rather let it be about the thickness of the skin.
If the pain ascends to the knees and back, then administer what was said in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then make punctures around the joints of the fingers, as two lines are rolled up.
If pain persists in the fingers, then make punctures over every nodule and on the back of the hand.
If the pain rises after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both from all sides.
And do not evacuate a sick person through good regimen and administration of medicine. For if the diet is good, and phlegm is evacuated, it will be cured with this cautery by the help of God.
Chapter on the mode of cauterizing in ruptures.
When rupture occurs in the groins and the intestine or zirbu (a term for a diseased testicle) descends towards the testis, and it begins to be near: then it is necessary that you order the sick man to abstain from food on his own day. And he should use laxatives so that stool passes from his bowels.
Then let him sit on your hands upon his back: and command him to hold his breath until it comes out, or the hernia appears, or the intestine.
Then reduce him with your fingers, and make a mark with hot iron under the hernia on his neck, with the mark whose end is similar to half of a circle above the body.
Then heat the cautery of this shape until it turns white and throw sparks. Then reduce the hernia or the intestine to its hollow. Then let the assistant place his hand on the spot to prevent the intestine from coming out: and you have already opened between the legs of the sick person, and placed a stone under him, and another servant is serving over his thighs, and another over his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery upon the mark, with your hand holding the cautery straight. And hold him until you reach the bone with it: or do it again with another blow, if you have not reached the bone with it in the first instance.
And be careful to observe the exit of the intestine during your cautery, lest you burn him and bring harm upon him or great evil.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, the operation is not effective.
And it must be that the cautery of children should be subtle, according to their measure.
Then care for him with ointments until he is well again.
And let the sick person lie on his back for forty days until the wound is healed.
And it must be that you place his food in length according to the time of his treatment, so that it softens his stomach; so that no hernia may come out during attempts and evacuations.
Then when he wishes to rise after forty days, then administer a belt made properly, and let him hold it for another forty days.
And let it (the wound) be diminished by work, and filled with food and drink, and with strong voices.
When this regimen is used, the cure is complete healing.
And I shall say the cure for ruptures with incision in its own chapter.
If ruptures occur in the rest of the abdomen and they are starting and do not want to heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and that which is cauterized should be like the third part of it from that time on. Then take care of it as I said: do not increase (the incision).
And some have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape.
After it is signed with wax, and a line is placed that goes across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery claw.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for pain due to injury or blow.
Chapter LVIII.
If pain occurs in certain members due to injury or blow, and the pain persists for a long time and does not help with medication, then it should be cauterized with a puncture cautery.
And the puncture cautery should be of the size and part of the member, its weakness, its strength, its location of twisting, and the pain from it.
If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good. If not: then repeat the cautery over it.
Because it is customary for these pains to change from one member to another that is nearby. Therefore, it is necessary that you follow them with a cautery until the sick one is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in leprosy.
Leprosy is sometimes helped by a great cautioning. And particularly the type of leprosy that occurs due to putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: when considering burning it itself.
If leprosy is beginning and you have treated it with what was said in the division, but it does not subside nor stay: fear for the weak one, lest corruption spread over his entire complexion; then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head known, and second lower toward the forehead at the end of hairline, and two above the horns, and one behind on the back of the neck.
And finally put your hand with the cautery a little bit, until it makes an impression on the bone smaller, and the cortexes come off from it; so that the expiration of gross vapors from it is relieved, and cauterize also with the cautery on the spleen according to what preceded.
If leprosy has already spread over the weak one and is apparent: then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries which were said in the head, and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on the cheeks, and two cauteries on the hips of the neck, and six on the hips of the back, and one large one on alhahosos near the tail and one above it, in the almeidat; and two over the ankles: namely over the whole ankle with one, and two over knees, and two over shoulders, and two over elbows, and two over the tendons of the chest; and cauterize on all the joints of his fingers of his hands and feet, and on all the heels of his feet, and on the soles of his hands.
Be careful to spare the nerves that are on top of the last heel bone, so as not to burn them.
And sometimes it is burned with a cautery upon the cheek bone, and upon another upon the forehead, and upon another upon the nose.
Know that the more you add to the cautery, the greater is the help and the better it is.
Know that an ill person does not find pain in the cautery, as a healthy person does: for this reason, because his body is already numb.
It must be that the cauteries are of suitable size and shape according to the limbs and joints: in accordance with which they were preceded by types of iron tools.
Then treat the burn with flour of herbs and honey, and the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter on Cauterization in Fainting.
When some part faints and is treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the numbed part with cauteries, according to the size or smallness of the member.
And let your cautery penetrate only a little into the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes it is burned for some fainting that happens to the hand and foot, at the joints of the back near the exit of nerves that move that member, and the fainting disappears.
But do not presume to apply it there unless he who is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the exits of nerves moving the body knows.
Chapter LI.
When the ulcer becomes old and nothing of medicine helps in it: then cauterize over it with a deep cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the white disappears and its color changes.
Then take care of it with the flour of herbs, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and blood of a dove, and blood of a crane: each should be one part: mix all these together, and apply on cloth, and let it adhere to the place until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in Cancer.
When Cancer is beginning, and you want to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it, as is rotated.
But the wise have said, that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
To me, however, it does not seem so: because I fear that it may burn, and I have already seen that many times.
And it is correct, that it should be cauterized around it with a circle, as we said, or with many cauteries.
On the method of cauterizing in Adubelati.
When someone has Adubelati, and it slows down in maturation, either because of an excess causing it or because of age and weakness, or when there are few blood vessels remaining, or because time is needed and you want to hurry the maturation of Adubelati: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by pricking. Then let it rest. For itself will hasten when it has matured.
If you want to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery, whose form is this: (Here follows a description of the shape of the cautery)
Place it in the middle of Adubelati; let it penetrate the skin; and let the cautery be weakened from that which follows, so that the course of the pus may be relieved.
Then care for it until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in a cancerous case.
Chapter LIV.
A cancer is not anything but corruption walking in a member and consuming it, like fire consumes dry wood.
If you see a cancer in a place that can bear the cautery with fire, then use much cauterization, small and large nails according to what suits the place where the cancer is.
Then cauterize it from every part until you have eradicated the entire corruption and there remains nothing of it beneath.
Then leave it for three days and place over the cauterized areas sulphur pulverized with oil until all scabs and all corruption are eradicated.
Then care for it with unguents that generate flesh.
If you see that after three days flesh is born by healthy generation in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places.
A cancer is sometimes treated with an acute medication. It arises in the place of the cautery.
However, cautery with fire is more swift in its help; and I have already said that the cauterization of it with an acute medication is in division (surgery); so take it whenever you need it there.
On the method of cauterizing in nails and verrucas (warts).
Chapter V.
This illness often occurs in the lower parts of the feet; it is a swelling, filled with matter, which injures the foot.
The cautery is indeed in them according to two modes: the cautery with fire, and the cautery with hot water.
As for the one with fire, it should be shaped like a hollowed-out raven's feather; made of iron according to its size, which contains a nail from all sides; and it should have fine edges.
Then place the heated one on the nail. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the nail, until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail; and leave it for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply salve made of wild herbs crushed with salt; and leave the salve on it at night. It will be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the place with a fine ointment for the skin until it heals.
If they are not cured and keep recurring on the body surface, especially in hands and feet; then administer cautery with hot water. It is to be noted that you will take a cannula made of brass or iron or raven's feather; and place it on the nail or althea root. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the cannula; hold your hand and turn it with a slight pressure, so that the tip of the cannula is pressed against the root of the nail, and let the hot water find its way to the depth, to the root of the nail; and wait for an hour for the weak patient under the burning sensation of hot water.
Then release it, as the nail will be uprooted along with its roots.
Do this to them one after another until you have treated all who are affected by them on the body.
Then treat them after they are uprooted, with a fine ointment for the skin.
Method of Cauterizing in a Shaking Manner.
When the bones are broken and perforated:
The tremor ceases with cautery oiling, and hastens the health's recovery from cold disease.
On the method of cauterization, Albatheer.
Chapter LVII.
Sometimes, Albathir expels foul things from the body, that is, pustules which are caused by corrupted matters.
Therefore, it is necessary first, when they appear, to cauterize on every pustule head with a subtle cautery together with myrtle wood, whose tip is set alight with fire. Or with the root of long aristolochia. Or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized, at the beginning of their expulsion, according to this method: and they do not increase: and the surplus is broken, making them, and it heals from them.
However, it must be done afterwards with phlebotomy.
On the method of cauterizing in bleeding from an artery at a wound.
Often it happens that blood flows from an artery which is cut near a wound, which occurs externally, or at the incision of a boil, or of cautery on a limb, and similar things: and it is difficult to separate him.
When this happens to someone, then hurry with your hand to the artery's orifice, and place your forefinger on it: and press him strongly, until the blood is held under your finger, and nothing escapes from it.=*/ When such a thing happens to someone, then quickly go with your hand to the orifice of the artery, and place your index finger upon it; and press it very hard, until the blood is held under your finger, and nothing comes out of it.
Then place a small oil-filled cautery on fire, and many large ones with numerous ones: and blow on them until they are very hot.=*/ Place a small oil-filled cautery on fire, and many large ones with numerous ones; and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one of them (the heated irons), either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the broken artery is, and place the cautery on that vein; afterwards remove your finger quickly: and hold the cautery until the blood is severed.
If it is expelled along with withdrawing the finger from the artery's opening and extinguishing the cautery, then take another cautery quickly, from those which are prepared in the fire.
Therefore, do not stop doing that with one after another until the blood is severed.
And beware, lest you burn the nerve that is there, and other evil happens to the already weakened person.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to sever it; particularly since the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or by extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is drawn out, the ends contract and the blood is severed. Or it will be tied with a strong thread. Or medicine from the property for severing blood is placed upon it and it is tightened with a decent ligature press.
But he who performs the severance with a ligament and a tightening with fabric or with substances that burn and similar, does not fully help him unless rarely.
If that happens to someone and he is not present with the doctor or medicine, then begin by placing the index finger over the opening of the vein as we have said, and constrict it very tightly, until the blood is obstructed from above the wound and on the artery. And the finger is not to be removed from above it with cold water of intense cold until the blood clots and thickens and is severed.
And meanwhile, consider in him what requires cautery or medicine.
On incision, perforation, and phlebotomy in wounds and similar cases.
As we have said in the first chapter, every disease for which burning with fire and medicine is suitable, as well as its occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cautery.
And there I set out chapters from head to foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same way: to alleviate the one seeking the thing sought.
And before I begin that, you must know, my sons, what is found in this chapter from the terror of that which was in the first chapter about cautery.
And therefore it is necessary for there to be greater caution because, in the operation that is in this chapter, evacuation often falls out with blood, with which life stands during opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of an exit wound, or treatment of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of which tremor, fear, and death occur in many.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you, for at times people of this art fall into these conditions with the weaknesses of men. For there is one who becomes angry with his illness and is light as far as death is concerned: because of the vehemence that comes from his weakness and the length of his wickedness. And when illness is due to fear, it signifies death.
And there is one who gives you false hope and deceives you with it, hoping for health, but the illness of this one is deadly.
Therefore, it is not appropriate that you agree to him who comes to you from those whose manner is such. Let your caution be more intense than your greed and avarice. And do not presume about anything from that, unless after certain knowledge, which is verified among you as to the matter that has reached a praiseworthy outcome.
And use in the treatment of all your sick, prediction and direction concerning that to which it is appropriately healthful.
For there is assistance for you in the matter of acquiring reputation and glory, memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O son, His understanding, and not deprive you of guidance and inspiration, for that is in His hand.
And I myself have arranged this Chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what was in the chapter on Cautery, from neck to feet: so that your request is made clear to you regarding what you desire and need from it.
Chapter on Treatment of Water that is Collected in the Heads of Children.
Chapter I.
Know that this affliction often occurs in boys during childbirth: either when the midwife tightens the boy's head without ease.
And it sometimes occurs also for hidden reasons that are not known.
And I myself have not seen this affliction in others than in boys: and to every one of them whom I have seen, death has followed: for that reason, it seemed to me that I should refrain from the operation on it.
And I myself have seen a boy whose head was filled with water, and his head swelled up every day until he could not sit on himself due to the size of his head; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture, it may accumulate between the skin and the bone: or it may accumulate under the bone above the forehead.
And the operation on him, if there is moisture between the skin and the bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a single fracture in the middle of the head along its width: and the length of the crack should be like two knuckles, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the form of the trepan.
If then the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then place these two cracks according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the sign of this is that you see openings of the skull all around; and water comes out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not hide itself from you: then it is necessary to make three cracks in the middle of the head according to this method.
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. Then bind the cracks with cloths and wool. Then anoint it above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then cut (the) ligament, and care for the wound with sutures and ointments.
And do not release the head without equality. Feed the weak with dry food of little moisture, until (the) limb is strengthened and healed.
Another method of incision is to consider where the abscess appears large and the collection of water (for) irrigation.
Because sometimes it is more in the head or skull, or right, or left.
Therefore ascend with incision where the abscess and filling of water appear to you, and cut it as possible for you.
And observe, do not cut an artery, and let the flow of blood occur and the weak one dies from this flow with evacuation of moisture.
Chapter on incisions of the arteries that are after the ears.
Chapter II.
When catarrhs occur to someone's eyes or chest, and it does not improve with medical treatment, then the final cure is in this, incision of these two arteries.
Therefore when you wish to cut them (the arteries), let the sick one shave his own head. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then let the sick one tie his own neck with any cloth of his. Then consider, where the vein pulsates. And the places of both are places that are depressed after the ears, and they are rarely hidden, unless in some men.
Then mark both with hot iron, and cut each one with a thin knife from both sides, the incision reaching the bone, and let it be wide enough for the head.
And if you wish, introduce the thin knife under the artery and cut it from above with the incision.
The length of the incision should be like that of two fingers joined.
When a vein is cut, blood flows out by pulsating exudation, which leaps to the interior by frequent jumps.
If however an artery is not apparent to the sense, then one should measure the quantity of space with three fingers. Then mark [the place] with wax and cut up to the bone.
And that which must be let out from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps you will let out more or less from it. Do that [letting out of blood] according to the quantity which appears to you due to the strength of the patient and the filling of the artery.
Then, consider the wound. If there remains something on the bone from the flesh, then cut it, so that no warm abscess occurs; then stitch the wound with linen strips.
Then care for him with an ointment until he is healed.
Chapter on the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When an old hemicranium (migraine) or acute catarrh due to acidic humidities and warmth in the temples, or an old soad (scrofula), violent, and similar conditions occur in a man; and it is treated with modes of curative medicine, but it does not help; then we have experience in these afflictions in extracting arteries from the temples, or cauterizing them, as we have related.
The method of operation for extracting (them) is that the sick person shaves hairs which are on the temples, and stretches himself to the visible artery in the temple. It is indeed shown to you by its pulse and it is rarely hidden except in a few men or in case of violent coldness.
If it is hidden from you, then the sick person should tighten his head with any cloth of his and then scratch the place with a rough cloth. Or fumigate the place with hot water until it appears to you in a clear manifestation. Then take the spatula which I have prepared earlier. Then scrape off the skin with it easily until you reach the artery. Then plunge a hook into it and pull it out towards the top until you pull it out from the skin, and make it exit from the tunics that are beneath it on all sides.
If the artery is fine: then fold it with the tip of the hook. Then cut from it a portion according to the length its ends extend and contract, so as not to cause bleeding. Because if it is not cut and if it is not severed, blood will not rise up deeply.
Then evacuate six ounces of blood, up to the third.
If the artery is large: it is necessary to tie it in two places with thick thread made of silk or twine; or with gut-string, so that putrefaction does not approach it before the wound consolidates and there is bleeding.
Then cut off the redundancy, which is between two ligaments. Do this at that hour or another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with the cautery until it reaches the bone, using a sharp-pointed cautery: until its ends are cut off and it remains in place for that same operation.
And this work is better unless the patient has a fever or is of chilly constitution. Because the cautery is from those things that help to stop moisture (bleeding). Therefore, it is better as a remedy.
And after the extraction of arteries, the place should be filled with hot ashes; and fine pulverized charcoal should be placed on it.
And after the dissolution (of gangrene), it is to be scraped with dry medicines that cause new flesh to grow and with linen until it heals.
If during the operation there is bleeding from an artery, then hasten to cut it off with a cautery or to fill the place with wax; and press your hand until the bleeding stops. If none of those is present to you, then place your finger on it until the blood freezes. And apply a cold compress to the place with water of intense cold until the pain ceases and it is pressed according to what is necessary.
And of that which is easier and less difficult for the extraction of an artery, it is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points: let the point of the two points be similar to an almond (small round object). However, they are much less sharp than two needles. Because if they are as sharp as two needles, there will be frost for both; and they will not cut through the flesh quickly. When there is a certain amount of thickness [in the diseased part], it is necessary to apply heat from fire and quickly cut off the flesh; for this operation is better than any other, and easier, and more straightforward.
And this is the shape of a cautery.
And the space that is between two knives should be a thickness of one finger's breadth, after you have marked two places with hot iron; and lay both heated ones down until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places: so that what lies between the extremities may be removed. For this cautery does not heal [the wound] completely.
Chapter IV.
Chapter on the treatment of chronic, sharp tears from the eyes.
When tears are persistent and flow from the veins on the outside of the skull: and no medication for treatment is applied to them with medicines, and the face of the sick person becomes red, and sensation is felt in the forehead as if it were ants crawling: and the eyes are exhausted, wet, so that the hairs of them are already corroded by the corrosion: and the eyelids have been heated due to the sharpness of the tears: then, in their treatment, ancient physicians resorted to this operation, which they called the Cure with a Sword.
And it is to instruct the sick person to shave the hairs that are on their forehead. Then make three incisions on the forehead of equal length, and let the length of each incision be approximately two fingers, and one incision be equal in length to the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second slightly beyond the movement of the arms, and the third on the opposite side: and be careful not to cut through the arteries that are on both sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the entire length of the incision be three fingers' width apart: and prepare for yourself a piece of sponge or dry cloth with which to absorb blood.
Then insert two sharp points, following their form. From the first incision to the second, scrape off the skin that is between the two incisions, along with the forehead above it. Then do the same from the middle incision to the second incision. Then remove the sharp points, and insert another instrument called a sharp knife, with one edge, not sharp on both sides, into the first incision. And this is its form.
And place the pointed side of it facing the skin attached with flesh, and the blunt side facing the bone; then push it until it reaches the middle fissure; and cut along with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes, except that the incision should be continued up to where it appears on the skin.
Then make it in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And when an equal quantity of blood flows out from it, squeeze the places from the clotted blood's stumps.
Then put linen cloth from an old cooking pot into every fissure, and place over them wetted wool soaked in oil, or vinegar. And see to it that no warm abscess occurs.
And on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then take care of it with a basilicon ointment and the other things that heal wounds until it heals.
Chapter V.
Chapter on the treatment of sharp tears and catarrhs of the eyes from internal parts of the head.
When someone gets sharp, severe, continuous catarrhs, and you see their eyes are stretched, small, and already weakened in appearance; and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out from them, and there is acute pain deep in the head, causing discomfort and sneezing; then take from these symptoms, that those substances and catarrhs do not come unless from many veins.
A better treatment for them is this. And it is to command the sick person to shave his forehead. Then make one cut in the middle of the forehead, or slightly to one side for less width, and start with the cut from the left temple to the right temple; let the incision go as deep as the bone: extend your hand away from the moving temples until the bone is exposed: and absorb all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the cut between the two lips of the wound with tweezers or linen strips. Then bind it on top with thread: and soak the threads in wine and oil to prevent a hot abscess.
And when you loosen it and see that the abscess is about to subside: then break the bone, until new flesh begins to grow in it.
Then treat the patient with a drying regimen that promotes new flesh growth; as if you were taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of pitch; and prepare an ointment from them, and apply it to promote new flesh growth in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
Chapter on the treatment of wounds that fall into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four species: either a mineral stone, or something resembling a stone such as iron and glass: or it is from a plant, like peas and beans: or it is liquid, such as water, vinegar, and similar things: or it is some animal.
When a stone falls into the ear or anything similar that does not grow in the ear and is not added to it, expose the ear alone: if you see a stone then pour something from violated oil or sesame into the ear. Then administer the extraction of it and make him sneeze with snuff mixed with powdered charcoal, and obstruct the nostrils near the moment of sneezing, after you place around the ear fragments from cloths or wool, and stretch the ear upward.
Many times it escapes with this treatment.
If it does not escape, then administer the extraction of it with Guidon's method (that is, subtle Pizigarol), whose form is this.
If it escapes with Guidon's method, it is good.
And if it does not, then administer the extraction of it with a fine hook, several times repeated.
If it does not escape through that, then make a tube from brass and insert the end of the tube into the ear opening widely, and obstruct what is around the tube with beeswax softened with oil so that there is no way out except the tube: then draw it out with your strong attraction.
Many times it escapes with what we have said. If it does not escape by that method: then take some helkalimbated or water (that is, prepared gluten), a small amount, which birds are caught with: and place it at the end of the radius when you have properly placed a sieve on it: then insert it into the ear opening gently, after you have removed the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not come out with all that I have mentioned, then hasten to cut, before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
The method of lancing is as follows: first draw blood from the patient with a lancet; and remove according to the power of the lancet from his blood. Then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear towards above and make a small lancet-like incision at the base of the ear in its fatty tissue where it is depressed; let the lancet be of lunar shape until you reach the stone; then remove it along with it, as far as possible with your instruments.
Then make the lancet incision from your side quickly and take care of it until it heals.
If what falls into the ear is one grain or more which grow and swell; then administer its extraction.
But if it does not obey you to come out, then take a fine, thin probe shaped as follows.
And administer with it the excision of that species from the grains which fall into the ear and do not do this when you think that that grain is already moistened by the steam of the ear, until you place many fragments upon it; then remove it with tweezers, or with a fine probe, or with suction, as we have said; for its extraction is eased.
In water which enters the ear, the patient should use sneezing when he is forced to do so first; and already his ear has filled itself with some hot old liquid; and it lies on that ear where the water is. If therefore it comes out through this, it is good.
But if not: then take many small, soft stones of the length of a finger and heat them slightly with fire; and let the patient insert one from these into the ear's opening; and let him spit on his foot from that side, and strike with a stone upon the stone in the ear. Therefore, it should not cease to be done with stone and stone until all water comes out.
And now the water comes out in such a way that you take one from parchment or reed, and insert its end into the ear; and light the other end with fire until it is burned as much as possible. Then take another reed and do this many times until all water comes out; and draw it out with a tube as previously mentioned in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into it (if it is small in body, like a louse, and similar to it), care should be taken of it as previously mentioned in division.
But if it is of a large body, which appears to the senses: then administer its extraction with forceps and hooks; and its nature is easier for all who hold it in the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you care for it as we have previously said in division and in the treatment of distillations, and your care does not help: then you should look at the ear in sunlight. If therefore something appears there from worms, then draw it out with forceps or fine hooks.
If however nothing appears there, then take a tube with this shape, narrow below and wide above; and insert its fine end into the ear according to how much weak it can tolerate; then draw it out forcefully with that suction. Do this many times until all worms come out.
If however they do not obey you to leave, then bind them with the tube of poppy seeds as previously mentioned in the stone.
If they do not come out with what was said, then administer the distillations which the ancients have already experienced in the destruction of worms; and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your flow (be) with oil and medications into the ear using this tool, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or brass, narrower below, with a small hole at the bottom and a larger one on top.
Therefore, let the implement that is within the concavity of the tube be made of brass properly. And if you wish, take radium (a type of brass) and wind its end with a suitable coil; then pour oil, juice or whatever medicine you desire into the tube; let this be in the ear; then insert the radium with the coiled part on top and press it with your hand until the oil is forced into the concavity of the ear, and let the sick person feel it inside; and whatever is poured into the ear should already be slightly heated by fire; but take care that what distills into it is not too cold; for medicines cannot tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
[Section on the treatment of aural impaction]
When some infants are born from the wombs of their mothers without perforated ears.
And it happens to some people that impaction occurs in the ear due to a wound or flesh born there.
And this impaction sometimes occurs in the deep hole of the ear which is not visible to the eye; and sometimes it occurs near the outer hole of the ear which can be seen.
Therefore, that which happens in the deep part of the ear and is not within the reach of sight, is difficult to cure in many ways.
And in that which can be seen, it is necessary to place the ear of the sick person in the sun and examine it; then if you see the impaction appearing, open it with a thin spatula whose form is as follows, its end having a small notch, part of which is sharp; and the rest of the spatula should be of two flat sides so as not to harm the ear.
If therefore the excision is born from the flesh within the ear: then hold it with a fine hook, and cut it with great force, until all the flesh is removed.
If therefore the boil is deep within the ear: then take a fine and gentle probe, heat it slightly with fire; then insert it into the ear.
If you feel the boil with it, that it comes accompanied by weakness and loss of hearing, try to open it gently; and beware, lest you injure the nerves of the ear.
Then place linen within the ear according to the size of the hole you have made, having wrapped it in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain about the healing of the wound.
Or take linen, and immerse it in rose water, and grind upon it alum powder, and use it.
If you see the ear already discharging: then you must draw out the linen, and allow it to be with another linen that you wrap in a pot made with rose oil, until the abscess becomes warm; then care for it until it is healed.
If there is bleeding, however: then immerse sponge or cloths in cold water and place it on the ear; and use the rest of the treatment that removes the mentioned bleeding by means of distillations.
Chapter on Althaea's care for the eyelids.
Chapter VIII.
These are the Thehelil that occur in the eyelids when they are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold them with tweezers or with a hook, and cut them at their roots. Then place on top of the wound a piece of linen cloth that has been ground up.
If however blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lens-shaped cautery.
And to cauterize them is better after an incision. They often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots will burn away and they will not return.
Chapter on the care of swellings in the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter IX.
Often something happens in the eyelids that is similar to a swelling in its hardness and toughness, and it is called a Crandin because it is an accumulation of coarse moisture on the upper eyelid and the lower one.
Therefore, the operation is to determine if it is a Crandin that appears on the eyelid and moves to all parts, and its substance is soft.
Make an incision over it in width. Then remove it from all sides with ease until it comes out. Then hang it with a hook and cut it off.
If the removal of it is not prepared for you unless after you have made an incision into the eyelid a little, then it may harm someone weak with that.
If the incision is large: then stitch it up with sutures: and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For an ointment restores it and fills it in.
If a foreign body is directed towards the inner parts of the ear and turned against the intrinsic surface, then invert the eyelid and hang up the foreign body with a hook; besides which you will need incision, and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is stretched by incision, it does not harm anything.
Then clean the eye after the incision of the foreign body with salt water; and take care of the place where it was, until the affected part heals.
Chapter on the treatment of eyelids.
Chapter X.
The Axirnath is a growth that arises in the upper eyelid tissues; and it mostly happens to children; it burdens their eyes, and they get cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot see the light of the sun, because tears flow towards them, and therefore you can always see them lying on their faces, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are always wet under the eyebrows, which has already been covered by swelling; and the appearance of Axirnath protruding is visible to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of treatment for it is that the patient places his head in your lap.
Then take a clean cloth, and prepare a linen bandage on it, and make a circle from the linen around Axirnath to its entire size. Then place it on the bandage and press with your fingers all around it, so that Axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a spatula-like instrument and make shallow cracks parallel to its width, but do not make the crack larger than what is done in phlebotomy in depth.
It is necessary that you find the entire skin, until you reach Axirnath, for in many dispositions, Axirnath proceeds from the fracture according to the shape of a white plum's pit.
Draw it out with a cloth that you have moistened between your fingers to the outside: and you rotate your hand to the right and left, until it is dispersed; and be careful not to add anything in the fracture, so that you do not reach the spittle to the eye, and harm it.
If, however, Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fracture, you shall add a little in the fracture with ease, until Axirnath proceeds. Then draw it out as we said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the place, and bind it with small stones.
And among men there are those who grind salt and put it into the hollow of the fracture, so that it melts what remains from that moisture.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
If, however, a boil hot appears in the place, then take care of it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
Chapter on the modes of Ataxmir (eyes), that is, when the eyelid softens, so that it weeps as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow in the eyelids beyond the course of natural hairs and become old; then they harm the eye, and cause the occurrence of diseases such as constant weeping, softening of the eyelid, and whitish film, until it becomes the cause of the destruction of the eye.
And indeed the eyes are treated according to four modes (methods) of Ataxmir. Through cauterization with fire. With sharp medicine, according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. The ataxmir is cured by incision and suturing. With reeds, according to what I shall say.
You must place the head of the sick person on your lap. Then, turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is thus turned, that is good. And if not: insert the point into it, where there is a thread from below the eyelid, and make the point penetrate with the thread above, and let it be close to the hairs themselves, that is, close to the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a rod.
Then, find on the inside of the eyelid under the added hairs with a spatula slipping from the greater lacrimal gland to the lesser one.
Then draw out the thread and put a small feather under the eyelid from cooked wool or cloth; then mark on the eyelid with wax, as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it should be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid, because it is diversified among humans.
From those who require that an incision be made according to the size of the eyelid, in proportion to its softening.
Then with the spatula find on top of the two lines which you marked, and start from the greater lacrimal gland to the lesser one, and let there be a split near the natural hairs, as the width of a rod.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape it all. Then gather together with suture two lips, with a sharp needle and fine woolen thread: and clean the blood, and make adhere what excesses from the threads on the two eyebrows, with some adhesives if you wish to do so: and if not, do not care.
Then release the suture and threads for three or four days, afterwards take care of it.
If you wish, release the wound without suture and take care of it as it dries and contracts. For the eyelid is to be raised during sealing of the wound and its bandaging, but it will be better later.
This method of treatment was taught by the ancients Ataxmir.
However, there is worry about the sick person in it, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is also in Ataxmir, and it is that signs are made on the eyelid in the form of a myrtle leaf, as we have told.
Then raise the eyelid with three separated or joined combs according to the following form, then cut what exceeds with small scissors according to this form, with equal incisions.
If it is not possible for you to hold the comb and it does not fit equally, then take a needle with thread on it, and insert it into the middle of the figure: and insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and another thread near the smaller tear duct: and gather the threads between your fingers equally.
Then raise your hand evenly with an elevation, and lift the skin where it is marked by the incision, as we have told.
Then gather together two lips of the wound with suture: and take care of it until it heals.
If a boil or an ulcer occurs at your incision or your wound, swab it with linen and wax, and apply ointments that soothe such things.
And sometimes the eyelashes may also turn inwards.
Therefore, it is necessary to use the method mentioned above for this case, but stitching both parts should be more artificial. Chapter on the care of the bite of a mad dog.
And it is necessary to turn the eyelid and cut the wound that is on the inside, as I have explained. Then make two needles or thin pieces of wood whose length is the same as that of the eyelid and their width less than the width of the eyelash; and you have now cut into the ends of both, from both sides where you hold the thread.
Then bring each one together with fine material over the surplus of the eyelid of the eye and sew two needles tightly from both sides with a strong stitch and leave it for some days. For skin that is sutured will die, become darker, rot and fall off by itself.
If it does not heal quickly, then cut it with scissors. Then take care of it until it heals.
When it has healed, the eyelid is lifted and no hairs are plucked.
And this is the shape of two needles that you should make according to this pattern and size in length and width.
Chapter 12.
Chapter on removing hair from the eye with a needle.
The operation is to take a fine needle and insert a thin thread from silk into it gently. Then bring the ends together and knot them tightly with a fine knot; let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then, on the Alinxotati thread, make another slender one beneath it in short length, and knot its ends if you wish.
Then let the sick person put his head in your lap and the operation be near the sun for it to be visible: since it is a subtle or minute operation.
Then insert the needle along with Alinxotati into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you pull out the natural hair from above.
Then pull out the hair above Alinxotati and insert this hair into Alinxotati: if there is one or two or three, but not more than that.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out together with Alinxotati from the eyelid along with the natural hair.
If Alinxotati is pulled out and no hair comes out with it, pull Alinxotati towards the bottom while keeping the thread you made in it until Alinxotati comes out from the upper hole, and you see it through the eye: then pull Alinxotati and the thread; remove both and close the eye; leave the closed one for two or three days until hair grows back at its place and flesh covers it.
If the hair is short, then join a long hair from the natural hairs with it and lift them up together; or leave it alone until it grows longer, and then lift it up.
Chapter 13.
When this Xatrat happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Xatrat is either natural or accidental.
Therefore, the accidental Xatrat arises from a congealing of wounds, cuts, cauterizations and similar things.
The method of operation is for you to locate that consolidation, and to separate its lips, and to place in it a linen cloth within, and to tie it until it heals.
And it is not appropriate to use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict: for if you do that, Alxatratus becomes worse than it was: rather use in it things that soften, such as fenugreek; and embrocation with water, in which althea has been cooked, linseed seeds; and dyaquilon ointment, which has been made liquid with some oil; and wrap it with linen cloth, and treat it with it.
The treasure of your cure is that you strive with all your skill, so that it does not become consolidated again, in its original form first.
And indeed this operation that I have said is nothing but a correction of Alxatratus, so that the form of the place does not return to what it was entirely.
Chapter on the care of Alxatratus that is performed in the lower eyelid, and it is a swelling or contraction upward to the right and left.
Chapter XIII.
This Alxatratus that occurs below is what is truly called Alxatratus. It is natural and it is accidental.
And the accidental Alxatratus is made from a wound, or a split, or cautery, and similar things.
The method of operation in it is that you take a sharp probe with a double thread, and stain it in the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upwards with the probe and cut it with a broad spatula. If therefore the form of the eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take radish, and place it in the fissure, and turn it with it the eyelid; and make two fissures in the interior side of the eyelid, and let their ends be from two angles of the incision, until they converge and form an angle: until when they are gathered together, let the figure be this figure, and it is the Greek letter Lambda.
Then remove that flesh to the extent of its sharp lower part, from what follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts; or join it with a thread of wool.
Then care for them with that which I said, with softening medicines and linen, until they heal.
If Al-Zaturat occurs from the fissure or suture, or cautery: then it is necessary to make a flat incision below the eyelashes, according to what has preceded. Then separate between two lips with linen, as I said.
The summary of the treatment for Al-Zaturat, whether it is above or below, is that the operation should be carried out on it, according to the preparation of the Al-Zaturat's form.
For indeed it is of many varieties in its shape: and the skilled artisan prepares his skill with whatever means is possible for him, until he returns the figure to its natural form or close to it, and himself the sick person, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in many different positions.
Chapter XV.
Chapter on the adherence of the eyelid with conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid adheres to the whites of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, it is necessary that you introduce the extremity of the radius beneath the eyelid, and lift it up: or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which should not be with the sharpness of spatula incisions, but rather blunt slightly: so as not to disturb the weak during the operation, and remove the spatula, and injure the eye with its sharpness: and let your incision be as if you are scraping off that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the adhesion heals completely.
Pour salty water into the eye, while washing it: or distill onto it from seive made, with dissolved zinc mixed with water.
Then separate between eyelid and eye with a linen cloth: and place warm wool soaked in egg white over the eye: and for three days use zinc, and with ointments, until it heals.
[Chapter] On Incision of the Nail and Protrusion of Skin of Tear Ducts.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the nail is according to two modes. Or it is nerve-like: and it is like a horn, subtle. Or it is not nerve-like, similar to the hardness of frozen milk, which when touched with iron, or attempted to be taken with a hook, is cut off, and the hook does not stick to it.
And neither of these types start, unless from the greater tear duct, up to where it gradually penetrates, until it covers the vision, and prevents light, and movement of the eye.
And the method of operation in its incision is: that you place the head of the weak in your armpit. Then open the eyes of his, and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then gather the nail with a few-fold hook and stretch it upwards. Then take the awl and insert a hair from a horse, ox or sheep into it; let it be a thread and slightly double the tip of the awl and fix it in the middle of the nail; pierce with the awl and tie the nail with the thread and stretch it upwards. Scrape off the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were pulling it with the hair until the end of its root.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the lacrimal duct with a fine spatula or small forceps; and let the natural tissue of the lacrimal gland remain, so that no constant flow of tears results from the incision.
And sometimes the nail is extended with a hook alone; or with thread, as we have said. Then scrape it with a soft spatula, which has this shape:
Be careful not to touch the spatula on the horny layer and cause a break there, and pierce the pupil.
After the incision, throw into the eye something of ground salt or made from cinnabar and leave it until another day. Then care for the eye as necessary until it heals.
If the nail is not nerve-rich and you cannot insert the awl into it or the hook does not take hold there, then this type of nail is repeatedly treated with medicines until it heals as I have said in the division.
If you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the sick person and take a soft, fine, delicate spatula of low hardness in this shape: And scrape the nail from above with fineness. If you see that it becomes hard and crumbles and presses the nail with the scraper, then pour from your hour into the eye from cinnabar made from zinc or red cinnabar or ground salt; and close the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation until the entire thing is removed. If a warm abscess is not present in the eye, then leave it alone and take care of the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the operation on it with reason, until it heals.
A protrusion of flesh from the lacrimal duct, if it causes great harm to the eye, is suspended with a hook and cut out from there; do not make a deep cut so that the flow of tears is not interrupted.
Then let blood from the lacrimal sac or ruby-red wine, or use silver nitrate, until it heals.
Chapter on Alguardenic's Incision and the flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
There sometimes arises in the eyes of humans a red flesh composed or laid over, which covers the pupil, approaches it, or presses on the eyelids and possibly turns the eyelids outwards; it resembles a rosebud on a pillar.
And the operation in it is also to place the sick head in your armpit. Then open his eyes and gather all that flesh together with appropriate forceps; and hold it with a single pair of forceps or tweezers.
Then cut the flesh first, to finish everything with a knife (or lancet). And be careful not to cut the eye itself during the operation; and let your incision be where you are cutting, or with a lancet as we have mentioned in the chapter on toe amputation, or with small forceps, such as those used for probing an abscess, according to its form after this chapter.
When your incision is complete and all the alguardenic (pus) has been removed, then fill the eye with a solution of ground salt or distill red powder and similar medicines from corrosive substances; and place on top of the eye outside a piece of cotton with white fat of an egg, to protect it from hot inflammation.
If there remains some pus and you are dominated by hot blood and fear a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone, and treat the same with what calms an abscess.
Then repeat the operation over him until he is healed.
And likewise do with the flesh that occurs around the eye of this type.
However, it is necessary that any weak eye from natural or accidental causes be treated without iron, and you should not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that the limb can endure this treatment.
Chapter on draining an abscess from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Abscesses are red veins that surround the eye and prevent visual function; they weaken the eye with the passage of days.
It is necessary for you first to consider whether the eye where the Sebel (cataract) is present, is strong and there is no other illness except the cataract. Then collect the cataract from it.
And it is to command the weak (patient), that he puts his head in your lap.
Then hang those veins with one or two needles according to your judgement. And let the needle be fine of double-thread thickness, or there should be two needles graduated within one body according to this shape.
Then collect those veins with fine forceps and cautiously, remove the blood by the hour, until you see the veins removed from the eye and dissolved; and be careful not to harm the eye with the points of the forceps.
And let your procedure be at midday before the sun, and be very firm in your procedure; so that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have finished (the procedure), then distill into the eye, either green or red; so that with its own acidity it burns what remains of the cataract.
If it is not possible for you to collect it all in that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with what alleviates the pain of the eye; and leave it for some days until the pain subsides; and secure it with warm compresses; afterwards repeat over it according to the same method until it heals.
And this is the shape of the forceps.
Chapter on reducing Arissa (nasal polyps) to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
The physician named Arisate treats a Fistula, which he cares for with a cautery or with a sharp medicine burning, as his narrative precedes.
If it is not cured, then there is no skill in it; except that you should open above the abscess at its birth, and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus, until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is exposed, and you see corruption or blackness in it, then grind it with this tool, whose shape is as follows.
And it is called an Asperi capitis (Aspergillus capitis).
Make it from iron indo, and let its head be round like an azir (a type of abrasive stone), which is punctured with a file or with the subtle point of aliskilfer (another type of abrasive stone): and place it over the corrupted bone.
Then turn it with your fingers, and press your hand a little, until you know that the corruption is already ground down; and do this several times.
Then restore the place with most powerful healing balms.
If the place consolidates and flesh grows there, and a flow of pus is cut off; and it remains for 40 days without being renewed, without developing an abscess, and no accident happens in it; then you will know that it is cured.
If not, then there is no skill in it, except to reduce the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this shape.
And it is to expose the bone of the second bone (presumably a toe) with iron or with sharp medicine; and when the bone is exposed, then take the trephine according to this shape, its end should be iron, triangular: and the wood of it should be pyramid-shaped, extended to the end, as you see.
Then place it on the very same skin: and let it be near the tear-duct: and stretch out your hand slightly from the eye. Then turn your hand with the lancet until it penetrates the bone, and feel it weaken: through this you will know that air is escaping from it, when he holds his hand over his nose.
Therefore, then restore the place with medicines drying, as I have taught you.
When the flesh grows and hardens, then the matter which was flowing out goes back to the nose; therefore it is lighter over the sick place.
[Chapter Title: Reducing protrusion of the Eye.]
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes completely and there is no visual harm or reduction, then it is necessary to dissolve the weakened part. Then apply leeches [phlebotomes] to it. After that, place warm fumigations on the neck without scarification but with suction.
Then apply a poultice made from acacia, aloe, frankincense [olibanum], and colophony [sarcocollyra] on the eye. Then bind the eye above with a plaster containing many small beetles [pulvillas].
The method of the beetles is: take soft cloths many, and fold all the cloths over four; make many [of them]; then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye needs; then bind them tightly with a strong bandage.
And repeat the fumigations without scarification but with suction.
Then remove the fumigations and let the eye be bound day and night.
If the binding becomes soft again, then it is necessary to bind it tightly; then remove the binding after a day and night as we have said.
If therefore you see the eye already returned to its sheath, it is good: and if not, then repeat the ointment, leeches, tightening bandage, and fumigations until it heals.
Chapter on the Incision of the Sheath.
Chapter XXI.
When there is a rupture of the sheath of the eye, then it protrudes and comes out beyond the eyelids like a grain of sand, and it fouls up the human form due to this, and one wishes to cut it: at that time, an operation should be performed on it, as I have said; and it is to insert the needle into the root of the eye from the bottom to the top.
Then insert another needle with a double thread from the tear duct side, and make it penetrate; and release the first needle according to its position.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie a piece of it around the eye with the needle; and tighten it strongly.
Then remove the needle, and place wool soaked in oil over the eye on the white part: and leave it until the thread falls with the eye.
Then care for the eye with what strengthens it, until the wound heals.
And sometimes the eye is tightened from all sides with a circle made of cloth, until the eye protrudes greatly.
Then it is pierced with a fine cannula that reaches deep into the eye, and moistens the white part; and the eye sinks down, and enters immediately; then tighten it until it heals.
Chapter on the Treatment of Conjunctivitis.
Chapter XXII.
This malady called Alcomnati is nothing but pus gathered in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
The method of operation in this case is to make the patient sit on a prepared seat or straight chair.
Then take his head with both your hands and move it until you see the pus descend to the lower part of the eyes. Then make it stop and do not let it descend, and the vision shall be cleared; and let the patient see as he did before: and if it does not descend to the lower part, know that it is water.
If, however, there is no descent of pus as mentioned above, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a sharp probe and puncture it above the corneal membrane a little near the junction with the cornea in the corona (rim) until pus comes out.
When the pus comes out, then pour warm water mixed with honey into the eye, or warm water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey; afterwards treat it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
Treatment for water that descends into the eye or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have already said the type of water in division, and which is suitable for perforation in discussion and explaining; then take it according to its health.
Then you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the light, near the sun; and bind the healthy eye and compress it strongly; then with your right hand close the eyelid of the eye in which there is water, or with your left hand if the eye is on the right side.
Then take your right hand (if the eye is in the left), or your left hand (if the eye is in the right).
Then place the forceps called almagdah near the corona (cornea) by the thickness of a radius within the white part of the eye that appears as the lesser lachrymal; then push the almagdah with force, and you will turn your hand with it until it penetrates into the white part of the eye, and you will feel that the almagdah has already reached the empty space.
The measurement of the journey of the almagdah to depth should be the measurement of the space from the pupil up until the end of the blackness; and that is the cornea of the eye. You will see it (the almagdah) within the pupil vision of the eye, because of the clarity of the cornea membrane.
Then place the forceps called almagdah up to the place where there is water (in the anterior chamber). Then press it (the almagdah) downward with a slight push after another.
If the water then descends immediately, then the patient sees what is before him immediately, and the forceps in his eye (the almagdah).
Then wait for a little while. If the water descends, then remove it (the forceps) after it has come out of the almagdah.
When it is fixed and does not rise again: then remove the forceps with ease; and you turn your hand slowly.
Then dissolve something from salt in clear water (saline solution) and wash the eye inside with it. Then place a pad of wool soaked in rose oil or linen over the white part of the eye and tie it to the healthy eye.
We, as well as those who are in our time, place camphor powder over him with the white part of the eye.
If the forceps called almagdah does not obey you to enter the eye due to its hardness because it is a human eye that is very hard; then it is necessary for you to take spatulia called Alberid, whose shape is as follows:
Perforate [the abscess] only with the same [incision], and do not insert your finger into the hole: it is only to make a way to a subtle place.
Then insert the probe, as we have said.
Furthermore, for the completion of your work, prepare a well-made bed for the sick person, in which he may sleep on his back in a dark room; and let him be kept from all movement, and from coughing; and let food be given to him that soothes his nature; and let him not move his head to either side at all.
And let the binding be according to its placement until the third day.
Then loosen that [the bandage] in the dark room and test his sight; and make him see things. Then bind it again until the seventh day.
It is not necessary that he perform it at the hour of treatment, or immediately after the incision; on the contrary, it should be left to others, because water rises quickly through a heated opening.
If however an abscess becomes hot: then it is necessary to loosen the eye before the seventh day; and straighten that which soothes the abscess, until it is soothed; then without his sight, and place a device for regulating his vision over his face, for several days, while he remains in the dark room.
Then he should leave the house gradually and change into his clothes.
And know that a student is not excused from watching [the operation] on several occasions; then he will dare to perform [the operation].
And now one of those from Alayrach has arrived, who said that the phlebotomy in Alayrach has been perforated, through which water flows.
Therefore, I have not seen anyone in your land who has done that; nor have I read it in any of the ancient books. It is possible that it is new.
These are forms of species from Magda, to stand over her who does not know them.
Let them be made of brass; and let their ends have the same subtle triangular shape, and sharp ends.
Chapter XXIV.
Chapter on care of the newborn flesh in the nose.
Whenever newborn flesh of various kinds grows in the nose, some of which resembles a scorpion with many feet; and from this is the cancerous meat, stony, dark brown in color; and from this is that which is tender, not dark brown.
Therefore, regarding that tender flesh which is not fraudulent or cancerous, it is necessary for the weak person to sit opposite your hands on the ground; and open his nostrils, and thrust the hook into those fleshes; then pull them towards the outside, and cut what you have caught with a fine, sharp spatula from one side, until you know that all of the flesh has been removed.
If something remains of that from whose removal is not possible; then shave it with a subtle tool with ease until nothing remains of it. If blood dominates over you, or a hot abscess occurs; then apply to it what is necessary: or if it is from malignant abscesses, then run towards cauterizing him until the blood is separated, and all fleshes are removed.
Then pour vinegar, water or wine into the nose after the incision. If the nose opens and moisture comes out until it reaches the palate; then you will know that he is already healthy.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that within it is flesh born in the upper bones of the nose, which did not reach with the cutting instrument.
Then it is necessary that you insert a thread of flax with some thickness and knots in it; and place between each knot an amount equal to a finger or less; and bind the weak one, so that he sends out one end of the thread into the nose with a probe, or with whatever is possible for him after he has made it similar to a syringe; and draw out the odor, until it reaches the cavity, and exit onto the throat.
And indeed many times do the boys in school perform this like Atomus; and it is an easy matter for him who wants to.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end which exits on the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then as a servant, you tie up the flesh with the knots that are in the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with the knots of the thread.
Then extract the thread; and place linen inside the nose after bloodletting, which you have soaked in Egyptian ointment; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has eaten away all that remains of the flesh.
Then place a lead pipe at the end into the nose for some days until it heals.
If, however, it requires drying treatment, use that.
For the purge to be made with olive oil and other medicines poured into the nose, make it of silver or copper; that it be similar to a small lamp, open like a shell; and its channel likewise.
And if you wish to make a closed pipe, as with a reed.
And prepare the instrument for caputpurgery, let it be filled, exposed: to which belongs a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when you heat oil or what you wish from suction and flowing things in it.
Chapter XXV.
Many times a Thelul is born at the end of the nose, and it grows and increases with days until its appearance becomes disgusting.
And therefore, when it appears at the beginning, it is necessary to cut it off completely. Then place upon its place either a cautery, or a burning medicine that stays in its place.
If the cutting is delayed until it grows and becomes large, then consider whether it is made of stone, hard, dark in color, with few senses: then do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous ulcer.
For many times I have seen that one has cut an apoma and evil has happened to him who possessed it.
And if the apoma is soft, not dark in color, and you see that cutting can be possible throughout it, then evacuate the weakened part, and cut it without fear or worry: and care for the place with it which drains and contracts until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
Paragraph on the suture of the nose, lip, and ear.
Know that when discontinuity of a one of these cartilages occurs, little help is provided by the operation except in certain people.
Therefore, when something happens to anyone from it, consider whether it is a recent wound with blood flowing from it: and then apply two bandages to the wound with suture: then care for it until it heals.
If the continuity of the solution has already been separated and each part is healthy, then it is necessary to scrape off all parts appearing from the skin until it bleeds. Then gather together the two lips with sutures and bind them, and sprinkle draconian powder over the bleeding dragon's blood, and finely powdered olibanum: and place above the powders a piece of emplastrum diafinicon, and any other consolidated plaster: and leave it bound for two or three days. Then dissolve it, and change the medicine: and leave it until the threads separate on their own. Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
The method of stitching is to gather together the solution of continuity, or with needles, as we have described in the suturing of the abdomen: or gather together the solution with thread, as I have taught you.
Chapter XXVII.
Chapter on the Extraction of Lumps on the Lips.
Many people indeed have hard nodules similar to grains of grass appearing on the inner parts of their lips; some of them smaller, and some larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to turn the lip over, and make an incision over every node of it, and hang it with a hook, and cut it off from all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision with zega finely powdered, until the blood separates.
Then wash it with vinegar and treat the place where there is a stoppage until the wounds heal.
Chapter XXVIII.
Chapter on the Incision of Born Flesh on the Gums.
Often flesh grows on the gums which is called abuluss by the ancients.
Therefore, it is necessary to hang it with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut it off near its root, and allow the pus or blood to flow out.
Then place over the place [that is] crushed, or other astringent powders, drying ones.
If the flesh returns after treatment, for it often returns, then cut [it] again and cauterize it; for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter XXIX.
Chapter on Tooth Extraction with Iron.
When [teeth] collect on the surfaces of Teeth from within and without, and between rough gums, rotten, and sometimes turn yellow or greenish until corruption reaches the gum, and teeth become foul because of this.
Therefore, it is necessary that you make the sick person sit between your hands and put his head in your lap, and file the root and tooth where the gums appear to you, and grind it until there remains nothing of them; similarly for blackness, greenishness, yellowishness, and others, until they are cleaned.
If what is in them [teeth] is removed at the beginning of the filing, that is good; and if not, then repeat the filing on them on another day, the second, and the third, until finally the purpose is reached in what you wish.
And know that a tooth requires rasors of various shapes and figures; according to what is prepared for your operation, because the rasp used to file the tooth from below is another than the rasp used to file between teeth, according to other shapes.
And these shapes of rasps should be prepared by you, which you see.
Chapter XXX.
Chapter on Extracting Tooth Pain.
It is necessary to heal the Tooth from its pain with all skill, and proceed slowly in extracting it. For it is not that another substance can replace [the tooth] when it is extracted; because it is a lofty substance; until there is no excuse for extracting it, then if the sick person must extract it, it should be firmly held and assured by you that the painful tooth will be extracted.
Many times pain deceives the sick person and makes him think that it is in a tooth called Saha and removes it; then the pain does not subside until the diseased tooth is removed.
We have already seen this from the operation of phlebotomists.
When the tooth itself is certified as painful with you, then it is necessary that you incise around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is something of virtue, until the gums are loosened from all sides; then move it with your fingers, or with delicate forceps first of all gently, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps in the location on it and hold the head of the diseased tooth between your knees; what you have firmly grasped, so that it does not move; then pull out the tooth straight away, so as not to break it.
If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it beneath it from all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If the tooth is perforated or eroded, then it is necessary that you fill the hole with cloth; and tighten it with the end of a small radius so that it does not break during your compression with forceps on top of it.
And it is necessary that you make a careful incision around the gums from all sides.
And maintain your strength so that you do not break it and leave a piece of it to return over the diseased tooth with the greater pain that was first present.
And be careful not to do what ignorant phlebotomists do in haste and the overconfidence of their own removal, exceeding what we have mentioned.
Many times they cause great ailments to occur in people, whose difficulties it is more difficult for them to be broken and all roots remain, or some of them; or to pull it out with some bones of the jaw, as we have often witnessed this.
Then, it is to be softened after excision (of the tumor) with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If there is bleeding from the place (for it often happens), then rub something made of pomegranate peel and fill the place with it; and if you do not have this, cauterize it yourself without the pomegranate peel.
The handles of the delicate forceps, which move the tooth, should be long at the ends and short at the gripping part, thick so that they do not split when pressed against the tooth; they should resemble the handles of large forceps, until you are squeezing with them and they do not bite themselves or split; the ends of the handles should be sharp, made of steel or well-made iron, directed at an angle; and there should be teeth in their ends, some of which enter into some and tighten by a suitable constriction, strong.
And at times the ends are shaped like the beak of an eagle's mouth, which is called a ciconia, and they are strong in constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
Chapter on the Extraction of Teeth and Removal of Fractured Jaw Bones.
When some part remains in the extraction of a tooth that breaks off, then it should be placed on the spot with warm cow butter for one or two days until the place softens; then introduce into it the algasti or forceps whose ends are shaped like the beak of an eagle's mouth called ciconia. The form (of the forceps) is as follows:
The ends should be made in the shape of a file or like an aliskilfe.
If the tooth does not come out with these forceps, then you must cauterize on the root and strip the flesh completely and introduce an instrument called the small palanca whose form is as follows:
The end should be short and somewhat thick: and it should not be filled, so as not to break.
If the root comes out through that, it is good: and if not, it needs to be helped with these other instruments whose shapes are such.
The shape of the first triangle's end has a certain thickness.
The shape of the triangle's end is delicate.
And with other instruments and tools that have come before for the reason of teeth.
It is also helped with this instrument resembling a large hook, having the shape of a triangular twisted end, which has some thickness, so as not to break, and it should not be filled.
And know that there are many instruments for teeth: and similarly the remaining instruments are not counted, and the skilled craftsman, subtle in his art, finds for himself an instrument according to what the operation and the illness themselves signify.
Since there are illnesses for which the ancients did not make an instrument due to the diversity of their forms.
If the bone is broken from the jaw or from other bones of the face, or it rots: then examine it at its place with that which suits it among the instruments and pliers I mentioned for extraction of roots, and help it whose shape is this.
Let there be some thickness gradually, so that the bone can be pulled or held with it and does not run away and move, until the bone comes out: and restore the place with appropriate medications for that.
If there is minor rottenness in the bone, then scrape it from its rottenness, and treat it until it heals.
Head XXXII.
About locking of protruding teeth over others.
When teeth emerge not according to their natural course, the appearance becomes foul; and particularly when this happens in women and girls, namely in those who are in menstruation.
Therefore it is necessary that you consider. If a tooth is born after another tooth and does not settle or can be closed, nor can it be filed itself; then uproot it; and if it is attached with another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, of which this is the form.
It resembles a small beak, and is made of iron point, having an extremely sharp tip.
And let your cut be such that you cut it on many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to disturb another tooth.
If it is protruding exposed for filing; then file it with a rasp from iron, of which this is the form.
Let it be made of iron, and its handle small, with many sharp points like a rasp with which teeth are filed; with which you grind the tooth gradually on many days with ease, so as not to disturb another tooth, and let it fall; then smooth it gently, and finally sand it down with some rasps.
If it is a tooth that breaks off and injures the tongue; then it must be filed even more so until the roughness of the fracture is removed and it is made smooth; and it shall not injure the tongue nor corrupt speech.
Head XXXIII.
Chapter on the filing of teeth with gold threads.
When the anterior teeth are shaken and dislocated by blow or accident; and a weak person cannot hold down what he eats so that it does not fall out; and you have treated them with medicinal adhesives, but the treatment has not been effective; then they should be sewn with gold thread; because silver becomes corroded and putrefies after days; but gold never changes.
And let there be a thread of middle fineness and thickness according to its quantity that can pass between Teeth.
The form of the rete is such that you take a thread and pass it through the gaps between two healthy teeth; then you weave with both ends of the thread the movable teeth, whether one or more, until you reach with the needle to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving until you reach the part from which you started; and hold your hand with subtlety and wisdom until it is not removed completely; let your constriction be at the roots of the teeth so that it does not come out.
Then cut the excessive ends of the thread with scissors; and bind both together and turn them towards each other; and hide the bound ones between the healthy tooth and the movable tooth, so as not to hurt the tongue; then release it when it is sufficiently tight.
If it loosens or breaks, bind it with another thread, and it will remain thus for the entire time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of the rete of two healthy teeth, and two movable teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that a tooth or two return to their places after a loss, and remain as we have said, and this does not happen unless the skillful and experienced artisan does it.
And sometimes a tooth from the bones of a cow is shaped; and it is placed in the place where the tooth is guarded and tightened, as we said; and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XLIII.
When this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural, it is born with a man; or it happens accidentally, from a healed wound.
The operation on him is that you open the sick man's skull in your hollow, and elevate his tongue; then cut through the nerve-ligament across its width, until the tongue is released from its hold.
If there is something hard and knotted in him, and it is due to consolidation of the wound; then strike with a hook on it, and bore through it across its width until you cut the ligament, and the knot is released.
And beware, lest there be a cleft in deep flesh, and you cut an artery there, and there be a flow of blood.
Then it is scraped in the wound-track with rosewater, or with vinegar, or cold water.
Then place a flax cloth beneath the tongue, which the sick man holds all night; so that it does not consolidate again.
If however there is a flow of blood, then place over the place zege tritum (perhaps meant to be zege tribitum, meaning crushed or powdered zege). But if the blood holds you back, then cauterize the place with a lentiginous cautery, which is suitable for it; then care for him with the rest of the cure until he is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes there occurs an aposteme beneath the tongue resembling a small frog, hindering the tongue from its natural function; and perhaps it swells so much that it fills the bone.
The operation on him is that you open the sick man's jaw facing the sun, and examine the aposteme.
If you see it black or dark colored, hard and insensitive: then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it is hollowed out towards whiteness where there is moisture, then throw in the hook and cut into it with a fine chisel, and release it from all sides. If your blood is confined by it during your operation, then place on top of it a piece of zecha ground, until the blood is released; then return to your operation until you extract it along with its entirety.
Then wash it with vinegar and salt, and take care of it according to the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Chapter on the treatment of two tumors (amygdala).
Chapter 36:
Whenever there occur swellings in the throat resembling goiters (thyroid), namely glands that appear outside: and they are called the two amygdalae: when treated with what we have said regarding division, and they do not heal, then consider.
If it is a hard aposteme of dark color with few senses, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing blood flow, indeed let it be, until it matures. Then either pierce it (the swelling) or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color and round and the root is subtle: then it should be cut (incised).
And the operation on it is to consider before the operation if the aposteme has been quiet for a long time and has grown smaller by some diminution: then let the sick person sit facing the sun, and hold his head in your lap: and open his mouth, and have a servant take hold of his lower jaw with one hand, and press down on his tongue with an instrument whose shape is as follows.
Let it be made of silver or brass that is thin like a knife (cultellus).
When you press the tongue with it (the instrument), and the aposteme is revealed to you, and falls upon it through your sight: then take a hook, and pierce it in the amygdala, and pull it out as far as possible towards the outside, taking along with it something from the tunics.
Then cut it (the amygdala) with an instrument whose shape is as follows. It resembles pincers: but its extremities are curved, so that each of them has an acute orifice facing the other, ensuring that it is made of iron (indium) or brass coated with alum.
If however this instrument is not present, then cut it with a lancet, whose form is as follows. It is pointed at one end and not pointed at the other.
And after you have cut one almond, cut the other according to the same shape of the incision.
Then, after the incision, let the sick person gargle with cold water or with vinegar and water.
If there is bleeding, let him gargle with water in which the rinds of pomegranates have been boiled or the leaves of myrtle and similar ones from poplar trees until the bleeding stops; then take care of him until he recovers.
And sometimes boils other than the two almonds appear in the throat. Therefore, cut them as I said in the incision of the two almonds equally.
I myself have been cured of a woman who had a boil that was born in her throat which drew towards the swelling, with a few senses, which had almost closed her throat; and the woman breathed from a narrow opening, and already forbidden her eating, and drinking water; and it had come close to death if it remained one day or two.
The boil had risen so much that it had expelled two branches until they came out through the two nostrils.
I therefore ran quickly and inserted a hook into one of them. Then I pulled it out, and a large piece came out with it.
Then I cut off the piece where it was grasped from the nostril.
Then I made that which came out from the other nostril.
Then I opened his mouth, and pressed his tongue; and afterwards inserted a hook into the boil; then cut off a piece of it, and no more came out except a little blood; so the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water immediately, then she started eating.
I did not cease to cut from that ulcer many times in a long period of time: and the ulcer followed the place which I was cutting until it became too extended and with that [the thing] itself.
I have cauterized the ulcer between the throat.
Therefore, it stood still after [the operation]: then I walked on that side, and I did not know what God did with it after me.
Chapter on the incision of a mouth ulcer.
Chapter XXXVII.
When catarrh descends to the mouth and it ulcerates and is long: then it is called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, then it is called a boil.
When it is cured along with what I have said in the division, and treatment does not help: and you see that the ulcer is warm and has stopped, and is soft: then it should be cut.
And that which is gathered round it and is not long, and is red or dark colored or black, and has no sensation: then it should be cut out. For there is fear for the weak [patient] in it.
Therefore, when you see it according to the way I have said from its whiteness and its length, you should make the weak [person] sit before the sun: and press his tongue with the instrument that was previously mentioned: then fasten a hook in the mouth, and pull it downwards: and cut it with one of two instruments that were mentioned in the incision of two molars.
And it should not be cut from it, unless what is added goes beyond the natural limit without additional [factors].
For if you cut from it more, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what was said in the incision of two molars: and treat it until it heals.
If the patient is afraid of incision: then it is necessary to use skill in cauterizing him without fear and dread.
The method of cauterization is not other than with sharp water: and it is to place the head of the patient in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument as we said. Then take water as I said in the chapter on cauterization and make a not-extinguished lime, do not make it thick nor thin, fill its concavity with this instrument which has this shape.
Let the end of it where the medicine is placed be concave, as concave as the cochlea of a radius.
Place the instrument with the medicine upon the ulcer itself: and let the patient lie down on his side, so that saliva from his mouth runs out of his inner medicine, and something does not fall from it into his throat and harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from above apply it on the ulcer for a first time with the quantity of half an hour until you see it already blackened and quieted by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish to take a hot iron and roll it over the end of the radius, pour the iron with medicine into the socket above, and insert the radius with the heated iron into the pipe from above until it sticks to the ulcer.
Do this several times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the ulcer. Then let it be: for indeed it burns and falls off after three or four days.
If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after cauterization wipe the area around the ulcer with a hot iron dipped in butter, and clean the area around it with what remains from the medicine: and let it be washed with cold water.
And it shall be treated from without with cupping glasses, and from within with gargles, until it is healed.
This kind of treatment is more healthful than cutting and farther away from fear.
And sometimes the ulcer is also treated with something more subtle than cautery and cutting; it is treated with fumigation in this manner. Take calaminthe, hyssop, origanum, rutus, thyme, chamomile, abrotanum and similar herbs: and mix them all together, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and boil; and the pot should be well coated with clay; and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which a concave instrument is placed in this manner.
Make it of silver or brass; and insert the end, where there is a grain, into the mouth of the sick person, until the vapor rises to the ulcer through the tube, until the ulcer is filled with a great deal of smoke.
Then repeat this several times, until it burns.
And beware, do not perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess. For in most cases, pus is added to an abscess; and it should not be done unless near the decline of the heat of that abscess.
If this instrument is not present to you, then take a reed, and prepare the bark of an ox at its end; so that the bone of the sick person is not burned; because the bark of an ox prevents steam from burning the bone; and this is one of the good treatments with safety.
Chapter on the extraction of thorns and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Often a bone or a fish spine adheres to the throat, or something else.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extract what appears on it upon which sight falls, after pressing the tongue with an instrument in the sunlight, and it becomes clear to you that it is in the throat.
What is not apparent to you and hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make it vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps therefore it will come out the attached thing through vomiting.
Or the sick one swallows a piece of nap or radish root, or a mouthful of dry bread; or takes a piece of soft dried sea sponge and ties it up; then he swallows it. When therefore it reaches the place where there are thorns or bone, and it is extracted, then it comes out.
If therefore it does not come out as we have said: then use an instrument made of lead in this shape.
Let it be thicker than a finger, but have a rounded tip at its end, which he introduces into the throat easily; and let it have its head raised upward.
And let him beware of touching his epiglottis, so that he does not cough, and push with it bone or thorn, or the physician introduces it with his hand.
But what the sick one introduces, that is better: because of his knowledge of the place where the attached thing is located; and he pushes it downward or pulls his hand with the instrument upward, all of it according to its quantity which is prepared for him, until it comes out.
[Section on Extraction of Leeches]
Chapter XXXIX.
When the leech is treated with what I have said in the section on cure with medicines, and it does not work, then consider if in the throat of the sick person, before or after exposure to sunlight, when you press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
If your vision falls upon the leech, remove it with a small hook or with thin forceps properly.
If it is not possible with those (instruments): then take a concave cannula and insert it into the sick person's throat up to his neck; then insert hot iron into the concavity of the cannula. Do this often, and let the sick person abstain from water all day.
Then let him take a vessel filled with cold water, and open his mouth in it; and rinse his mouth with it, but do not swallow anything from it; and move the water with his hand for an hour after an hour. For the leech immediately lets go when it feels water.
If it does not come out with what I have said, then fumigate the sick person with bedbugs or with camphor with the instrument that I told you about in fumigating the throat.
Do this often, for it will let go by itself.
The method of fumigation is that you take a pot, in which there are live prunes with fire; and the pot should be covered with a lid, in the middle of which there is an opening; and the end of the instrument should be placed in that opening.
Then throw the fumigation and let the sick person place his mouth at the end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape before you know that the fumigation has reached the leech. For the leech will immediately let go.
If it does not fall (the tumor), then repeat the fumigation many times.
The sick man will bear thirst, eat salt and other foods, but drink no water.
Therefore it is necessary for him to go out (leave the house) with this regime.
This is the shape of the instrument with which a leech is drawn from the throat, when it falls upon the eye.
It is like forceps, as you can see, except that this hook which goes into the throat is curved. And its end resembles the mouth of a bird called stork, which has roughness like a file; when it captures something, it does not let it go at all.
Chapter on opening abscesses and their section, and care in general.
Chapter XL (Fortieth chapter).
The species of abscesses are many, according to the remembrance (description) of each one, that is to say, there is one for one in this book; and they differ in their perforation, and cutting open (section) from two kinds.
One of them is of the species of an abscess within itself, and because it encompasses moistness.
The second method is due to places where it occurs from the body.
Since an abscess occurring on the head is another than an abscess occurring in the anus; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is another than an abscess occurring in joints: and each of them has its own judgment through operation.
And from abscesses there are those that should not be punctured unless after the maturation of pus in them, and its completion; and from these there are those that should be punctured while raw, and do not mature according to their completion.
As abscesses which are near joints.
Since when an abscess occurs near a joint and prolongs itself until it becomes rotten what is around its circumference perhaps corrupts the ligaments or the nerve of that joint; therefore it is the cause of closer contraction of that member.
Or it is an abscess near the main member; because if you delay puncturing it until it matures, it will harm either the one himself or through the main member.
Or it is near the anus, so puncture it immature; and it is not necessary to puncture a raw abscess, not completed digestion, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not rot deeply, and prolong towards the inner parts of the anus, and become a fistula, or it will be in its end which will not heal.
It is necessary that you know the hour of puncturing an abscess, which has matured according to its completion; and it is in sedation of pain, retreat of fever, and reduction of redness, and pulsation, and acuity of head of the abscess; and the remaining signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower part of the abscess, and of more prominent protrusion: and let the perforation be directed in the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of hands and feet, and places of arms, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all places where there is no reflection.
In those which are reflected, proceed with the perforation according to that limb.
If however the abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better to defer the perforation of it until its digestion has been confirmed, as we said in the supplement.
Because if you perforate it before that, the course of the virus from it is prolonged, and there are many filths and foulnesses, and perhaps its edges harden and its depth increases.
And some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the body due to necessity, or according to that part which the limb requires.
And it is necessary to administer a small perforation for small abscesses, and a large one for large abscesses; or many incisions in proportion to the size of the abscess.
And among abscesses there are some in which the skin must be concave: and it is cut when it has become like a cloth, and it has reached the end that is already dead; such as happens with many, as in buboes.
And among them there are some which are to be cut by a section having three angles. And from this one is cut like the figure of the myrtle leaf.
Like an inguinal abscess.
And among them there are some in which a round incision or crescent-shaped incision is administered, and ones similar to these from the incisions.
That which does not have a head, such as suppurating superficial ulcers, should be pierced with a shallow penetration or only superficially.
When an abscess is large and has collected much pus, it should be pierced so that it does not spread and all the pus is removed at once: rather, remove a portion of it from it. Then, open an abscess until the next day. Then remove some more pus.
Do this repeatedly according to degree, until it comes out: particularly if the patient is weak in strength, or a woman pregnant, or a small child, or an old person decrepit: for animal spirit often dissolves with the release of pus; and perhaps the weak one will die, and you will not receive payment.
Be careful, therefore, to take great precautions in this chapter.
After your piercing, which you perform on these abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound and think about it. If the wound of the abscess is small or a plain incision, then administer linen strips or an old bandage. If the abscess is large and there are many openings of the piercing, then insert linen into each opening until they meet.
If you have removed part of the skin from an abscess or hollowed it out, then it is necessary to fill it with old bandage, or as when a cloth is sewn, or shorn with linen wool without wetness; and bind it for three days.
Then expel it, and take care of it with what is necessary from ointment until it heals.
If there is bleeding during your operation hour, then administer cold water and vinegar, after which a cloth is soaked; and place it on the site of bleeding many times.
If the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer treatment, care, and powders, as I have described in many places of this book, and by division.
If it is winter time and the place of the abscess involves many nerves: then it is necessary to pour hot poultices with wine and oil onto those areas.
And if it is summer and the areas are fleshy: then it is necessary to place hot poultices that have been soaked in water, oil, or wine and oil, and let everything get cold. Until the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary to open and clean the abscess, and administer treatment suitable for its healing until it heals.
Therefore, this is what is generally required for the knowledge of treating abscesses.
According to the method of division, I have already said about every kind of abscess, how it is the pathway for its treatment one by one.
Chapter XL.
Chapter on cutting abscesses that occur on the skin of the head.
Pustules small, resembling nodules, occur on the skin of the head, and are contained by the tunics that resemble pouches, as if they were swollen like a hen's glands.
And their types are many.
Some of them are fatty: some contain a similar moisture to clay: and some contain a similar moisture to ointment and poultices: and those resembling, and some are hard like stone.
And in the cutting of all [of them], and their removal, there is no fear, as long as it does not create opposition to an artery during its cutting.
The operation in their cutting is that you try it with the instrument whose shape comes later, which is called Introductus, until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it along its length with a surface incision in this manner.
Begin with an incision along the line b to line g. When the moisture is evacuated, then excise the cyst that contains this moisture, and do not leave anything inside it.
For many times it returns if something remains in it.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt; fill the wound with it, and leave it until another day. For that which remains from the cyst will corrode itself.
Then again repeat over the wound with the second Egyptian ointment, and the third, if necessary; until you are confident that nothing remains from the cyst, then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
If the pustule contains a fat nodule: then cut it according to this shape, having the form of a cross; and throw out the uncinis between the two openings of the incision, and excise it from all sides; and strive for your strength in the extraction of the tunica that contains it.
If however an artery opposes you, then do what I shall tell you afterwards.
And similarly [do the same] in an abscess, if it is stone-like, through cutting and treatment as we have said before.
The cutting of a stone-like abscess is easier: since it contains little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are such abscesses [in the head] of certain men, without deep moisture.
This is what it means: because I have cut over an abscess on the head of an old woman, and I found the abscess to be like a solid and hard stone, rough and white, which could not be broken: and if someone struck it with something, he would wound himself.
However, in other abscess cases on the head, except for these abscesses which occur on the heads of children and at the roots of ears, the cutting [of them] should be a surface cut.
Or place a perforation in them always from their lower part, to divert the flow of pus downwards.
Then treat it with what is suitable for its cure.
Chapter on cutting of the Straphules (glands) in the neck.
Chapter XLIX.
These abscesses often occur in the neck and under the armpits and groins: and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And on those which occur in the neck, there is one [type], and many: and they are generated from one another: and every Straphule from them is within its own layer, like in the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have said before.
And the types of these Straphules are many. For from them there are stone-like ones: and from them there are those which contain moisture: and from them there are malicious ones, which do not obey treatment.
In that which you see good arrangement in touch, whose color is evidently close to the skin's and moves throughout all parts, and is not attached with the neck nerves, nor with the tendon, nor with an artery, nor deep: it must be separated by a superficial incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body along line b to line g. And scrape off its entire surface with a knife, or with multiple knives if needed, as we said regarding tumors of the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is advisable not to cut vein or nerve.
Let the forceps not be very sharp, so that it does not injure your hand with the incision or disturb the sick one, and cut what is not necessary.
If you cut vein or artery, it prevents you from operation, then place in the wound sieve crushed or certain powders that dissolve blood, and tie up the wound, and let it be until the sharpness of the tumor subsides and the wound becomes soft or begins to rot.
For the blood is dissolved by tuncica (linen) Redi then to your operation until you finish.
Then ask with your index finger if anything remains of the Strophulus (a small stone) or similar small ones. If so, cut and clean them.
If it is in the root of the Strophulus a large vein: then it must not be cut from its root, but rather tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with an old cloth that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it (the patient).
If the Strophulus is completely cut off, then gather the edges of the wound and sew it immediately when you see that there remains no unnecessary excess.
If you see that there remains superfluousness due to the size of the Suture, then it is necessary to stretch towards cutting its root and pulling it out: and administer the suture as we said.
And that which contains the humidities of the Suture, perforate it with a superficial perforation: so that its maturity appears to you: and place the perforation from what follows below the body, as we said.
Then administer after the perforation linen with ointment, and similar things, so that what remains from corruption corrodes, until when you see the wound already clean: then care for it with ointment of healing flesh, until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
[Title: Surgery on the Epiglottis due to an ulcer within the throat.]
The ancients said this surgery on the Epiglottis, and I did not see anyone in our land who has done it: and this is their writing.
In those who have a synanchia [a condition where the epiglottis is fixed to the base of the tongue], it is necessary to avoid surgery on the Epiglottis: since no benefit comes from this, because all the veins and lung are weak.
But in those who have a hot ulcer in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no sickness in the channel, it is necessary to use surgery on the Epiglottis, to avoid destruction which occurs from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the Epiglottis, it is necessary to cut under three or four rings of the Epiglottis, with a small section in width, where it is between two rings in depth, which is the cut in cartilage, not in bone: and this place is suitable for cutting, since it is devoid of flesh, and the vessels of blood are distant.
If the surgeon is afraid, then it is necessary that he should spread the skin of the throat with a hook. Then let him find the skin until he reaches the channel: if he sees anything from it, he should stop the blood vessel.
Then cut what I have mentioned (the channel): it is indicated that from the mucus which comes out of it and with what is torn apart, and with cutting off the voice.
And leave an open wound for some time.
When the danger of suffocation is removed, join together two lips of the wound skin, and sew only the skin without cartilage.
Then administer medicines which make flesh grow, until it heals.
Says Albucasis. This is the summary of the conversation I have told, the explanation is not given unless when they see that one of these abscesses of the throat of the sick has burst open: and the sick person is raised up near death and wants to be cut open to breathe: they go to cut the Epiglottis so that the sick person may breathe over the place of the wound with a certain breathing, and thus be saved from death: and for this reason they commanded to leave the wound open, until the malignancy of the illness is consumed, and the malignancy is this for three days, and as it were itself: then therefore they commanded to sew up the wound, and to take care of it, until it heals.
And this that I have seen myself is that a maidservant took a knife and sent it into her throat, and cut a part of the trachea of the lungs.
And I was called to care for her, and found her moaning, as is the moan of the dead.
So I opened up the wound, and found blood which had come out from the wound to be small. The wound had not drained pus, nor did it suppurate; and the wind issued forth from the wound.
I became anxious over my own wound and treated it until it healed; nothing happened to the servant except a coughing fit when speaking; and she returned after several days to her usual condition.
From this I say: there is no fear in cutting the Epiglottis.
Chapter on the sectioning of a hernia in the throat.
Chapter XLIV.
This protrusion called a hernia of the throat is a large abscess, resembling the body's color; and it occurs much in women.
It is of two types: either it is natural or it is accidental.
In the case of a natural one, there is no congenital defect.
An accidental one is also of two types: one of which resembles fatty knots. And the other type, is similar to an abscess caused by a node in an artery. There is fear associated with it, and it should not be presumed to be cut with iron unless it is small; examine it yourself and probe it with a sharp instrument. If you find it resembling a fatty knot and is not suspended by any veins; then cut it, just as knots are cut; and extract it along with what contains it from the cyst, if it is in a cyst; and if not, then thoroughly examine the entire area. Then care for the place where it was with what is required for treatment until it heals.
Chapter XLV.
Chapter on cutting across nodes.
There are many types of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division; it is necessary that here I explain the difference between a node and an exitus, when there is confusion.
I say therefore, when the heat departs, and the fever, and the strong pains, until the effervescence of superfluity subsides, and the rotting is completed: then indeed the fever and the heat cease.
When indeed the heat is not present, nor the fever, nor the pains, and they are confined by a bag known as kistis, which is their proper container, and it is according to the color of the body; it begins like a chickpea, and it becomes like bataga, and both major and minor.
And they are of two kinds: either fatty: or containing moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of the Node, it is necessary to try it out and examine it with the tool called Introscope, according to its form as it will come in the chapter that follows this one.
And the method of examining abscesses and all nodes is to take this tool and insert it into the more moist place that you find in the abscess; then move your fingers slowly with it until you know that the tool has already pierced the skin. Then, lay your last hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then, remove the Introscope, and observe what comes out with it.
If therefore the running moisture comes out, whatever its color may be: then cut it with a surface incision, according to what I said in the other abscesses.
And if the moisture does not come out in the footprint of the Introscope, then you will know that it is fatty; cut it with a surface incision having the shape of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you; and suspend it with hooks, and scrape the skin from all sides with ease; and keep the kistis over it if you can so that you may extract it along with the node while it is still healthy.
If a cyst bursts during an operation and it cannot be safely extracted whole, as often happens, then extract it piecemeal until nothing remains of it.
If something remains of it, whether little or much, a node (inflammation) will return more often than not.
If it (the inflammation) conquers you and leaves something remaining: then fill the wound during your treatment with some corrosive, sharp powders; tie up the wound; place upon it a warm poultice of an abscess and care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
If the node (inflammation) is large, then make two flaps of its skin and care for it along with that which becomes solidified.
If it (the node) is pulsating or non-pulsating artery, then rush and fill the place with powdered vinegar and leave it tied up for two or three days until the wound begins to rot and the boiling of blood subsides; then return to cut what remains from the node.
Chapter 46.
Chapter on external instruments for cutting and puncturing.
These (instruments) have shapes of probes, and there are three types.
Among them is the large one, among them is the medium-sized one, and among them is the small one.
Make them from iron with squared ends well-centered so that they may enter quickly into an abscess.
And these (probes) are the shapes of experienced ones, and those which pierce or penetrate; one of them is called beris (piercer), and they are three types.
From these are great, middle, and small [ones].
They join together to be incised for abscesses, wounds, fistulas, and buboes from what is between the bones.
And others are round, smooth, and flexible, like the large needles that chairs have, made of citron, or brass, or iron, or silver.
Those that are better are the ones made from citron.
And also (ones) are made of black lead, which join together to test fistulas, whose concave part reflects with their flexibility, so that they reflect with the smoothness of those reflections.
They are again of three kinds. Because there are long ones, medium ones, and short ones, according to the size of the fistula and its narrowness.
The form (of forceps) is of the shape of a pair of scissors, and it has many kinds.
Because there are simple ones, that is, those with one curvature: and they have three kinds as you see, large, medium, and small.
And (there are) blind forceps: and they have three kinds.
And there are forceps with two curvatures: and they have three kinds; and from these there are forceps with three curvatures, and they have three kinds; and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which knots and abscesses are cut and scraped: and they have three kinds; because there are large, middle, and small [ones].
The ends where the cutting is made are sharp, the other ends are not sharp; they are not placed thus except to provide help in scraping knots near fear of incision of vein or nerve: and that the weak may be healed through them, and may find a little relief from burning which he finds during the scraping of abscesses.
They are made of air and resemble Radix (root) from which alcohol is made; at its tip there is a hidden point called Spathulum (spatula), which penetrates to the inner and outer parts as desired, just as you see.
The shape of spatulae hidden among the fingers for incision of abscesses; these are not perceived by the weak; they come in three species: large, medium and small.
The forms of ventosa (sponge) with which blood flow is cut off; they come in three species: large, medium and small.
Make them of air or citron wood, round, shorter than what you see, delicate.
It is necessary that the forms of ventosa are large and small in your possession so that when required you may quickly cut off blood with them and when medicine is not available to you.
However, do not use them for cutting blood in every part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy parts such as arms, legs, hips, shoulders, breasts, abdomen, groin, and similar areas, from fleshy parts that are wet.
And sometimes they are made into small instruments resembling the core of a fist, according to their shape, which are used for cutting blood when it flows from the place of phlebotomy or incision of vein or artery; and sometimes they are round in this shape.
Chapter XLVII.
Chapter on care for human breasts resembling those of women.
Whenever the nipples of some men swell during sleep (that is, when they begin to dream), until they resemble those of women; and remain corrupt.
Whoever avoids that (swollen nipples during sleep), it is necessary to cut them with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this shape from the line b to the line g. Then scrape off all the grease. Then fill the wound with a medicated ointment. Then gather together two folds of the wound with suture, and care for it until it heals.
If the nipple turns downwards and softens due to its size, as happens with women: then it should be cut into two upper sections, similar in shape to a crescent, each of which is contained by the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller one, according to this shape from the line b to the line g. Then scrape off the skin that is between the folds, remove the grease, and administer what I said about sutures and powders, which is necessary for treatment, until it heals.
If you do not complete the incision that is required of you to cut it (the swollen nipple), either due to the restlessness of the sick person or due to bleeding: then fill the wound with a plaster soaked in a corrosive ointment, and let it be, until it corrodes what remains from the grease. Then care for it until it heals.
Chapter on the Perforation of an Abscess, which occurs under the breast.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses that occur under the breast are of the types of calluses that contain cysts, and those that contain liquids.
Whatever are among those that contain moistures should be scented with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b to line g. When everything that is in the boil is evacuated by pus, then fill it with an old linen cloth and leave it until another day.
Then remove the linen cloth, and treat it with a suitable ointment until it heals.
If the boil is of the kind like knots (Strophules), then cut over it, as we have said in the section on Strophules equally.
If however the wound extends so that it discharges pus, then administer cautery to it, as we have said in what has been mentioned before.
Chapter 49.
Chapter on the incision of boils due to artery and vein.
When an artery bursts and the skin that is above it hardens, a boil often occurs on it; and similarly, a boil and swelling occur in a vein.
And the signs by which it is known that a boil and swelling are due to an artery or vein are as follows: for when a boil is due to an artery, it is long and aggregated in the depth of the body; and when you press the boil with your fingers, it feels like a grating sensation.
And that which is due to a vein is round on the surface of the body.
And an incision on this boil is a mistake, and especially when it is under the armpits, groins, neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great. Therefore, its treatment with an iron (i.e., cautery) should be avoided; and what is also present in the limbs or head, it should be avoided.
Cut open the skin incision lengthwise to find that which comes from the swelling of the opening of an Artery. Then open the incision with scissors, afterwards the Artery; and free it from the tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert a probe under it and make it penetrate to the other side; and tie the Artery with doubled thread at two places, according to what I taught you about the extraction of two Arteries that are in the temples.
Then pierce the place between the two ligaments with a lancet until all the blood that is there comes out; and the abscess is dissolved.
Then administer treatment that generates pus until the ligaments fall off; then care for it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If there is an abscess due to a vein incision, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what is possible from the abscess along with the skin. Then insert a lancet under the place that you hold with your hand and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread in it until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess with a good suture; according to what I told you about the suture of the vein, from two parts with two ends of the thread.
If you are afraid that the thread will be drawn out, then insert another lancet with a different thread under the entire abscess near the incision; press, and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in half through the middle until what is inside comes out; then cut off the excessive skin and let go of that which is tied to it.
Then place a poultice made of wine and oil on top of the boil that you have immersed. Then administer treatment consisting of liniments and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter L.
On the amputation that occurs from a twisting of the nerves.
As it happens with an aposteme in Artery and Vein, similarly it happens with an aposteme in Nerves: what happens to them by striking, or happens from excessive labor, and similar things: and it most often occurs in places more assisted, or at the heel, and in every place where joints are moved: and the aposteme is severe.
Its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is found in various dispositions without pain: and when it is pressed with force, one feels weak, similar to a state of numbness.
And the aposteme is not gathered deep within the body, but it is under the skin, and it moves to every part: it does not reach forward, nor backward, neither towards the front nor the back.
What is on joints from them should not be invaded with iron. Perhaps it may happen that contraction occurs.
However, what is from them on the head or forehead, pierce the skin with a lancet. If it is a small aposteme, then hold it with forceps and remove it from its root.
And if it is large, then bind it with a ligator, and scab it: then remove it, and close the wound with stitches: care for it until it heals.
Chapter LXI.
[Title] On the cutting of an aposteme that occurs in the abdomen.
These grow frequently in the bellies of some men, and in the remaining bodies of them, 'Fungalia', which are called by likeness to mushrooms.
Their root is subtle, and their head is thick, and the lips of them are turned around. It has a small part from it, and there is something from it that is greatly enlarged.
And I myself have seen a man, and in his belly were two 'Fungalia', which resembled mushrooms more than other things: there was no difference between them, they were white and had small roots, the lips of them turned around, and they were swollen, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
I cut them, and one weighed approximately X and VIII ounces, and the other approximately VI ounces. The operation in cutting them is to consider then if he who is sick is weak and humid, and the 'Fungalia' are white, moist, and subtle roots: then cut it with a broad spatula, and have cautionery iron in your presence.
For many times blood is expelled at the cutting of it: therefore beware if blood conquers you, then cauterize it.
If you see one who is sick, fearful and timid about the cutting with iron, then take a well-made wire from lead, and tie it with that 'athelul': its method is as we have said, and release it for two days.
Then add (a substance) to the lead seal. Therefore do not cease tying the lead wire whenever it presses on 'Fungalia', until it is cut off and falls by itself without effort.
If 'Fungalia' is large at its root, then there is some fear and terror in the cutting of it: especially because it is in the belly.
It is possible to cut through its middle. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then treat it until the wound heals.
And beware not to cut what is of a dark purple color, few senses, foul appearance; for it is a cancerous apostema, and I will come again with the reminder of Cancer after this.
Chapter LII (102 in modern numbering).
Chapter on the treatment of umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia occurs for various reasons. Or from fissures that are above the abdomen, from which comes out either the althub (small worm) or intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or from blood that flows from the vein, or from the artery, according to what was mentioned earlier. Or from constipation that has been blocked there.
If it is due to a fissure of the sifac (anterior abdominal wall) and outflow of pus: then its color resembles that of an apostema; it is loose, without pain; and the position appears diverse. If it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position is more violently diverse with what we have stated. When you press it with your fingers, it is hidden; then it returns, and possibly there is a sound; and it swells greatly at the opening of the bath, and the pain is severe.
But if it is due to moisture, it is soft; then it does not hide when you press it with your hand, nor does it contract, nor does it swell.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs an abscess appears dark red from the heel.
But if it is due to fleshy matter, then the abscess is heavy, large, hard, and pierces through by a certain quantity.
If it is due to windiness, then when touched, it is soft.
And the operation in this case is to consider if the protrusion of the navel is due to bleeding from an artery, vein, or windiness; then it is necessary to prohibit treatment of it. For there is fear and terror, as I have taught you in the chapter where I said abscesses due to an artery or vein.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or tumor; then you must command the sick person to hold his breath and stand extended. Then mark with a cautery around the entire navel. Then command him to lie on his back between your hands. Then circle around with a broad spatula around the navel over the place which you marked with the cautery. Then extend the middle of the abscess to above, with a large hook. Then bind him around firmly with thread or with a silk cord: and let the knot of the bandage be tied in an alenxotate manner.
Then open up the extended middle part (of the abscess) above the ligament. If you find (it) already caught by the ligament: then extract the alenxotati, and insert your finger into it, and push intestine towards the inner part of the belly; and if you find a stone, then take it with a hook, and cut off its excess.
If however, an artery or vein is against (it): then bind it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles and insert strong threads into them; and insert the needles into the stitches you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, which you make penetrate (them).
Then stitch the abscess in four places around the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles and leave room for the rotten flesh to extend; and let it fall by itself; or cut it when it becomes soft and rots.
Then take care of (it) with what is necessary from ointments until it heals.
If the protrusion of the umbilicus is from raw flesh or moisture on it, then you must hollow out the abscess as we said before. And remove blood or moisture that you find in it.
Then take care of (it) to close the place.
Chapter LIII.
Chapter on cancer care.
We have said about the species of Cancer (cancer) in division, and how its treatment is with medicines; it must be cautioned against it during its treatment with iron, so as not to ulcerate it. We have also said that Cancer is generated in the matrix (womb), and a cauterization should be avoided in its treatment.
The ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it can be eradicated; such as cancer which is in the breast or hip and similar parts, from detachable limbs; particularly when it is starting small.
But when it grows old (advanced) and becomes large, it should not be approached.
For I could not heal anyone from that; nor have I seen anyone else before me who has succeeded in treating it (the advanced cancer).
And the operation on it, when it is placed as we said, is to go before (excise), and to release a weak one from black choler several times. Then, if you find phlebotomy (bloodletting) in it with obvious fullness.
Then prepare the weak one with a preparation, in which it is located during the operation.
Then cast hooks into Cancer (cancer) that match it. Then hollow out the whole thing from every part with skin (layer), according to examination, until there remains nothing of its roots; and let blood run, and do not cut it quickly, rather press the places, and remove all coarse blood with your hand or as possible there with instruments.
But if a flow of coarse blood from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you; then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
Chapter on Hydrophysis (hydrocele).
Head LIV. We have now spoken about the types of Hydropsis and how water collects; and the signs of all its types, and their treatment with medicines.
That which is cured with iron is only the type of ascites alone; it does not approach iron in the case of tympanitis; neither deeply in the case of hypoascarcia, for that is fatal.
When you have already been treated with this kind of Hydropsis due to tympanitis with medications, and the treatment has not helped, then consider. For if weakness has already come upon the sick person, or there is another illness in addition to Hydropsis, such as cough, or loose stools, and similar ones; then beware not to treat him with iron, for it is dangerous.
If however you see the sick person overflowing with strength, and there is no other illness in addition to Hydropsis alone; and if he is not a child nor an old man; then the method of operation for him is as follows: you should raise the weak person who stands before your hands, and afterwards let another press his abdomen by hand, pushing water down towards the lower part of the chest.
Then take a pointed lancet. Let it have two sharp points, long, and with an acute tip like a lancet. However, it should have something short about it, so as not to penetrate through it during the operation up to the intestine and injure it.
Then think about this. For if the hydropsis is due to the intestines, then you must make an incision of three fingers' length from the navel downwards, along its upper part above the chest.
If however the hydropsis is due to liver disease, then your incision should be three fingers' length on the left side from the navel.
And if its generation is due to the spleen, then let the section be in the right side: and it is not necessary even that it should be a section on the side over which the sick person wishes to lie, so that superfluities do not run to that weak place.
Perforate the entire skin with the instrument. Then insert your hand into that incision and dissect it with the spatula between the skin and the underlying tissue, as if you are excoriating it; let the quantity that is excoriated be equal to a fingernail or approximately so.
Then perforate the underlying tissue until the spatula reaches an empty place; and that is the place of water. Then remove it (the spleen) and insert an instrument into the opening, whose form is this: (Here follows a diagram or description of the instrument.) It is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver, copper or brass, cleaned; at the lower part of it there is a small hole; and on its sides there are three holes, two from one side and one from the other; and the end of it is cut in the manner of an incision like that of a reed, as you see; on the upper end of it is a strap.
For when the instrument reaches water, then it (the spleen) immediately descends upon the instrument; therefore evacuate from the water a quantity of about half an hour.
Because if you evacuate more than is necessary from it, perhaps the sick person dies through resolution of his animal spirit; or he gets a syncope approaching death.
But evacuate from it according to its virtue and according to what the signs of the sick person's condition indicate to you from the force of his pulse and the quality of his complexion.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
This is because it (the water) is immediately retained due to the skin which keeps the hole that is on the underlying tissue; about which I said that you should perforate it in this way.
Then repeat the instrument on the second day, if you see that the patient can endure it; and extract also a small amount from water.
Carry out that procedure for some days without fear, and be careful to avoid error; until there remains in the water only a little.
If you fear for the patient and let a large amount of liquid remain; then take care of him with hot sand, much sweating in the bath and sun, and let him fast; and take care of him with strong medicines, until he is cured; and cauterize over the stomach, liver, and spleen, after the extraction of water; as I told you in what went before.
Treatment for infants born in places where their urinary tracts have not been perforated.
Chapter LV.
When a child is born from the womb of its mother, and its head is not pierced, or there is a narrow opening, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore, it is necessary to help with the piercing of it immediately when it is born, with a sharp spatula very much, according to this form.
Then place a fine nail made of lead into the opening and tie it; hold it for three or four days.
When it desires to release urine, let it be removed, and mix it. Then bring it back.
And if you do not place lead, it is now possible that the urine flowing over the place does not allow it to close.
But if its opening is narrow, it is cured with lead as we said, for many days, until it is widened.
Those in whom the opening is not in its proper place are harmed. Because the opening is at the end of the spine of the one who is born, therefore it cannot mix towards the front until it raises the spine with its hand to the upper part. It is not generation for it, because the seed cannot reach the mother in the correct way; and it is a very foul disease.
And the method of operation in that one is to turn the sick one onto its back. Then extend the spine of its head with your left hand and cut the head of the spine from the place of priapus, with a sharp knife or pointed spatula; as it is the cutting of a reed, or like rooting something, so that the medium comes out similar to the head of the spine, and for the hole falls in the middle as necessary.
And be careful during your operation not to have bleeding. Often does that happen. Oppose it with it when it cuts blood, and take care of the wound until it heals.
§ On Albather that occurs in the foreskin and head of the penis, as well as rotting, blackening, and adhering.
Head LVI. (In a list or table of contents)
Often occur these Albathers in the penis, and it is a prominent flesh foulness.
And from this, one is malignant, and another is not malignant.
Do not allow the non-malignant one to hang with a fine hook and cut it off until you clean it completely. Then place on it a pot immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it itself after that with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.
If Albather is malignant and of a foul color, then administer cautery after its incision and removal.
If, however, the Albather is within the foreskin and has not been circumcised, and part of it is inside the foreskin and part outside, then you should remove the Albather that is inside first, until it hardens, and then care for it externally; because when you treat it, the foreskin will not heal unless it breaks.
And now they also occur in the testicles, and blackening and rotting of the foreskin. Therefore, you should excavate all that has become blackened, and what is about to rot or has already rotted.
Then place linen on it after that with honey that has been shaken with flour from a nutmeg and sieved herbs.
Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If, however, bleeding occurs, then administer cautery with lunar cautery in this manner. (The text describes a procedure using a specific tool called "cauterium lunare".)
The cautery is useful for two purposes at once, namely for blood flow and a wound when it is corrupted.
If the head of the rod (clyster) is corroded and destroyed within an hour, then it is necessary to introduce a cannula made of lead into the penis, so that the weak one mixes with it.
In the case of adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the rod (clyster), and this adhesion does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy and circumcision is not required for it: at times, adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess. Therefore, it is necessary to remove the adhesion with a Spatumili chisel (a tool used in surgery) until the ligament is released and the head of the rod is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish that adhesion (between the foreskin and head of the rod), then it is necessary to remove some from the head of the rod and some from the foreskin. Since the foreskin is delicate, it may be easily perforated due to its delicacy.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the rod with a fine linen cloth that has been soaked in cold water to prevent them from sticking together again.
Then it is cured with wine of staghorn (a type of resin) until it solidifies.
Chapter 57.
Chapter on the cleansing of infants and treatment due to their mistake.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity, like other wounds; however, since it comes from our operation, with our will, and its use is specifically for boys, it is necessary to mark the operation as better and leading to a lighter way towards health.
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books; since they do not use it in their laws and it is only because we have acquired it through experience.
I have found a greater number of artisans and phlebotomists to use disinfection, circumcising with scissors, and with forceps: they employ cauterization, suture with thread, and incision with a nail.
I have now proven all these methods, and found no better disinfection with forceps, or suture with thread.
Since the skin often slips away during circumcision with scissors. Since the skin of the prepuce has two layers: perhaps the upper layer is cut, and the lower one exposed: it is therefore necessary to make another incision, and pain will result. And with the disinfection performed by cauterization (digital), which is used by tailors [for sewing], the tip of the masculine member is not severed: since it may enter its opening.
However, in the disinfection with a nail, perhaps iron will enter [the wound], and ruin your operation: indeed, the skin of a child is naturally short, and often it does not require disinfection; I have already seen that.
The experiment of disinfection with forceps and suture with thread revealed itself good to me: since forceps are proportionate to the incision: therefore, the sharpness at the top is like the sharpness at the bottom. When you press your hand, the two sharp points correspond, and they incise simultaneously according to one operation in a single moment: and a compression of similar shape is formed, containing the skin like a cord from all sides, with which no error occurs at all.
And the method of your operation is, to let a child, especially if he understands somewhat, to perform it himself, except that you tie thread on his own member only: and leave him until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy in every possible way for you, from the fact that he receives his understanding. Then make him stand before your prepared stance, and let him not be sitting: and hidden scissors in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy sees them not at all, nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his member, and blow on its skin, and pull it upwards, until the head of the member comes out. Then cleanse it from that which accumulates in it as dirt.
Then tie the marked place with double thread. Then tie below that a little ligature again. Then hold it with your index finger and thumb, and keep the place of the lower ligature well in retention, and cut between two ligatures. Then peel off the skin upwards quickly, and extract the head of the member. Then let the blood flow slowly (it is better), and put powder on top: and over the powder a cloth in which a roast lamb's fat has been beaten with fresh good olive oil: and let it lie on that until another day: and take care of it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
The form of the scissors for cleansing is as follows.
Let there be two sharp points at the ends, and let them converge so that the nail does not come out between them: and let the length of the two sharp points be equal to the length of two hands equally.
But error occurring in cleansing is as follows: since perhaps the inner skin may completely escape, or part of it near the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch it out from your own hour with your nail before the incision of the place: and cut it evenly.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a tweezers, and cut it.
If it extends beyond three days and there remains what is under the navel inflated, it is an abscess: then let that be, until the abscess settles down warm, and scrape off that abscess easily, and cut it according to how it prepares for you; be careful not to touch the head of the vein. It will not harm him that.
Therefore treat that wound with it as it consolidates the wound with powders, which we have described in the treatment of powders; and if it is cut through the skin beyond measure and penetrates to the upper part, it will not harm him even that.
Therefore treat that until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
Chapter on the extraction of a retained worm in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs from obstruction made by stone, frozen blood, pus, flesh born, and similar things from those which we have said in the treatment methods in division.
And if the urine is not resolved, and you see that its retention is due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary that he be weakened on his knees bent. Then place his feet on his back, and he shall stretch out his abdomen from the upper part of his back, and contract his breath as much as possible for him. Therefore with the neck of the bladder is compelled towards expulsion of the stone, why the urine is discharged.
If it is not resolved with what we have said, and the force is upon the weak: then it is necessary to administer extraction of it with an instrument called syringe, whose form is as follows: It is made of silver, and is subtle, soft, concave like a feather cannula in fineness of radius, long like the palm of one and a half, and wide: which has a subtle cannula at its head.
The method of extracting a worm is as follows: take a doubled thread and tie at its end a good ligature: insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe; and cut with scissors if there is any surplus from the wool, but forcefully insert it into the cannula, like alder.
Then anoint the syringe with oil, or with butter, and alum of wool; and make the patient sit on a chair, and apply warmth to the bladder, and the herb with moist oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then introduce the syringe into the herb gently until it reaches the root of the herb.
Then fold it over twice above the navel.
Then push the syringe into it until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it has reached an empty space: and this is not done according to this order unless because there is a twist in the channel through which it goes.
Then slowly extend the thread with wool. For the worm will follow the wool.
Then draw it out and let the worm run through the urinary way; and repeat the syringe, and do not cease to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Section on clepsydra for the quality of clysterization of the bladder.
Chapter LIX.
When a wound occurs in the bladder, or blood congeals there, or pus is constricted within it and water and medications are desired to be distilled into it: then let it be done with an instrument called Clepshydra, and this is its form.
It is deaf, that is, closed. And there are three openings in it, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And the concave part where what drives it is located should be proportional to the quantity that fills it without addition, until when something is pulled with it, it is attracted from humidities; and when it is driven, along with it something is expelled far away: this is how a clepshydra works, which shoots naphtha, that is, Greek fire in the war of Mars.
Therefore, when the desire is to expel humidities into the bladder, insert the end of the clepshydra into the humidity and pull what drives it upwards; for the humidity is drawn into the hollow of the clepshydra.
Then insert its end into a rod, as we have told in the syringe. Then push the humidity with what drives it; for that humidity immediately reaches the bladder, so that it feels weak.
The shape of a subtle enema, with which to enema the bladder.
Make it from silver or gold; whose head is higher like a small pitcher and under it there should be a cavity in which the cord can fall.
Then take the bladder of a ram and put the humidity into it, with which to enema the bladder. Then tie her between two cavities with a strong cord using double thread; and heat the humidity a little over fire.
Then insert the end of the clyster in a cannula, afterwards press your hand on the bladder with a suitable amount of moisture for the ligature, until the weak one feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If the bladder is not present for you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it from all its roundness. Then insert a thread into those holes as they are rolled up. Then gather the circle as it is gathered with wax: when you put in it what you wish from waters, oils, and water.
Then tie it up in the instrument: and make with it as you did with the bladder by squeezing it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
[Paragraph on Extraction of a Stone.]
We have said in the division of the species of the Stone and its treatment with medicines, and I have told the difference between a stone generated in kidneys, and bladder, and the signs of its entirety: and I have told the operation on the Stone that is done with the hand or section: and this Stone is specifically generated in the bladder: and it which is formed on the string: and I am telling this with a clear explanation and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that the Stone generated in the bladder most often happens to boys.
And among its signs is that urine comes out from the bladder like water in its subtlety: and it appears in it white sand, and the weak one scratches his stick, and labors with it, and it often hangs down. Then it is erected, and it comes out with it when many of them do so.
And the healing of boys is easy up until they reach fourteen years of age. It is difficult in the elderly. It is medium [difficulty] in the young, because it is between that [condition] and its stone is larger, the cure is easier; and if it is small, the treatment is reversed [to be more difficult].
When we approach the cure [of a condition], first it is necessary that we clean the patient with an enema, which extracts all the feces that are in his intestines; because sometimes it forbids the discovery of the Stone during examination.
Then the patient is taken with his feet and shaken and moved towards lower parts; in order that the Stone descends to the depth of the bladder or comes out several times from a high place.
Then make him sit between your hands, and his hands should be under his buttocks; in order that the bladder becomes entirely hollowed towards lower parts.
Then examine [him] and touch him from outside.
If therefore you feel the Stone in a space, then approach immediately with cutting upon it.
If it does not fall with your touch at all, then it is necessary that you remove the index finger with oil of the left hand if the patient is a child; or the middle finger if the patient is a grown man; and insert it into his anus and examine for the Stone, until it is under your finger; and turn it gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger, and push it towards the outside against the place where you want to make the incision; and command the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and command another assistant to extend the testicles of the right hand upwards; and with the other hand remove the skin which is below the testicles in the part near the place where the incision will be made.
Then introduce a pointed probe [or instrument], whose shape is as follows: Find in him what is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, to the side of the left: and let the cut be above the stone, and your finger in the anus: and make the incision transverse, so that the incision is broad externally and narrow internally, according to the amount such that the exit of the stone from it is not greater.
Perhaps the finger, which is in the anus, compresses the stone at the incision and comes out without difficulty.
And know that from the stone are its angles and edges, therefore the exit of it is difficult because of this.
And from it is soft, like a gland, and round: and the exit of it is easy.
To him who has angles and edges, add them to the fissure.
If it does not come out in this way, then you must press on it: or tighten it over him properly, whose extremity is like the moon, which tightens over the stone, and does not escape from it: or that you introduce under it a subtle instrument with a curved extremity.
If however you cannot do so, then enlarge the opening slightly. If something stops you from it with blood, cut it off with a knife.
If however the stone is more than one, then push first on the bladder bone. Then cut over it. Afterwards push a little after that: and do the same if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then ignorance is to cut over it with a large incision. Because it happens to the sick one of two things, either he dies or there is a constant flow of urine: because the place is not consolidated at all.
But administer its expulsion until it comes out: or press on the break of it with forceps, until you extract it piece by piece.
When you complete your operation, then fill the wound with tar, aloe, and dragon's blood; tie it up and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water; so that an abscess may sit down warm.
Then turn the sick person over onto his neck, and do not loosen the bandage, until the third day. When you unbind him, anoint the place with oil and water.
Then care for him with diaphine ointment and basilic ointment until he is healed.
If, however, an abscess hot and corrosive arises in the wound, similar to when blood congeals in the bladder and urine is prevented from passing out of it; and this is known by the passage of blood along with urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood. For if it remains, it promotes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and apply to it everything that agrees with the healing process, until it is healed.
And during the entire healing period, it is necessary to bind two hips together and tie them, because of the medications that are placed on the place.
If the stone is small and is located in the bladder, and it blocks the passage of urine; then care for him with what I mentioned before, until you reach the incision. For often during this treatment, you are freed from the incision, since I have already proven that.
And it is to receive the perforator from an iron awl, whose shape is triangular at one end and sharp, fixed into wood.
Then take a thread, and tie it to the rod under the stone, so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the rod with ease, until it reaches the Perforatorium at that stone; and turn the Perforatorium by your hand in the said stone gradually; and press the perforation of it, until you make it pass through from the other side.
Indeed, urine is discharged immediately.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outside of the rod. Indeed, it breaks and goes out with urine, and heals the sick one.
If this treatment is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it from him: then tie a thread under the stone and another thread on top of the stone. Then cut above the stone on the rod between the two bindings. Then pull it out (the stone). Then untie the knot and clean the congealed blood that is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone unless to prevent its return to the bladder; and another knot above, unless when the string is untied after the stone has gone out, the skin returns to its place, and covers the wound; and for this reason you must do this when you tie the upper string, so that you remove the skin to a higher level, so that it returns where needed, and covers the wound, as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
Chapter on extracting stones in women.
Too little stone (calculi) is generated in women.
If it happens to any of them that a stone occurs, then the treatment is difficult and forbidden due to numerous ways.
One of them is: that the woman may possibly be a virgin.
And secondly, because you cannot find a woman who will reveal herself to the doctor when she is chaste or married women.
Thirdly, because you cannot find a woman well skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And fourthly, distance from the place of the stone; hence it requires deep section, and there is fear (involved).
If necessity forces (you) to it (i.e., surgery), then one must take a woman-doctor, well skilled; and it is hard to find such.
If you are afraid of it (i.e., surgery), then look for a chaste and skilful doctor; and seek a midwife well skilled in women's matters, or a woman who is familiar with this art; make her present, and especially tell her to do everything that you order concerning the stone.
Firstly, whether the woman is a virgin; then it is necessary to insert the finger into her anus and search for the stone.
If he finds it (the stone), press it with his finger and then order the midwife to insert her finger into the weak part (of the bladder) and search for the stone, after she places her left hand on the bladder and applies a good compression.
If he finds the stone, then it is necessary to move it gradually from the bladder opening towards the lower parts with utmost care, until it reaches its root at the hip.
Then it is to be cut near the opposite middle part of the bladder at the root of the hip, from whichever side it is prepared for him; and he feels the stone in that place; his finger should not be removed from the stone, pressing under it; and the incision should be small initially. Then introduce the rod over that cut.
Then introduce the rod over that cut. If he feels a stone, then let him add to the incision according to the amount proportional to what the stone is coming out from there.
And know that the shapes of stones are numerous. From these it is small and large, smooth and rough, long and round having branches.
Know its shape so that it may be shown to you by this for what you want on that [object].
If blood conquers you, then add at the place crushed pumice and hold it for an hour until the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out; and do so that you prepare yourself with those tools which I said for the removal of a stone in men, to aid you in your operation.
If the flow of blood conquers you and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery which has been cut; then place dust over the spot and tighten it with a suitable suture thread; do not move it; and leave the stone alone, and do not pull it out. Perhaps a weak woman may die. Then care for the wound.
When the sharpness of blood subsides after days and the place becomes rotten, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
Section on a watery hernia.
A watery hernia is not, unless a collection of moisture in the scrotum white, which is under the skin of the testicle containing eggs; and it is called scrotum.
And at times it is in its own panniculus (fatty fold), which nature has prepared for it in the ear part, until it is thought to be an egg; what is there is the testicle's skin wrapped in a serous membrane, which we have said is rare.
This generation (of a hydrocele) indeed arises from the weakness that happens to testicles; therefore, this material is discharged towards them. And at times it occurs as a result of a blow on the testicles.
This moisture (hydrocele) has many colors. For its color is either yellowish, reddish (blood-like), brown, black, watery white, and the latter is more common.
And the signs by which one knows where the accumulation of water is, are these: For if it is in the white serous membrane (we have said), then the abscess is round and slightly shorter than the figure of an egg; and the testicle is not visible because the water contains it from all sides.
And if the moisture (hydrocele) is in its own panniculus, then the abscess is round with a part of the ear; and for this reason, a man is deceived because it appears to be an egg.
And if the moisture (hydrocele) is between the skin of the testicles and the white serous membrane, it falls under the sense (of touch).
When one wants to learn the color of the moisture (hydrocele), then test its color on an abscess with a flat probe, whose shape has been described earlier. According to what comes out (from the abscess) in the track of the probe, judge about that which is between it.
When we come to treatment with iron (ligature), then it is necessary that you command the patient, if possible for him, to be bled; and observe his body full (of the hydrocele).
Then he lies down on his back on a raised platform slightly, and put many cloths under him.
Then you sit on his left side and command the attendant to sit on his right side, who extends the rod to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the hernia of the abdomen.
Then take a broad lancet and cut the skin of the testicles in the middle along its length up to the pubic bone, making an incision parallel to the line that divides the skin of the testicles, until you reach the fat tissue encompassing it; peel it off and observe carefully or avoid peeling too much, and your peeling should be on the side that hangs more with the egg. Subtle examination with the peeling according to the amount you can manage.
Then pierce the sac filled with water with a wide perforation and drain out all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with tweezers and pull up the sac and do not touch the skin surrounding the testicles; cut the sac in whatever way is possible for you to cut it, either completely or partially, especially the delicate side of it. For if you do not carefully examine, there will be no security in that incision so that water may return.
If the egg comes out from its skin during your operation hour, then when you complete the incision of the sac, bring it back. Then gather together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then treat it as other wounds until it heals.
If you find a rotten egg due to darkening from some other reason, then it is necessary to tie vessels which are suspending, fearing bleeding.
Then remove the testicle with its suspender, and extract the egg; afterward care for it as we have said.
If water is added to two parts, then know that there are two branches; therefore cut the other part equally as you did in the other one.
And if it is equal so that the operation becomes one, then do this: afterwards remove the blood. And insert a submerged wool into the cuts, or in red oil; and place another wool outside which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over two testicles, and inspect the belly; and put double cloths on top of them, and there are lice; and tie them above with a ligament that has six knots according to this shape.
Then take two cloths and rinse them, and fill them with carmine dyed wool, according to this resemblance; and make the ends which are pressed from cotton, or wet wool; and add it together with a bandage in the loins; and one end takes on the anus up to the back, and the other takes to the part of the neck; and two ends below take to two thighs, and two others above take to two groins; and the entire bandage is added to the loins.
And at times this branch is artificially treated with a cautery in the place of the cut with iron; and it is so that you take a sharp cauterizing knife, and sever the skin of the testicles with it; and it is lit, as we have said, until the white membrane containing water appears; then take the cauterization, according to this shape.
It resembles Greek letters.
Then pierce it with that membrane, and it is lit until all the moisture comes out.
Then extend the sheath with forceps, and excoriate it with a fine cautionery heated, and cut it as much as possible for you, until you root out all of its parts.
And be careful not to burn the egg.
Know that this operation is safer, more distant from bleeding, and better than the operation with incision.
If, however, the counteraction happens to you at the time of incision or at the time of cauterizing, a boil, or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary that you treat what causes the counteraction from it with the treatment that suits it, according to what was mentioned earlier.
If the patient is weak and afraid and does not expect this operation due to its horror: then administer a puncture as I tell you that, and it is.
When you are assured to you at your home about what I said about the signs, that the branch is watery: then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised chair.
Then puncture the boil in its lower part with a broad spoon-shaped instrument and place the puncture along the length of the body and let it be wide open until all water flows out.
Then place a warm pad on the spot and tie it up and let the remaining water flow out; then treat it until the wound heals.
If the counteraction happens during the exit of water at the time when you puncture it and this is not due to anything else except a white gauze that causes counteraction in the wound opening and prevents the flow of water, then it is necessary that you insert a feather into the wound or an instrument with which the water from hydropic sores is extracted, whose shape was mentioned earlier, or add slightly more in the wound treatment.
And know that water returns and accumulates after six months, approximately. Therefore, when it accumulates, it should be stirred in the same manner, and the sick days will pass through.
Chapter LXIII.
Chapter on the Treatment of Fleshy Roots.
Know that in a section on this shinbone (Ramicem), it leads to danger in many dispositions due to fear. Therefore, it seems to me that its release would be beneficial from that [position].
And I remember the operation in that [place], and the appearance of the excised part.
I say that many excisions occur in the body, of which the testicles are composed; this happens due to various causes, such as...
Or from an excess of sharp or acid fluid that is discharged towards the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of an excised part is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain found in it; and an excision is heavy (or large).
And perhaps it is a stone-like excision, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it happens from the swelling of the arteries and their inflation; as has been mentioned before; or from the swelling of the veins.
What then is known to be from the inflation of the arteries can be recognized by the appearance of the excised part, when you compress it with your fingers. And one should not touch it entirely (or fully).
But that which happens from the swelling of the veins does not spill out anything under compression with fingers.
And now it is possible that a section can be made on this appearance and on the remaining flesh; and it is to cut the skin of the testicles. Then spread the egg to the top, and extract it along with its sac (sifach) of white; and release the suspension from the abdomen, and tie the abdomen; then cut the suspension after you have released it from all parts of the egg.
If the hardened egg is attached to those born (or growing) flesh, then you must pull the egg and cut it.
If there is an adhesion between something from the siphunculus, or within what is between the vessels: then it is necessary to release the entire adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
If it is a flesh birth in the place of the adhesion that is behind: then it is necessary to cut the entire thing and extract the egg, as we have said.
When your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; afterwards take care of it with the remaining care until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
Chapter on the Care of Branches, which is related to the Vine.
A tumor is enclosed by some swelling resembling a bunch of grapes with the softening of testicles; and it becomes difficult for movement and exercise, and walking.
And in the treatment of this illness there is a fear because of the memory of what preceded it.
However, it is necessary to say that the operation should be done according to what the first ones did.
I therefore say that it is necessary to make the sick person sit on a raised seat. Then pull down the suspender of the testicles towards the lower part. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, near the vessels which are close to the penis; and let another servant hold it and stretch it with a strong extension.\]
Then cut with a wide, sharp, transverse incision directly over the vessels, until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape away from every side, as I have told you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.\]
Then insert a needle with a double thread into them and tie it at the first places where vines occur; and tie it again at the end of them.\] Then cut it in half straight through the middle along the body's length, and extract what collects from foul and corrupted moistures.
Then care for the wound along with the treatment of other wounds, where pus is generated, so that vessels which nourish one testicle may fall. For it is not harmful through that [pathway].
If it happens that all the vessels are affected, then they must be extracted because of the testicles along with the vessels: so that the egg may not be deprived of nourishment due to the incision, and it may decay or burn, and not be helpful with them.
Chapter 65.
Chapter on the care of intestinal roots.
The outlet of these roots is from the incision which occurs on the extended sifach above the abdomen in the inguinal part of the liver.
Why do the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from the sifach or its extension.
These two types of ruptures occur for many reasons: either from a blow, a jump, a shout, raising a heavy object, and similar things.
And the sign is when it is due to the extension of the sifach. It happens gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly: and it is an abscess turned deep: therefore, because the sifach compresses the intestine.
And its sign is when it is from the section of the sifach, because it causes a sudden intense pain from the beginning: and it is an abscess different, appearing below the skin close by: and this is due to the outlet of the intestine, and its course to the exterior sifach.
And sometimes it comes out with the intestine called zirbum: and this root is called intestinal root, and zirbia: and sometimes it occurs with wind.
And at times feces run into the intestine and are retained there; it is with great danger for the sick, because it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron, there is fear; therefore one must be careful about accidents happening in it.
The method of the operation is to order the sick person to bring their intestine back with their own hand to the hollow within themselves, if they obey the return. Then he shall lie on his back upon his neck between your hands; and lift up his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin upward, and cut the skin of the testicles entirely along its length. Then fix two hooks on the lips of the incision, according to what you need to open the incision with them; and let the incision be according to the size, so that it is possible for the egg to come out of it.
Then scrape the scrotum, and what is beneath the skin of the testicles, until the albumen of the scrotum becomes hard from all sides; then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, into that which is between the albumen of the scrotum, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the scrotums according to, and without adherence to it in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move the right hand toward the inner skin of the testicles; and while doing this, stretch the albumen of the scrotum upward with the left hand; and lift out the egg with the scrotum to the part of the incision, and command the assistant to extend the egg upward; and you separate the adherence that is behind the complete solution.
And search with your fingers whether there is something inside the scrotum from the rolled-up intestine in hard albumen. If you find anything from it, then push it downward to the lower stomach.
Then take a probe with a thick thread made of linen from ten strands, and insert it at the last sifach, that is, the tunica underneath the skin of the testicles following the incision: then cut the ends that project from the thread until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them above others in a cross-like fashion and tie the sifach, which we mentioned is the ligament beneath the skin of the testicles, so that no pus from those vessels can be sent to them: to prevent the development of a hot abscess there. And place another ligament beyond the first one, at least two fingers away from it. And after these two ligaments, release a piece from the sifach beneath the skin of the testicles, as big as a finger. Then cut the rest in a circular manner and remove the egg-like substance.
Then make a cut on the lower part of the scrotal skin from which blood and pus flows, as we described in that which was mentioned before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place the ligament we mentioned. And sometimes burn the white sifach which we described after its incision, to prevent bleeding. It often happens that this occurs. Release the ligament until it falls off by itself.
If the condition does not improve, then fumigate it with hot water, and place on top of what we described until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the usual treatment for wounds until it heals.
Chapter 66.
Chapter on Ventose Hernia.
In this ventose hernia, I did not see anyone who dared to treat it with an iron.
And indeed they first said, that it is done as we have narrated in Ramice which is with Vite. That is to tie vessels after the section with ease below it; then cut in the middle, and care for it afterwards with what opens itself, until the vessels fall out; and care for the wound, as we have said, until it heals.
Chapter LXVII.
On the disruption that happens in the groins.
When rupture happens in the groins, as we have said, and the place becomes open, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles; and if it does descend, it is little, and returns at all hours; but if prolonged with it, a fissure is added in sifach until the intestines descend into sifach.
And this happens due to the extension of sifach, which is in the groins, as we have said. That is because sifach extends; then it softens, and the place is massaged, and it comes out.
And its care is with a cautery, as its previous narrative has described.
And sometimes it is cured with iron, according to this method; and it is to lie weak on his back between your hands. Then cut the place of the rupture and protruding, with a cut across its width, according to the size of three fingers.
Then tie off the alisifak and what is beneath the skin until white sifach, which is beneath the skin that follows it, appears.
Then take the cautery and place it on the protruding place from sifach, and press it deeply into the abdomen.
Then take two protruding places on the extremity of the radius from sifach, and join them with a suture; then remove the extremity of the radius.
Do not cut the anus at all, nor stretch the egg, nor anything else, as I have taught you to know in the treatment of intestinal branches.
Then treat that with the remedy for wounds. When you cut the thread, clean it, and restore the wound until it heals.
For indeed, a sisycos (a kind of tumor) is contracted, and there is no swelling due to rupture.
And cautery is better in this place because it is closer to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
Chapter on the softening of scrotal skin.
The scrotal skin is often softened in some men because the flesh between them becomes soft and its appearance is disfigured.
Therefore it is necessary for the person who is asked to treat this condition to have him lie down on his back, and to cut through all the softened skin over the natural skin.
Then gather the two lips together with suture: and if you wish, or especially if there is excess of softened skin, trim it off using three or four stitches, and sew firmly.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat the remaining wounds with remedies until they heal and the thread falls out.
Chapter LXIX.
Chapter on castration.
You should know that castration is prohibited by our law, and because of this I may omit it in my book and there is no need to remember it except for two methods.
One reason is that this knowledge should be in the medical profession when asked about it: and so that he may know the treatment for the condition when it occurs.
And there is another method that we often need for the castration of some animals, due to our needs from it, as for example sheep, goats, cats and similar ones among animals.
I say therefore that castration is done in two ways. Or by attrition. Or by making a cut and dividing it (i.e., surgical castration).
In the case of castration by attrition, the method of operation is: that we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and relax and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they resolve and no longer appear under touch.
In surgical castration, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the scrotum and cut through it entirely over every egg until two eggs come out: then cut where you have scraped off both, and do not leave anything besides the chyle (seminal fluid) that is on the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one by attrition: because attrition perhaps leaves something from the testicles, therefore the animal desires intercourse.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
Chapter on the care of Hermaphrodites (intersex individuals) in two ways.
A hermaphrodite is male according to two modes. One of them is because there appears in it what follows the space, or in the skin of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles, a figure resembling a female wolf, in which hairs are found: and sometimes urine flows from it, which is in the skin of the testicles.
But in women there is one species, and it is a female wolf on the forehead like small testicles of a man, projecting to the outside: of which one is like Priapus (a mythological figure with an exaggerated male sexual organ) of a man, and two are like two testicles.
And the treatment of the three species (threes types), two from men, and the one species from women, is: because it is necessary to cut into the flesh added, until the impression of them escapes. Then cure them with the treatment of other wounds.
But in the second species of men from which urine flows out, which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is its treatment at all.
Chapter LXXI.
Chapter on the incision of tentigo (an inflammatory disease) and the flesh projecting in female wolves.
Tentigo (an inflammatory disease) is perhaps added superficially until it becomes ugly and the appearance of it becomes foul: and sometimes it swells so much in some women that it extends like it does in men, and reaches to coitus (sexual intercourse).
Therefore it is necessary to hold the superfluity of tentigo with the hand or with a hook and cut into it: and not to go too deep in cutting, especially at the root, so that bleeding does not occur.
Then cure it with the treatment of wounds until it heals.
The flesh that arises is the flesh that is born in the orifice of the womb until it fills itself: and perhaps it comes out to the outside, resembling the tail: and because of this some call the disease "caudatus". It is necessary that we make an incision in it as we do with a tumor, and treat it until it heals.
On the treatment of the Alraqic ulcer, which is not penetrated by the vagina.
Chapter LXXII.
The arteria is that it should be a female's unperforated wound, or it should have a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by the preceding illness; and it itself is made either from flesh naturally added, or ifach subtle, or thick; and it is made either in the deep of the womb, or in its sides, or on its top, or bottom; and it prevents coitus and impregnation, and parturition, and perhaps prohibits menstrua.
And the knowledge of this is obtained through the examination of an obstetrician, if the membrane is visible nearby.
If it is not visible, then search for it with your fingers, or with a probe.
If the membrane is from ifach subtle and is near two lips; then, pull it and break it apart.
And it is to place two small pills on top of the lips.
Then place your thumb and index fingers together, and the woman lies on her back with legs apart. Then spread the two lips with force until the ifach subtle is torn and the membrane is opened.
Then take wool and wet it with oil, and place it on the site; let the woman anoint it every day so that the site does not heal in another way.
If the ifach is thick and large; then it must be cut with a broad-bladed leaf of myrtle.
If the membrane is from flesh naturally added; then hang it with hooks and cut it; and have medicines that stop blood flow without constriction, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and cedar resin mixed with egg white.
Then administer a wide cannula of lead to prevent the wound from healing quickly; hold it for several days; then apply linen cloth, and then care for the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And sometimes a birth in the womb of flesh from other parts occurs: it is therefore necessary that they be cut according to this manner: before there is no abscess, for an abscess that is cancerous in the womb, should not be opposed at all with iron.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the care of hemorrhoids, Attechel and Bothet regarding redness in women's ulcers.
Hemorrhoids indeed are the opening of vein orifices, until much blood runs out of them continually.
Therefore when hemorrhoids persist, they become piles; and I have already said about their species and the signs of them in the division, and now I will say which ones receive a cure, and which do not.
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb and are not felt by touch, then there is no cure for them with iron.
But those which are on the opening of the womb, over which there is touch, these are those which can be cured.
Therefore it is necessary to introduce a woman into a cold house. Then extend Attechel with forceps or rough cloth and cut them from their roots.
Then powder over them near the flow of blood from one powder of incision without biting: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and alum, and similar ones.
Then press his feet to the wall at noon. Then lay her down in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumach, and rind of pomegranates, and vinegar, and similar ones.
Then take barley flour, knead it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on his back.
If therefore blood is cut with it, good; and if not, make the back adhere to bladders, and nipples, without scarification.
Then take wool, and dip it in the juice of tarathit or arnoglossa or alaulat branches (aglanter), Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the loin.
When therefore the abscess is quiet, then care for the place with ointments until it heals.
However, the red one resembles the heads of alhaasse and has a rough appearance.
Therefore it is necessary that you cut what appears from it, according to what I said in thehelil equally; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter LXXIIII.
On the Perforation of the Dead Fetus that occurs in the Womb.
Many species of abscesses occur in the womb, such as cancer, stone abscess, ulcers, adubelati and alekilati (herpes), fistulae, hemorrhoids, ragadiae, thelil, and hot abscess.
And I myself have already said all these diseases and their species, the signs of them, and their treatments in division: it is necessary that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess that occurs in the womb when it is one of the abscesses that collect pus; and know how to make its opening with iron.
Therefore it is necessary that you consider. If then the pain of the abscess in its incision is sharp with striking, and burning, and fever; and you see it turn red; if it falls on sensation, then do not rush with perforation of it: and care for it with that which helps for maturation until when the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a bench which has two arms, and she should recline or lean upon her back, and bring her feet to the lower part of the abdomen: and her hips should be spread open, and she places her arms below her knees, and tie each with a band corresponding to that.
The midwife should sit by the right side, and administer the instrument for opening the womb's opening.
And it is necessary that when you administer this instrument, you mark with the deepest part of the rod of the woman's womb: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the womb and harms the weak.
If the instrument is deeper than the depth of the womb, then it is necessary that you place pillows on the top of the deep part of the woman's womb: to prevent the entire entry of the instrument into the depth of the womb and to make a loop, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and to hold the instrument and for the attendant to turn the loop until the depth of the woman's womb is opened.
When it appears that the baby is about to be born and it is touched with a hand, and it is soft and smooth, then it is necessary that you remove her to the head with a broad spatula.
When the pus is expelled, then it is necessary to place a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, containing some sticky substance, on the wound: and to place the cloth and make an incision in the depth of the womb.
Place a clean woolen cloth soaked in water boiled with mallow over the womb and the comb.
Then it is cured for two days with an ointment suitable for that until it heals.
And sometimes the matrix (womb) and wound are washed, so that they are cleansed with water and honey: then, with water in which the root of the lily has been boiled, or long aristolochia, return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden internally within the matrix (womb), then it is necessary that you refrain from treating it with iron, rather treat it with what I said in the division section.
Chapter 70.
Part of Obstetrics: How to treat living embryos that have been born abnormally.
It is necessary for an obstetrician to first know the shape of a normal birth.
From these signs it is that when you see a woman being pressed towards the lower part and desires to smell air, and there is lochia on her who is in labor, and she hurries the birth of the embryo: then you know that this birth is according to its natural shape, and its exit is over the head and the second one with it: either suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press her abdomen so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends over its head, the second one also descends with it, and it is cleaned from these excesses with good cleansing.
But whoever is beyond this birth, is unnatural, unlawful.
Because sometimes the fetus comes out over its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and its feet and hands one or both: or the head and hands come out: or the navel comes out: and perhaps it turns on its neck, and similar unlawful figures.
Therefore it is necessary for an obstetrician to be wise and cautious in all these matters, and to avoid errors and deception: and I am showing every figure of them, and how there is intelligence in it, and it is indicated by that, and it will stand on top of it.
When the fetus comes out on its own head during natural delivery and it becomes powerful over the woman, and birth becomes difficult for her, and you see that his strength is already weakened: then make her sit on a chair, or women hold her; and fumigate her windpipe with fennel boiled, and with moist oils.
The midwife introduces a small spatula between the fingers and cuts the second finger, and snips it with her nail until what is within her becomes dry; then she presses the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be cleansed with a fennel mucilage, with sesame oil.
Then command her after the cleansing to be bound; and make her sneeze with pepper and hold her nose for an hour. For the fetus will immediately come out.
If two hands of the fetus come out first, then it is necessary to reduce them gently and slowly with a reed. If it does not obey when introducing, then put the woman on a chair and raise her feet upwards; then strike the chair on the ground; and hold her so that she does not fall during the shock.
If then the hands do not come out and the fetus dies; cut them off, and extract the remaining fetus; tie her hand with cloth, and extract him evenly; for he will come out.
The emergence of the embryo is on its foot. When the fetus comes out on its feet, then push them upwards; then turn the fetus gradually; afterwards extract him evenly.
Then take one foot of his and stretch it gradually.
When they (the instruments) come out up to the hips, then command him (the patient), let it be pressed, and make it sneeze with a powder: it will come out if God wishes.
If it does not come out as we have told (described), then gradually draw back the fetus until you place it in its natural position. For it will then come out easily through delivery.
If it is prevented from coming out as we have told (described): then take althea mucilage, sesame oil and dissolved gum: grind all together well in a mortar using good pounding; afterwards, apply the mixture with a thread to the woman's womb and lower abdomen. Then make her sit in warm water until the afterbirth follows.
When you see that the lower parts (of the woman) are now warmed up, then give her some (substance) from myrrh: and place it under her. When an hour has passed since you gave her the substance, then make her sit on a chair. Then make her sneeze: and hold open her mouth and nose: and press the lower part of her abdomen gently. For the fetus will come out immediately.
The exit of the fetus above the knees and hands. When it comes out in this manner (described), then make her give birth gradually by introducing her hands little by little. Then the woman lies on her back with her feet hanging down: and she lies down on a bed and wraps her hands (around the fetus). Then press gently on her abdomen little by little. Then remove whatever is under the woman's feet from the pudendum, until it is prepared below (in the vagina). If the fetus does not come out, then take her feet and move them forcefully. Then press gently what is above the hypochondrium gradually, until the fetus rises upwards. Then insert your hands and gently press the fetus: and instruct the woman to compress herself until the fetus exits.
The exit of the fetus is wide-spread hanging from the hands. Make an incision for reducing the hand (of the fetus). If it cannot be reduced, then lift the woman and make her walk.
But if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed: and strike her legs violently.
Then apply the ointment you prepared from glue.
But if she receives her labor, then make her sit on a chair. Then strive for the reduction of the hand and gently press the fetus according to its natural shape: and make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to compress herself until it exits.
The exit of the fetus is on its neck, with spread hands, and its face is towards the back of the mother. The midwife must hold the hand of the fetus, then gradually turn it and press it gently with ease.
When it is turned, then place it on the wound that we have mentioned, made of oil and glue.
Then instruct her to move slowly. When you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and instruct her to lean to the right side. Then instruct her to compress herself: and make her sneeze with powder.
The exit of the prepared fetus is on the side. When it descends to the woman's opening in this manner with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your nail until it is expelled due to moisture.
If the fetus is suspended over the face and its neck, then cut it from the navel so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus towards the inside until you place it as required; and tell the woman to compress herself several times; for it will exit easily.
Section on Twins or Multiple Fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or even four. However, such a thing is rare and unusual.
But five are absolutely beyond nature and do not survive long; and contain them, although they multiply, by the second one; and separate them through a surgical incision (sifach) that distinguishes the connected cord at the navel of each of them.
And sometimes they exit like a single fetus through a natural, easy birth canal; and they exit in an extraordinary way, as we have told.
If some of them are difficult at birth and reach the condition that I have said in unnatural ways (from the figures), then care for them as we have described; and let a skilled midwife be there, and she should do what she does with ease and slowness, and invent according to all possible shapes to prepare herself to save them.
Section on the Recollection of That Which is Formed in the Womb from Embryos, and Miscarries.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or even more than ten embryos are formed in the womb and miscarry; and it has already been proven to me that a woman, while miscarrying, has expelled seven, and another fifteen, all fully-formed.
That which was done by the measurement of a wise man.
Therefore, this entire matter should be known by an Obstetrician. Perhaps it will reach that one similar to it: Therefore oppose to it what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus, as previously stated in the division of medication, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use surgery with your hand, then it is necessary for you to consider.
If the woman is of good health and not with any accident from which destruction may be feared over her: then it is necessary for the woman to lie on a bed, on her back, and her head should be inclined downward, and her legs raised: and the attendant should hold her from both sides, or she should be tied to the bed, so that her body does not come out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then the mouth of the womb should be moistened with oils, almond gum, and flaxseed.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and gums: then she should insert it into the womb easily. Then she should seek with her the place where she will fix the hooks on the fetus, and places suitable for that.
Therefore consider then, if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its head: then fix hooks in its eyes, or its neck, or its mouth, or its palate itself, or under its beard, or in its armpits, or near the ribs, and under the breasts.
If, however, it is a descent onto its feet: then fix hooks in its chest and the middle of its ribs.
And it is necessary that the hook should be held with the right hand: and she should place her thumb on what is between the fingers of the left hand: and insert with the hand easily, and fix the hook in one of those places which we said, until it reaches an empty space.
Then fix another hook or a third one, if necessary: so that the constriction is equal, and it does not lean to one side.
Then it should be extended with an equal extension, and it should not be an extension only in a straight direction, rather it should be moved to all parts, so that its outlet is relieved: just as it happens when a tooth is extracted for its removal.
And it is necessary for what is between it [the extended part], that the extension be made soft. If a part is retained from it [the extended part], then it is necessary that the midwife insert certain fingers with oil and turn it with them, which is retained.
If, therefore, a part of the fetus emerges, then the hooks should be moved to another higher place: do this until the entire fetus has emerged.
If, therefore, a hand emerges before other parts and it is not possible to return it because of its twisting: then a cloth should be wound around it. Then extract it until when the entire [part] has emerged, cut it at the joint of the foot or the elbow: and thus you should do so with the other hand, and in two feet.
If the head of the fetus is large or it has a twisting in its emergence, or water is collected around its head: then a sharp pointed spatula called Spatumile should be inserted between the fingers and pierce its head and extract the water; or break it with the instrument called Almisdac, whose shape comes with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter following this.
Similarly, do as follows if the fetus is of large head nature: then pierce it with a cautery called Algengematu; or extract it with misdach, as mentioned before. Then draw the bones with forceps.
If the head emerges and twists at the neck: then it is punctured until the moisture inside the chest is released.
If it is not complicated and does not obey to exit: then cut the head roughly, as much as possible for you.
If below the abdomen is an apostema or it is in him hydropisis: then you must pierce it, until the moisture runs out from it.
If indeed the fetus is above his feet, then the drawing of it will be easy, and its direction to the bone of the matrix will be light.
If however it is twisted in the abdomen or chest: then you must draw it out along with a cloth which you have wrapped over your hand; and pierce the abdomen or chest until what is within them runs out.
If however the remaining limbs are removed and the head returns: then the midwife should insert her left hand. If therefore the bone of the matrix is open, then insert your hand into the depth of the matrix and search for the head with it, and draw it out with your fingers up to the bone of the matrix; then insert a hook in it or hooks two, and draw it out with them.
If the bone of the matrix is twisted, because of a hot apostema which has happened to it: then you should not work on it, but rather administer a solution of moist things, oily; and administer poultices; and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it may be equalized: then administer what we have said for a living fetus.
If that cannot be done, then cut it roughly and draw it out.
And it is necessary not to leave anything from the second part inside at all.
When you complete your operation, then administer what we have said for hot apostemas which occur in the matrix.
If bleeding occurs, then lower [the patient] into warm water and administer the remaining treatment.
I myself have seen a woman, whose womb was dead due to one fetus; afterwards she became pregnant again with another fetus, and that fetus also died. Therefore, after a long time, an abscess occurred in his navel and it became swollen until it opened; and he began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called upon for his treatment, and he was treated over a long period; but the wound did not heal.
I then applied to him some strong adhesive plasters; and bone came out from the place. Then, after a few days had passed, another bone came out. I was therefore amazed when no bone was found in the womb.
Therefore, I thought that the dead fetuses were made of bones.
I therefore asked the wound, and took out many bones, when the woman was in good condition; and she lived for a long time in this state, but emitted little pus from the place.
I did not apply this foreign substance here unless there was knowledge and help for the treatment that is given by the medical artist with his hand.
Chapter LXXVII.
§ On the shapes of necessary instruments for extracting fetuses.
The form of the Spiral that opens the matrix.
Here is the form of a Stricture Instrument, by which books are evened, having equally two spiral threads at the ends of two pieces of wood. Nevertheless, this Spiral must be finer than the Stricture Instrument; and it should be made either of Ebony or Boxwood.
And let the thickness of all the wood be about two fingers; and the edge of each of them is like one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half; and in the middle of two pieces of wood there are two additions of the same kind of wood, which have already been fastened to both, whose length is half a palm or less; and the width of each is about two fingers or less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the matrix, to open it when you turn two Spirals with them.
Another form similar to it, but finer and lighter.
Let it be made of Ebony or Boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps. Nevertheless, at the end of it there are two additions, as you see here above; and the length of each addition is about a palm; and the width of each is about two fingers.
When therefore you wish to open the matrix with it, then make the woman sit on a bed, with her legs apart, opening what is between her thighs. Then insert these two additions together into the matrix; and you hold the end of the instrument below her hips. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with forceps, equally according to the amount by which you wish the opening of the matrix; until the Midwife does what she wishes.
Form of Vertigo other than what the ancients called Form of Pushing, by which the fetus is pushed.
The shape of the Molar-grinder, by which the large head is crushed: and it resembles a pair of forceps, having teeth at its end, as you see.
And sometimes it becomes hook-shaped, like a pair of forceps according to this shape, as you see, having teeth like the teeth of a saw, by which it cuts and crushes.
The shape of the Scissors having one spine.
The shape of the Scissors having two spines.
The shape of the Spatula having two ends for severing the head.
The shape of two Spatulas also broad.
All these instruments are applied, and the more their forms multiply, and the more they are prepared by the craftsman, it is quicker for its operation, and higher in the eyes of men, due to its quantity.
Therefore, do not disregard any instrument, as it may be prepared for you. Indeed, their necessity is unavoidable.
Chapter LXXVIII (78).
Chapter on the Second Extraction (Cesarean section).
When the Second Extraction (Cesarean section) retains during childbirth, then order the weak to hold their breath. Then make her sneeze with powder and press your hand over her mouth and nose. If it comes out through this (the incision), that is good.
If not: then take the pot and pierce a hole in the covering (uterus): and put in there opening herbs, such as camomile, rue, anise, chamomile, wood-ear, centauray: take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and place them on fire.
Then place the bulb of the reed on the opening of the pot's cover, and the other end into the bone of the matrix; and hold it until the vapor reaches the concavity of the matrix.
Then make her sneeze, as we said. For sublingual secondaries, it will come out easily.
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, then order the Midwife to immerse her hand in sesame oil or marshmallow juice. Then insert [the hand] into the cervix and seek out the Sublingual. When it is found, then take it and gently pull it out gradually.
If it is attached deeply in the matrix, then insert [the hand], as we said, until when you find the Sublingual and draw it out gradually along the correct path to avoid the strong attraction of falling into the matrix; indeed, it should be moved gently to the right and left sides: afterwards, add to the amount of the attraction. It then subsides and is saved, and escapes from the adhesion.
If the bone of the matrix is twisted, as we have already said: treat it with sneezing and medication from the pot with herbs.
If it does not come out with everything that we have said, then take care not to tire yourself by repeatedly attempting the extraction.
However, whatever comes out of the bone of the matrix from there, tie it to the woman's hip. Then enema her with the four-ingredient ointment. It will rot and dissolve after a few days, and it will come out.
Nevertheless, when it rots, the foul smell is raised to the stomach and head, and harms the weak one. Therefore, it is necessary that suitable fumigations are administered for that purpose.
Some of the ancients have already experienced the fumigation of nasturtium and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate a woman during retention of the second birth and menstruation.
Make an instrument similar to an alembic, or from a jar. Place its wide end over the fire, and place the fumigation on plums. Hold it until the fumigation is consumed, then take another one.
Chapter LXXIX (79).
Chapter on the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born, and the anus of some of them is not perforated, which has already been cauterized with a sharp probe. Therefore, the midwife must perforate it with her finger; and if she cannot, she should perforate it with a pointed spatula, but be careful not to touch it (the rectum) with her hand.
Then put wool soaked in wine and oil on top of it. Then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
If you are afraid that it will be cauterized (healed), then put a leaden tube into the opening and remove it when the boy wants to defecate.
And now, cauterization of the anus also occurs due to the consolidation of a wound or abscess. Therefore, that consolidation must be cut, then treated with the remedy as we have said for the treatment and lead.
Chapter LXXX (80).
Chapter on the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part (of the body).
The fistulas that occur in the lower part are nodes (lumps), and swellings that occur near the anus outside; or in a space of one part; and there is one fistula or more than one.
When therefore the ancient knot is untied, watery whiteness or subtle pus flows out from it.
And sometimes there are penetrating ones among these fistulas. Therefore, those that penetrate are recognized by what comes out during discharge, and its gaseous nature, when the sick person uses discharge; and perhaps a worm comes out from them.
And there are fistulas among these when they penetrate into the space up to the bladder, and up to the meat of the penis. And there are those that penetrate up to the hip joint, and up to the coccygeal node.
From this it is recognized that the penetrating fistula up to the anus can also be recognized by the non-penetrating one, by inserting your index finger into the anus; and inserting a probe made of thin copper or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
If there is tortuosity in it, then insert a thin lead probe or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it all the way through, nor does anything come out of it during discharge, nor gaseousness, nor a worm as I said; then you will know that it is not penetrating; approach then for treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to the bladder or the urethra; then its sign is the outflow of urine from it, and its prohibition is that the location should not be closed with medicine.
But if it is penetrating up to the hip joint or the pelvis; then its sign is that the probe reaches there, if there is no tortuosity up to the bone; and pain in the surrounding area can be found, and pus always comes out from it; and medication cannot be applied in it, nor closed with an ointment.
In these fistulas that penetrate, there is no treatment at all; and their cure is toil and futility for him, upon whom they are formed, by foolish physicians.
In those not penetrating and also not ancient, healing is hoped for with a knife; as I tell you, and I have already tested it; and there lies the sick one between your hands upon his back; and raise his legs up to above his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his own belly. Then introduce a lead or copper rod if there is a twist in the fistula, until you know where the probe has reached.
If the sick one feels it around the anus, then you must insert your finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe already penetrate itself through the detected fistula, except that you also feel it between your finger and the fistula or flesh; then you will certainly know that it penetrates; therefore do not labor in it, because there is no healing for it, as we have said.
They say that flesh heals in some people and that the remedy by which they hope for help consists of applying a fine cautery to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and then introducing the burning cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat this twice or thrice until you know that all the flesh added by filtration, which is similar to a bird's quill, has been burnt up.
Then treat it with linen strips soaked in butter until the burnt flesh emerges; then treat it with ointments that produce and heal skin and make it firm.
If it heals, it is good.
If not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
If it exits [the anus] and does not reach your finger, which is within [the anus], and there is a thick membrane of flesh or sifak between it and the anus, and you see a fistula in what follows the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you go cutting with the fistula what is in the fistula, until the incision reaches where the edge of the membrane ends, and the membrane is released and falls.
Then clean those fleshy parts resembling the quill of a bird's feather, so that there remains nothing of them.
If blood overpowers you and dissolves between you and your operation so that the fleshy parts cannot be separated, then it is better for what is being done, and more expediently helped, to cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Because the cautery with fire brings about good results in searing those fleshy parts, burning of these added caruncles, and drying up of blood and moisture.
Then treat it with bandages rolled in butter or softened cabbages until the place emits pus and those seared fleshy parts emerge in the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments that produce tough flesh; there are medicines containing styptics and astringents.
For when it is restored, then it heals; and do not fear the repetition.
If the fistula has already reached the depth of the anus and is prolonged from the body's excess: then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
If therefore you feel a membrane, and there is between you and it a membrane from sifak or flesh, and it is close to perforation: then there is no operation on this, unless according to the way of trust and hope.
The substance is, because it is administered in him one of the three methods: either to cauterize it itself, as we said; or to excise it, until you reach its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert a linen, and cure it from nearby. And do not proceed much with the excision, so as not to cut the muscle containing the anus, and a harmful outcome of evacuation occurs without its will. Then cure that with what I said.
For perhaps it will be cured: or you elongate the skin itself, and clean it after you cut it up to near the anus, as I said, either with a pouch or with another sharp-pointed instrument. Then clean those fleshy parts filtered which are in the excision, up to where you can with examination.
Then try the healing of the whole wound with the excision, and at the superior orifice where it consolidates; and remains a hole opened in the inner part of the anus, and it will be lighter for the sick one.
And sometimes a fistula is sucked out by this method: and it is when you insert the pouch in the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus; then take the perforated tip of the pouch, which is like the point of the awl, that is, prepared from calfskin, according to this shape. And insert into it a thread rolled up from five threads, and around there. Then insert the pouch with the thread in the fistula, until you reach its concavity.
If it penetrates into the inner margin of the anus near, then extract the thread from that hole; so that you insert your finger in the anus and extract the tip of the thread, and gather both ends together: and tighten both, and leave it for one day or two days: and as much as the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well, until those fleshy parts which are between the two ends of the thread fall down; then care for the wound, until it consolidates and heals.
If, however, the opening of the Fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate in whatever way you prepare, unless it is very deep. For you there is no need to do this for the arm, so that you may not cut it yourself.
Then proceed with it as we have said, until it heals.
The form of the Spatulinis spiny is used to cut the Fistula whose sharpness is very keen, and one part is not keen so that it does not cut what is unnecessary, as you can see.
Chapter LXXXI.
On the suturing of hemorrhoids from which blood flows from their incision, and on the care of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids according to two modes. They are either within the anus, similar to coal-like blisters or prunes, or they are like grains of wheat themselves. And among them there are small ones and large ones; and blood flows from them always, and some are single, and others are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those which are outside the anus are for the most part dry, from which yellow water or little blood flows persistently, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is within the anus is to order the sick person to fast and rest: and it is pressed out, until it appears from the anus, and is seen by you. Therefore, either suspend them with hooks, or hold them with your nails. Then cut them at their roots.
If they are not held in them by the hooks due to their moisture and softening: then grasp them with a rough cloth or with a comb made of double wool, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them (the vessels), and sprinkle some warm powders over them after the incision to remain in the place of cautionery. Cauterize them according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. Then care for them with the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
If the anus does not obey to evacuation, then administer a gentle enema to the sick one containing a small amount of purgative, so that it cleanses what is in the anus, and let the sick person evacuate quickly when he releases it.
If the objects are external from the anus, then their nature is light and easy: it is as if you seize them with your nail, or seize them with a tweezers, and cut them. Then care for them with what I have said until they are healed.
And whoever abhors the incision with iron, then it is necessary that you administer suture for them in this way. Take a thread wound around, and insert it into the point. Then extract the objects towards the upper part, and let it penetrate with the point into the root from the other side: and wind up two ends of the thread, on the lower part of the point, and let them be broad: and tie the objects tightly with a strong ligature. Then knot the thread, and extract the point.
Do this with all the objects, and leave one of them: do not seize it yourself, so that excess of blood may flow from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch on the anus and place it on the anus: and command the sick person to rest. Then let him go until he falls asleep.
When the objects fall out, care for them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
On the treatment of fissures. For they often occur due to evacuation of feces and constriction of nature.
When they have been long standing and no medicine is of use for them: then it is necessary to shave with spatula or nail until they become moist, and the upper layer which prevents their consolidation should be removed from them. Then take care of them until they heal as required.
If they do not heal: then sharpen them more forcefully than before, until they bleed much and are opened again, then take care of them until they heal.
On the treatment of sores that are not inverted and those that are inverted, and about scrofula and ants.
Chapter LXXXII.
Know that Almirmar is not anything but a round knot similar to the color of the body, like a nail head: it occurs throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers: and pain arises from them during walking.
Therefore it is necessary to cut what surrounds the nail head and hold it with forceps or a tweezers, and extract it from its root.
Then take care of that, and if you wish to cauterize it as described in the previous chapter.
From scrofula, there is one raised part, a small and rough, filtered, round swelling above the surface of the body. And they often occur on boys' hands.
The treatment for it is to stretch the scrofula and cut into it, or sew it with silk thread, or with hair until it falls off. If you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, as mentioned before; and now the inverted scrofula and the non-inverted scrofula are removed with an instrument which I will describe.
Formica is also a small pimple that is filtered and coarse on the surface of the body, penetrating deeply; and when it is found cold, it feels like a bite of an ant in it, and it becomes throughout the body; and it mostly happens in hands.
And the treatment of it is that you take a reed from a goose's feather or a strong bird's feather; and place the reed on the pimple, until the circle of the reed contains its parts. Then turn your hand with the reed until it separates what is in the pimple's circuit; and place it in the flesh's depth, and pull out the pimple from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a reed of air or iron, in this manner.
Let the upper end of the reed be pulled to its limit, wrapped in something soft, so that it may be relieved when grasped by the finger and its rotation.
And if you wish to cauterize the pimple according to what was mentioned before in the caution of Athelil, in the chapter on cautery.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Chapter on instruments for administering to fumigations for diseases of the anus, and solutions of the stomach, and colics.
When fumigations are made of silver, gold, copper, or tin-bronze (malachite).
And sometimes one of these instruments is small, and large, according to those in whom it is used.
Therefore, that which is administered for the treatment of small children should be small. And as regards those with weak anuses or painful ones, so too should their clysters.
Large clyster.
The head of the cannula, i.e., the upper part where it is tied to the uterus, should be wide according to this method. It should have a distinction so that it can be tied to the uterus as you see, and its lower end, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed, i.e., not open, soft, very flexible, drawing towards subtlety. And on one of its sides there should be two holes, and in the other side there should be one hole.
And let the size of the hole be according to the thickness of the radishes, and slightly larger than that, and let the uterus in which medicines are placed be that made from the bladder of an animal or from goatskin, which should be small like an asphorate with a root of one palm.
And it should be perforated by many holes as is customary, and the space between each hole should be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a thread, perhaps made of raw silk, which should be from ten threads or about that, and bind it with it like an asphorate. When the cannula is placed in the uterus, tie the clyster at its head with a strong constriction between two of its distinctions. Then clysterize it (the uterus) with that.
And this is the shape of a circle and holes as depicted here.
The quality of clysterizing with it is: to fill the uterus or bladder with medicine which should be heated according to the tolerance of the sick person, and take care that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then the sick person lies down on his back and raises his legs towards above: and place under him a skin or linen, that is, a hide upon which people lie, or a cloth.
Then pour oil, or lard, or fenugreek mucilage on the extremity of the Clisteris (clisterium). Then insert it gently into the anus. Then let the assistant take the bladder with both his hands and squeeze it strongly until all that is in the clisterium (clisterium) has passed into the intestine.
Then remove the clisterium, and let the sick person raise his legs towards the wall.
If the medicine causes him to discharge, then hold as much as possible. And if he sleeps all night with it, it is more helpful in his recovery.
If the clisterium does not help him with abdominal diseases and he quickly discharges: then repeat the clisterium until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or wounds in the anus: then let the clisterium be very subtle, very soft, from those clisteria with which boys are cleansed.
And this should be the shape of a subtle clisterium, upon which the skin is tightened.
Chapter 84.
I have already said in the division of treating wounds that it belongs to a book, and here I will say about their treatment with hands and with medicine as a supplement.
Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to the cause of the wound and according to the place where the wound falls.
Therefore, the causes of wounds are as numerous as the thrown stone: cut with a sword or knife: struck with a spear, stick, or arrow: and similar things from various objects.
Wounds that are made according to the parts of the body are, for example, a wound on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the back: and similar ones from these members.
And I am telling cures for some wounds, in order to lay down reasoning and rule for the rest of the wounds.
And I shall begin with simple wounds of the head, since the memory of composite wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say. If there is a simple wound on the head and no bone is fractured, consider whether it was caused by a blow from a stone or similar objects, and only the skin has been broken; and if the wound is large, and you fear an imminent abscess of hot pus, then hasten and make a phlebotomy (letting blood) from the head immediately; do not delay this, and draw out as much blood as the strength of the patient allows, provided there is nothing prohibiting a phlebotomy, especially if little blood is flowing out from the wound. And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the weak patient avoid being filled with food and drink, and heavy foods.
If anything prevents a reduction (of the wound), then let there be a reduction in food, and avoid approaching meat or wine.
Place on the wound if a hot abscess occurs, warm compresses soaked only in rose oil or with wine in which there is soap.
If you are free from a hot abscess, then place on the wound if it is recent with its own blood and has not been exposed to air, and then wait a little while, and if the air has already changed, then place some ointment on it until it heals.
If the wound is large or from a sword cut and similar ones: and its edges are not brought together by pits, then gather it up with sutures, as I shall speak about in the wounds of the abdomen regarding their suturing.
If the wound has already been exposed by a bone and is hanging, and there is no retention of it except in a small suspension: then cut it. Then take care of the wound with medicines, and restore the hard flesh to its place in the skin, and tell the weak one to eat thick foods such as heads (of animals) and boiled wheat, until it becomes soft; and similar things.
If you find corruption (rot) in the skin and it is not adhering to bone: then cut away the rotten part, and throw it out; then take care of that.
If, however, in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows, and it cannot be separated by medicines, then ask about the artery. If you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula or tie it. If there is a need and it does not obey what has been said, then cauterize it until the blood separates.
If these wounds are small and simple, then the matter is easy and light; in such a way that you sprinkle this powder on them: because it solidifies them before they change to air.
Recipe puluellum albi, molae de caule aquileae, et bicarbonatum; Take one part of olibanum (frankincense), two parts of dragon's blood (cruor draconis), and three parts of unquents non extinctae (unburnt pitch); grind all together very finely, and strain it; fill the wound with it and tighten it with a good constriction, until it adheres well above it and coagulates with blood.
Then bind it from above with threads, and leave it alone, do not untie it while it remains, so that it does not become undone. The medicine is not to be removed from him until he is well.
And sometimes a plaster made of lime alone is used when there is no olibanum or dragon's blood available at hand. Even dragon's blood performs the same function in many serious wounds when it is necessary to put it on and bind them, and the wounds are fresh with blood that has not been affected by air.
If air has already affected the wound in some way, especially during summertime, then this powder is not effective. Therefore, treat it as we have said, by putting something digestive ointment over it, or applying poultices made of barley flour mixed with water and honey until pus is emitted. Then treat the remaining part of the wound with the rest of the cure until they are healed.
If a fracture occurs with the wound in the bone, and it is small, then extract it with trephine; I will now speak about the treatment of skull fractures, which follows.
Chapter on neck wounds.
If a wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple skull wound.
If the nerve or artery of the neck has already been cut, if it is a nerve, there is no skill in treating it except to prevent its intense stiffness with remedies such as zinjar and zegeh, and similar ones. Because they harm the nerves and contract them.
And do not put anything cold at all on the wound because the substance of nerves is cold and they are continuous with the brain, which is above the body's organs; let what is applied for treatment be made from soft medicines like lime mixed with sweet water several times infused with oil or rose oil, or with tuthia when it is also washed with sweet water; and other mineral stones, in this way, as well as moist ointments.
If however the wound is large, then administer suture; or sew together its irregular edges with small catgut. Then care for it until it heals.
If however the wound is deep and there occurs a cavity at its lower part which already collects pus, then open it up more deeply in that place.
If an artery has already been cut in the wound and there is bleeding from it; then separate, or cut it off, and tie it; or cauterize it if necessity requires this.
If however the cartilage of the throat has been cut, either entirely or partially, and the windpipe is spared; then bring together the edges of the skin with suture on top of the windpipe, and do not touch the windpipe; instead lift it up, and place it back in its natural shape. Then close it by stitching with a suitable suture, and let it rest for some days. Then care for it with ointments containing styptics and astringents until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then explore it; if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of them or as many as possible; and what cannot be prepared for removal, leave it until the ulcer rots, separates and drains away naturally.
If the wound is recent, then dust powder over it as I have said. If a bone appears in the wound and a fistula forms; then care for it with the remedy that comes up in its own chapter.
Chapter on wounds in plates or shields.
If it is a wound from a spear or knife; and you can see its depth, then examine it. If therefore a wound discharges pus, when, being ill, one breathes from it, then you know that the wound is mortal.
If it does not have depth and is recent with its own blood: then do not put powder in it from the first hour nor tie it up so that blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and kills the sick one; but put on it attracting ointment, and dissolve it twice a day.
If however ointment is not present with you, then put on the wound's opening an old piece of cotton to absorb what discharges from it by humidity; and make the sick one sleep over the wound so that what collects in it may run off.
If however three days or more have passed from the wound, and no spasm occurs to the sick one nor a bad heart tremor nor difficulty in breathing, and you see that his other conditions are good; then know that the wound is healthy. Treat him then with linen cloths and the rest of the treatment until he is healed.
If however his healing breaks open again and it keeps opening, then know that it has become a fistula. Treat the fistula from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and simple on the surface of the chest or back; then treat it with that which came before from suture, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
If however it has made an impression on the bone and cut off fragments from it; then look for the wound and rush to extract those fragments if they are separated. If however they are not separated, then leave them alone until the wound rots, for extraction is painful.
Judgement for treating other types of wounds on remaining limbs is the same as what we have previously mentioned.
On abdominal wounds and the evacuation of intestines, and their treatment.
A rupture that occurs in the abdomen can be great, medium or small.
From a great rupture, sometimes the intestine or number of intestines evacuate.
Therefore insertion and stitching is necessary for them, and the stitching is more forceful and difficult.
A small rupture also causes difficulty in a different way. Therefore, the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not hurry to insert it into its place immediately; because it inflates, opens and swells, which makes the entrance difficult.
Therefore, a medium rupture is better because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in these two types [small and great].
Know that the stitching of the abdomen is done according to four methods.
Two types of stitching are common to abdominal stitching and stitching for other body wounds; and two other types of stitching are specific to other wounds. However, they are more specific for abdominal stitching; and I will tell you one by one with an explanation and clarification.
Therefore, if the wound is small and something from the intestine comes out of it and reduction becomes difficult; then that is due to one of two methods. Or because of the smallness of the rupture, as we have said; or because there is inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
When this is the case, then it is necessary to heat it up so that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in warm water. Boil in water squill (squinant), daisy (cyperus), spike and broom in it, until the swelling is resolved.
Sometimes this decoction makes wine that has a stypic property: and it is better than water alone for resolving swelling.
When therefore you see the swelling already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which the wormwood (althea or artemisia) has been boiled, or with mallow (malva). For this purpose an opening is prepared for it with a small instrument.
If however the return (reflux) is lost after this treatment, then close the wound slightly with an instrument for hemorrhoids cutting.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared than section; and there should not be compulsion to cut after necessity and lack of instruments.
Let it have one part that is twisted, pointed, and another part not pointed, and the end should not be subtle like a spatula, rather it should be slightly blunt; and it resembles a shoemaker's awl, as you see.
When the wound is enlarged and the intestine enters, then it should return to its natural shape in its own place, if possible above it; because it is better.
But when the wound is wide at the lower part of the belly; then you must make the weak person lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is at the upper part of the belly; then raise the head and chest higher than the lower parts.
And similarly if the wound is on one of the two parts of the belly, then keep your attention and consideration always in this: so that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary to apply it to large wounds and to medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds, place it accordingly as it has been prepared for you.
Then make sure that a faithful servant is present among your hands, who holds the entire tear with his hand and brings the lips together. Then take something from it for the one who follows to sew, and this is the common method of suture for one.
And it is that you receive a needle or the number of needles according to the size of the wound. Then let go from the edge of the tear a length equal to a finger, that is, the doctor's; and sew in one needle beyond which you insert the thread into both sides of the skin, with both ends of the sifac (that is below the skin) from within, until you make it pass through from the other side, and you have already brought together the two sides of the skin and the two ends of the sifac; and there are four rows.
Then sew with double thread around the point of the needle several times from both sides together, until the two lips of the wound are brought together by a suitable approximation.
Then let go the thickness of a finger and sew again with another needle; then draw it back with thread, as you did with the first needle. Therefore do not cease to do this with the one you need from among the needles until you complete the closure of the entire wound.
And let the needles be of medium thickness between coarseness and finesse; because fine needles penetrate the flesh too quickly, and coarse ones are difficult to enter the skin; therefore, it is necessary that they be medium in finesse and coarseness.
And it is not necessary to sew the needle in the two sides of the skin that are close together; so as not to penetrate the flesh too quickly and open the wound before its consolidation, and not to elongate when sutured, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
Then cut the end of the onion so as not to harm the sick person during his sleep; and place small cloths around its ends, and leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
And this manner of stitching with onions is indeed more suitable for small wounds. Because one or two onions, or about the same number, are sufficient for their stitching.
The second stitch is common, where you bring together the edges of four: the edges, two of skin, and two of fat (in place of one), with an onion that has the thread wound equally fine and coarse around it.
Then when you pierce with the onion these four edges, remove the onion from the side where you began, so that the thread protruding from the upper part of the wound falls out; in this way the stitch is made, like a stitch with cloths as they sew clothes, and place between every stitch an amount of thickness equal to that of a little finger.
This stitch is known to men.
And with this stitch I sewed up my own wound which had happened to a man in his abdomen, who had been wounded with a knife, and the wound was larger than a span; and about two spans had come out from the small intestine, and the tear was in the middle of the abdomen.
I therefore sewed it up again when his intestines had stopped coming out for twenty-four hours.
The wound had therefore healed in about fifteen days; and I cured him, and he recovered; and he lived for many years afterwards, converted to his own dispositions.
And the physicians judged that he would not recover.
And it was a miracle that I did not cure it with ointment. Since I was in a place where no ointment could be found nor any medicine. I therefore put an old pot over the wound twice a day and kept washing it with water of honey until it was healed.
I will now describe two types of suture according to the narrative of the speech.
And it is, when you begin with sharp stitching: and you insert the needle from the outside to the inside part.
When the needle penetrates the skin and follows the length and width of the entire body: release the end of the thread on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate the other end from the inside to the outside at the opposite end.
When you have made it penetrate [the thread], then make it penetrate in the same end as follows: from the outside to the inside; and release the end of the thread on the side where you inserted it, and make the needle penetrate the other end from the inside to the outside; and make the penetration go through with your penetration that you are making in the end of the thread, which is in that part, until it penetrates completely.
Then also begin from the same side, and take hold of it with the end which is on the other side of the thread; and remove the needle from the skin that it penetrated.
Then return it to the same skin, and take hold of the other end of the thread with this end; and remove it from the skin that is on its side, and do the same thing again, and the other, and so on until you secure it all outside according to this example.
The summary of this suture is that you should sew the skin of animals such as hides: in such a way that one end of the thread is on one side of the skin, and the other end is released on the opposite side, until you complete it.
Second type of simple suture, as Galenus said.
This speech is told in such a way as some physicians do it, aggregating all parts to their corresponding part by nature; and they apply the end of the sifac to its other end, and the end of the mirach to the end of another part. And that is done according to what I tell you.
It is necessary that you fix the point of the needle near the end of the mirach on the outer side and let it penetrate to the inside only; and leave two ends of the sifac. Then turn the needle and let it penetrate from the outer side to the inside through both ends of the sifac.
Then turn both and let both penetrate from the inside to the outside through two ends of the mirach on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than common easy suture, and it is the suture which is mentioned previously.
Therefore, this is also the speech of Galenus.
And some said. The suture of the abdomen is sewn with two needles. Insert the thread into each of them (the two ends of the abdomen to be sewn) and begin with the insertion of the needle from where it is with you, letting it penetrate to the other side according to the equal stitch of those who sew leather equally.
And know that when the break is in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the dressing of wounds is the judgment of all wounds.
When you catch a fresh wound with its own blood before it changes due to air, and you reduce the intestines, tie them, and prepare them; then place it on powdered meat.
If the wound has already changed (for the worse): then place upon it certain ointments which are present to you, until they cause pus; and let the threads fall out, and may it heal well and be closed up. Then care for that wound as one would care for other wounds, until it is healed.
If there are no medications available to you, then immediately place upon it something old and warm; and change it twice a day as I have taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need other medicines when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound may communicate with the main limbs upon injury, then it is necessary to immerse a soft wool in warm oil or rose oil; and place it around the areas which are between the groins, and under the armpits.
If it feels pain, or punctures, or rotting in the bowels (for this often happens), then cleanse it with warm stiptic wine, black; especially if the rotting has already reached the intestine, and it becomes a penetrating issue as deep as its concavity.
And know this, that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal; and what comes from the small intestine, is harder to heal.
The intestine which is called Jejunum does not heal from a wound that occurs in it at all; and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and their size, and because of the subtlety of its body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
If what comes out from the wound is pus, and you follow it recently: bring it back according to your normal reduction of the intestines.
If the specified time has passed and it has already turned green or black: then it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the discolored spot, so that there is no bleeding. In it there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament and place two ends of the thread hanging from below on the wound side, outside it: to relieve the pulling of it toward you, and to draw out at the risk of the instrument the pus from the wound.
Reminder of a wound that occurs in the Intestine.
When there is a rupture in the Intestine and it is small: then it is possible for some people to be restored: because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a spear blow, and the wound was on the right of the stomach, and the wound was old: and it became a Fistula, and exuded feces, and gas.
I therefore treated it until I was not doubtful about its healing: nor did I cease to probe it, until it was healed and the place had become solid.
After I saw the place had become solid, I feared for the weak person, that an accidental evil would happen to him in his belly: and it did not happen to him from that accidental evil. And he remained in better conditions for himself, eating and drinking, urinating, and went into the bath, and was active in his regimen.
And some experimentalists said that when a wound occurs in the Intestine and it is small: then it should be tied up according to this method. It is, that you receive large-headed ants. Then join two edges of the wound and place one ant with an open mouth on the two edges of the wound. When therefore [the] head is placed on it, and the head is tightened, cut off its head, for it adheres, and does not loosen.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease to perform this until the ant after the ant according to the size of the whole wound.
Then draw it back, and suture the wound. For these heads remain attached in the intestine until it is fed, and healed, and no harm befalls the sick one entirely.
And now it is possible that the intestine can be tied even with a fine thread; what has been removed from the intestine of the animal, being attached to it when inserted into the point.
And it is to take the end of this thread from the intestine and remove a lot of flesh. Then tie a thread of fine linen at its end. Then insert the thread into the point, and suture it with the intestine. Then draw it back to the rupture.
And this method of suturing with ants and intestine, is not but by the way of confidence and hope.
Know that a large wound, wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines; then there is no artifice, nor is its healing altogether.
Chapter on Zuchomen (ulcer) care, and fistulas.
Know that every wound, or abscess when it becomes old and decayed, and becomes an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and always emits pus, and does not heal; then it is called universally in whatever member it may be Fistula, and we call it Zuchomen.
And Fistula indeed is according to truth a knot filtered, hard, white; with which there is no pain, which has the hollow of a bird's feather pen; and for this reason some call it Risati, that is, feather.
And there are certain hours that emit pus, which is moist. Perhaps the moisture splits in some hours. And at times this moisture is abundant and at times it is scant; and it is thick and at times it is subtle.
And now I have passed on to the division [of the subject], when I said wounds; for every sore that does not heal and is not generated within it flesh, is not that except because of one of nine causes.
One of these is when it is due to the scarcity of blood in the body; or its badness; or because within and on top of it there is hard flesh, which prevents the generation of flesh; or because there is much dirt and filthiness; or because the sore itself is putrid and the matter that is sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for its healing; or because corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence, as happens in Caesaraugusta, where the digestion of diseases is difficult and healing of ulcers through nature is delayed; or because there is one bone or number of bones.
And I have now shown all these causes and their signs, and the cures of them with medicines in the division; it is necessary here that I make you know the cure for fistula and zucchus, which is done by the way of operation with hand.
Therefore, you should know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For from these are fistulae that reach to large veins and arteries, nerves or joints; or intestines, bladder, or one of the ribs; or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the connecting parts composed of them: such as hands and feet; and from these are those that approach the proximity of a main member and similar ones.
That which is of these fistulas according to this method, is difficult for healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If it is one of the fistulas whose depth does not reach to those places which I said: and you hope, believe in its cure, and wish to attain knowledge about it, then take a probe made from bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, and examine it with it.
If there is a twist in the fistula, then investigate it with a fine probe made of lead. Because lead, due to its flexibility, can be easily bent according to the twist.
If the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to sign it with a probe. Cauterize therefore from its openings.
For the moisture with which you cauterize it, goes towards other openings and runs out of them.
Then investigate and inquire according to the way that is possible for you: so that you may know if there is a bone or nerve there, and if the fistula has a deep concavity, far or near; or if it is one with many openings, which stands over all of it, with the greatest strength of your hand, when questioning the sick, and discovering pain upon compression with your hand on the spot, and similar signs and causes of injury.
When you have stood steadfast over all of these with true certainty, then proceed to cure according to your confidence: and consider then if the fistula is near an apparent one, or in a distant safe place away from union, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places which I have told you; then cut the fistula according to what has been said in my narrative, remove what is in it from filtration and rotten flesh, which is born in its opening out of meat, fat, and similar things; and care for it until it heals.
If a fistula is deep-seated and straight: then it should be cut as deeply as possible for you. Then clean it from all the rotten flesh of its own.
Then wrap a linen cloth around the fistula with sharp medicines and insert it as far as you reach the depression of the fistula with iron: do this frequently, until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that remains in the depression of the fistula due to decay.
Then restore it with unguents which promote healthy flesh until it heals.
But if it does not heal through this, then cauterize it as we have said before.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it has been confirmed to you: then investigate it and cut it as I have told you; if it does not prevent you from cutting anything from the vein, or nerve, or major limb, as we have said before.
If you find bone and there is something decayed and blackened within it: then scrape it until the decay is completely removed. Then care for it with what cures it to make it heal.
But if it does not heal and emits pus like before: then you know that you have not completely removed the decay.
Investigate further over it, and find out the reason for it and clean it with all your might.
Then restore it. If it heals, it is good; and if not, then you know that the decay is in a deep-seated part of the body which you did not reach. Therefore, you do not have skill in it unless you allow nature to take its course.
If a small bone is decayed and can be reached by you, draw it out with fine forceps that fit the place.
If there are many bones, then carefully draw them all out without leaving anything behind with your strength.
If something occurs to you from the moist parts and there is no fear or mistake in cutting them: then cut those moist parts and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then place something over the wound that will rot it and let it go until it rots what is around those bones from the flesh and moist parts.
And keep the wound so that it does not harden. And contract the incision which you cut during your operation. Place over it, if you fear, a piece of copper submerged in crushed sulfur with oil; or a piece of copper submerged in Egyptian ointment, or any green ointment.
For when those moist parts rot and the bones separate from them, remove them and draw out the bones.
If there is a single large bone, such as the shin bone or hip bone and similar ones, and what has been corrupted from it is a large part: then shave it with the final rasp, until that blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
If what is in it has become a large part and corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it and cut it completely until the corruption stops; then care for it until it hardens.
And I tell you about a woman who had a problem with her leg: place this example and help for your operation.
A young man of about thirty years had pain in his leg due to a cause that moved within it from inside the body until the matter reached the leg and an abscess formed, which was large; there was no external cause.
The incision has therefore been made at the same time as the error of the physicians, until the abscess was opened, and many materials have gathered together with it. And the treatment of it was delayed until the leg ulcerated, and many openings were made in it: which all emitted pus, and moisture of the body.
Therefore, the crowd of physicians treated it for about two years, and there was no skill in healing hands among them until I was called, and I saw his leg, and the materials that were flowing out from those openings at a great speed: even the whole body of the man had already become swollen, and his color was yellow.
I therefore inserted a probe into one of the openings, and it reached the bone.
Then I examined all the openings: and found that they were penetrating each other from all parts of the leg.
I therefore approached, and cut through one of the openings until I exposed a piece of bone: and I found it corroded: which was already corroded, blackened, rotten, pierced, and penetrated up to the marrow.
I therefore sawed what had been exposed to me, and prepared it from the corroded bone.
And I assigned, that there was no part of the bone except for that corruption, which I had cut off and sawed. And I had already removed it.
Then I placed a restoration of the wound with firming medicines at a distance. And it is not solidified.
Then I tried again, and exposed a second bone above the first exposure: and I found continuous corrosion with the bone: and I sawed what appeared to me also from that corrosion.
And then I attempted a restoration of it. And it is not restored.
I therefore examined it again and did not cease to cut the bone piece by piece, and tried to restore it; and it was not restored until I cut about one palm's length of bone and pulled it out with its marrow.
Then I healed it with medicines, and it was quickly consolidated and cured; and this repetition in the operation and section of it was not necessary, except for the disposition of weakness in the patient, the scarcity of his tolerance, and my fear of death; since it often happened to him at all hours from an excess of evacuation syncopes bad.
It was therefore completely cured; and there grew in the place of the bone tough flesh, and good arrangements were made in his body, and his strength returned; and he turned to his own dispositions; and no harm at all was done to him by walking.
If, however, the projecting bone in the body is already broken; then it is necessary that you bind it thus: and this is to take a ligament, and tighten it at the end of the protruding bone; and order someone to stretch it upwards; and place another thicker ligament of wool around it first. Then bind it over the flesh that is on the bone; and extend its end, so that you may pull the flesh downwards; and you will uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew, so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
Place a stick or board underneath the bone below; because when you do that, it is not forbidden to cut the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the saw is over the corrupted place a little, so that there is no corruption in the hollow of the bone; and it does not appear to the senses when viewed, and forces another to be its substitute for the saw.
If the bone is corrupt and not projecting, but rather continuous with a part of it, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it: then excise all the flesh from every part. Then place the log below (it).
Next, saw that (part) from the affected side where the corruption is, until it reaches the other side of the incision; and let the saw-cut be shorter than the corruption length, as we said before.
If the corruption is at a joint, cut through the affected joint and saw the bone where it connects from the other side.
But if the corruption is between two joints, then it is not a fracture but an abrasion.
If the corruption is at the beak of the hand or foot: then matters in it are very difficult. However, you must examine the corruption to see how it appears to you. And abrade it, and cleanse it according to any possible arrangement for you, and with whatever skill available to you: when it does not cause you opposition from Vein or Nerve.
And know that the saws and saws for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones, their preparation, and their size, sharpness, magnitude, smallness, hardness, and scarcity. Therefore, you must prepare every kind of instrument suitable for the operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you the type of instrument you need, when your study has been prolonged. And the knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the methods of illnesses: then you will find for yourself that which suits it from among the instruments for every ailment.
And I confirm to you at the end of this chapter's number of instruments, which you will place examples upon that you cut into, and a proof by which you test on others.
Form of another Saw.
Form of the Razor for joints. Let the head of this Razor be in the shape of a star-headed nail's head; and its points be in the shape of the points of an enchased nail.
And it is not suitable, unless they are rubbed with the heads of connected joints when they are corrupted, or a large and great bone.
Form of the Major Scraper.
Form of the Wide Scraper.
Form of the Scraper with a Concavity.
Form of the Other Subtle Scraper.
Form of the Other Scraper with a Curved End.
Form of the Small, Subtle and Flexible Scraper.
It resembles a Saw and its end is like a Razor: it is used in many places due to the cutting of bones.
Form of the Scraper suitable for scraping that which has been pierced from bones.
Its end is triangular and its points are sharp.
It is made of India (ivory). And likewise, everything that we have said should be made from Scrapers, Chisels, and Saws.
Chapter on the Incision of Edges and Sawing of Bones.
Extremities become putrefied either from external cause or internal cause.
When you have treated the corruption with medicines and the cure does not improve and you see that corruption is spreading into the member which it did not affect previously: then it is necessary to cut that member as far as where the corruption appears, so that the weak part may escape death or a greater evil due to the defect of the member.
And a sign of this is that the member turns black until it seems rotten; that fire has burned it itself or it becomes putrid after turning black: until the rot is cut as far as the following member and it creeps throughout the whole body.
Approach therefore with the incision of his, and similarly if the cause of corruption is from the strike of certain venomous things such as the marine scorpion, viper, weasel, and similar creatures.
If the corruption or striking is at the extremity of a finger, then incise the finger, and do not leave room for spreading (of the corruption), until it reaches the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in a hand, then incise it from the root of the wrist, and do not leave room for spreading (of the corruption), until it reaches the forearm.
And if it spreads within it (the wound), then incise the arm at the elbow joint.
If the corruption passes through and you see him about an elbow's length, then it is death of a weak person. And beyond that (the treatment), the amount is virtue (of the medicine).
And similarly with a foot, when corruption spreads to the toe, then cut it at one of the joints; and if it reaches the heel of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. If it rises to the knee, then cut off the leg at the knee joint.
If corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no help except for release and to leave the weak person to die.
And the manner of cutting a limb, or sewing it is that you bind (tie) the ligament at the lower end, which you wish to cut, and tie another ligament above the place. And let one attendant stretch the ligament to the lower part, and let another attendant stretch the other ligament upward. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments with a broad (blade), until all the flesh is exposed. Then it is cut or sewn.
And it is necessary that you place a clean linen cloth over all the parts and not touch a healthy place with the blade; and for a weak person, an additional injury occurs and a hot abscess.
If however bleeding occurs internally while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly; or place some powders on top of it that absorb blood. Then return to your treatment, until it is completed.
Then tie the wounded member with an appropriate ligature and take care of it, until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot, the same thing that I told you happened.
It is that, because blackness occurs in his foot, resembling the burning of fire; and the rot starts first in one of his toes, until it began to affect the entire foot.
Therefore, the man came out of himself after he saw the rot spreading in his limb with severity, which he found from pain and burning; and he cut it off at the joint, and he healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, the same rot occurred in one of his fingers on his index hand.
Therefore, he came to me and I attempted to recover the amputated part using medicines on his hand after cleansing his body; but the amputation was not recovered, and it began to affect another finger until the rot affected his entire hand.
He therefore called me to cut off his hand; and I refused it, hoping for a recovery of the amputated part in me; and I also feared death itself for him at the cutting of his hand. Because the man was of great strength.
Therefore, after he had given up on me, he returned to his own land; and he came to me again because he was in a hurry, and cut off his entire hand; and he healed.
I did not bring this narrative unless it should be of help for what falls under the genus of this illness; and in order to signify what is meant, and according to which procedure it is to be carried out.
On the treatment of nosebleeds, and the quality of clysterization with medications.
When a boil occurs in some fleshly members and the duration of the boil extends until it collects pus: then it bursts or is perforated and what is inside the boil exits as pus and leaves a hollow place like a vessel: and the skin that is on top of it becomes thin like a cloth that has been softened: and it does not reach its ultimate corruption, nor presses upon a bone, nor a nerve, nor a ligament: it deserves to be called a Sinus: and it is not named a Fistula: however, if the duration of its hollow space extends until corruption spreads into one of these members, then it is named a Fistula or zuken.
And its treatment is that you should cut the entire skin as it is rolled: and especially when it has become thin like cloth: and trust that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and this ultimate corruption does not follow: and if there is a thickness in the skin from flesh: then treat it with Clisterium: and know that it concerns a Sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus that is emitted from it has a foul odor: then clisterize it with medicine from Egypt, which is vinegar, oil, and zinnia, taking equal parts, to be mixed in a jar: and boil them over fire until the medicine turns red: and let it come to the consistency of honey.
Then take what is necessary from it: and dissolve it with water and honey, and clisterize the Sinus with it: and compress its opening, and let the medicine be released into it to the quantity of two hours.
Then remove it along with pus expression: make this daily until the sinus is purified and the stink is removed.
Also, when you are not present for this medication, clisterize with ashes water: and it is to receive the ashes of vinewood, or the ashes from holm oak; and throw water over it. Then wash (it) and clisterize with it until you trust that the sinus is now cleaned.
If the patient cannot bear the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then clisterize it with water and honey, which already has something mixed in of crushed gum. Or clisterize it with honey and wine mixed, because honey has the property to purify and wash (it), and wine makes the sinus sticky, especially when there is an excess of dryness and dryness in the wine.
When you do it several times and trust that the sinus corruption has been removed: then clisterize it with what makes flesh grow in it.
And it is to receive from the ointment dyafinicon: and dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic wine; or clisterize it with certain medications and other unguents whose properties I have written in the treatise on unguents.
If the sinus opening is narrow and cannot receive the clisteris cannula: then expand it slightly with iron; or place linen folded in Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment inside until it is expanded.
And similarly, if the opening is also wide, then join its lips with suture: and allow a quantity for the clisteris to enter without addition.
And similarly, if the opening from which pus flows is elevated to the top: then cut it at a lower place that is within it, so that pus runs out below; because when the pus is constricted in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from growing in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the bladder about below it as you wish: then try, so that you prepare the member for running out pus with ease according to its preparation for you. Try not to retain anything of the pus within it at all: and take remedies that are put on top of the mark, suitable for what you wish. And stretch them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such a size that there is communication with the entire bladder. Then cut with scissors into the opening of the bladder the hole of the bladder more widely than the bladder opening itself. Then stretch out from soft ointments over another cloth according to the size of the hole: and place it on top of itself at a distance long from the bladder opening, so that the exit of the pus is eased: and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days with one exception.
The one who is on the bladder opening, that is the one you remove at every hour, so that what accumulates in it from the pus may exit: and so that you know if what runs out of it is much or little; or digested or undigested.
And with this repeatedly consider the place of the bladder itself, if its master feels pain there or not; and whether there is a tumor there or not.
When your medication is thus extended and you see the matter that exits from the bladder opening, then you know if the bladder already adheres or approaches to adhesion: then soluble it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you soluble the wound, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
If it exits from the bladder after a long time subtle pus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, because there are people who slow down the generation of flesh in their wounds and there are those who act contrary to this.
If however it comes out from the Sinus after many days as an un-digested pus, then you know that the sinus is not adherent.
If the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then add moist medicines in the excision. However, physicians should do this, so that the medicines are moist in substance but dry in effect, such as the unguent dyafinicon, when it is added to it, excess should be avoided from zegi.
And from the remedy that is applied last, it is to receive the unguent dyafinicon, and let it be dissolved with rose oil, and let it be rubbed on top of old wine equal in substance.
Then mix it with that, and use it.
And now this action is similar when you do not have the unguent dyafinicon, honey, when you boil it until it thickens, and use it. Or receive myrrh, aloes, and frankincense: grind all of them, and powder it on top of the honey while it is above fire. Then apply a linen cloth over it, and tie it over the sinus: and line with the honey that you have boiled until it thickens, and powder it over it as a layer, and put it on top of the linen cloth, and tie it up.
And sometimes the following is administered in it: long aristolochia root, celestial lily root, and common lily: and flour of herbs, and chamomile. Use these simple substances or mixed ones, grind them and sift the powder: and powder on top of the honey that I mentioned, and use it.
If the sinus prolongs and is not cured by this treatment: then you know that there is corruption in its depth: either it makes an impression on the bones or on other hard members or ligaments: then cure it with fistula treatment, as was previously mentioned.
On the treatment of corns and worn nails, and the incision and section.
Corns are the lesions that occur under the nail of the thumb or big toe, or possibly on other fingers or toes.
When the matter prolongs itself and is neglected in its care and it is treated with a hot cautery, or it corrupts and emits pus until it corrodes the root of the nail; and perhaps it corrodes it completely, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone, until there is a foul smell to it; and the end of the digit becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
When the matter is not cared for as mentioned before, then it is necessary to cut with iron the surplus that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. Indeed, cautery is very beneficial.
If the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy, and empty additions of the nail already press the flesh towards the inside, and begin to pierce it, and wound it; then it is necessary to place subtle Radium under the angle of the nail which pierces the flesh, and push it upwards; and cut the flesh with ease, and place on top of what remains of the flesh from medicines that burn, corrosives, until all of it is removed. Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If the corruption has already pressed into the bone, then it is necessary to cut the bone and remove it; for the corrupted bone will never heal while it remains there.
If you see the corrosion and corruption advancing in the finger, then cut it at one joint, according to what has been mentioned before about its memory. Then care for it until it heals.
If the nail is rubbed or struck and a very strong pain results, then first apply leeches. Then cut off the nail with the sharp Spathamelus incision from above to below.
And beware lest the incision reach the flesh that is beneath the nail, for you will cause a violent pain to occur over it, and it will become a cause of adding flesh at that place.
Then take care of the spot with it (the oil), so that it alleviates the pains.
The finger that is born in some human hands may perhaps be completely fleshy; and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it; and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or its birthplace is in some knots of the finger. Therefore, the one that is born in some knots of the finger does not move; and the one that is born at the joint of the finger perhaps moves.
Its incision (of the flesh-like structure) is easy (to perform). What you should do is to make an incision at its root with a broad spatula.
But the treatment of the one whose birthplace is at the root of the joint is difficult. Therefore, refrain from making an incision on it.
In the one that is born in the finger at the end of the knots, then it is necessary to make an incision into the flesh with a round incision up to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws that fit for it. Then take care of it (the area) until it heals.
Consolidation that occurs in the fingers often occurs either from human birth (that is, it is born with the person), or from consolidation of wounds, burns from fire, and similar things.
Therefore, you must remove that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place linen or cloth soaked in rose oil between them (the fingers) to prevent rapid consolidation and separate them; or place a thin lead plate between them until the area is healed as required.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in certain fingers with the palm, then cut off that consolidation, according to how it is prepared and fits the shape of the member.
On the Vices of Incision.
Uites are swollen veins, large and filled with melancholic superfluities that occur in many parts of the body; and their most frequent occurrence is in the legs, especially in those who travel frequently or work hard, and those who carry heavy loads.
Therefore it is necessary to administer the purgation of the body with strong purges from black bile at times.
Then bleed the patient through the basilica vein.
The cure of them with iron is done in two ways. One way is to make an incision and draw out black blood. A different method is to elevate the vein and draw out all of it.
The section, however, is according to this method. First, irrigate the leg with much hot water until the thick, foul blood is resolved. Then tie the affected leg from the upper part of the hip to the lower part of the thigh with bandages. Then cut the vein at one, or two, or three wide sections.
Then drain the blood from your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, and it is necessary that the leech draws the blood from the affected person first. Then cut off the nail and continue to drain blood until a sufficient quantity comes out that you can see and that the strength of the affected person can withstand.
Next tie it up and tell him to abstain from foods that cause black bile; and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are filled, as this is harmful for the affected person.
The elevation of it, however, is according to this method. If the affected leg has many hairs, shave it. Then immerse it in the bath; or irrigate it with hot water in the affected leg until it turns red and the veins swell; or exercise it with strong exercises if there is no bath nearby until the limb warms up.
Then cut open the skin directly over the vein section along its length; or at the end of it near the knee, or at the lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with scalpels and scrape off the vein from all sides until it becomes visible to the touch; and when it appears, you will see it turn from red to black. When it has come out of the skin, you see that it is white like a cord.
Then insert the Radium under it until it rises and exits from the skin; suspend it with a blind hook, softly.
Then make another cut near that cut with three fingers. Then scrape the skin from above the vein until it appears. Then raise it with Radii and suspend it with another hook as you did before.
Then make another cut or several cuts if needed for that one. Then scrape and cut it at the very end of the sole (calcaneum).
Then pull it out through the cut that is above it.
And do this until you pull it out through the upper cut or any higher cuts until it completely exits; then cut it.
If it does not obey you to pull and raise it: then insert a strong needle with double thread and tie it, and pull it out; or insert a Radium under it and turn your hand over all parts until it exits. And be careful, it is not cut. For if it is cut, it will be very difficult for you to raise it and a harm will enter upon the patient from it.
When you pull it out completely, then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil or olive oil on the wound site and care for it until it heals.
If the vein is contracted with twists and loops, not as we have said according to straightness: then it is necessary that you find all parts of its twists and the places of its loops.
Then suspend it with hooks until you raise it completely; and be careful at your cut on it not to cut the vein or wound: for it will be difficult for you to raise or pull it out. Preserve therefore your prudence.
The form of the wound heals a vine.
The form of the blind pouch.
It is not like other pouches in that it has no scabbing, nor a sharp end which would wound the vein; rather it is of thick and flexible form, soft; for if it were delicate, it would wound the vein by its fineness; but excessive thickness is superfluous as we said.
On the extraction of a leg vein.
This vein is generated in the legs of warm lands, as Al-Zahgi says, and in the lands of Arabs, and in dry, warm, sparsely vegetated areas, that is, where no herb or tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
Indeed its generation is due to the putrefaction which occurs beneath the skin, such as happens within snake and ascariasis worms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And a sign of the beginning of this vein's development is that it occurs in a swollen leg. Then it blisters over. Then the vein begins to come out of that blistered spot, as if from the root of a plant or an animal.
When its end appears, then you should wind around it a piece of lead weighing one keil's drachma, up to two and a half drachmas and nodes; and let the lead hang down from the leg.
Whenever something comes out of it to the outside, wind that up in lead, and tie it. If it prolongs itself a lot, then cut off a part of it and wind up the remainder. And do not cut it at the root before it has come out completely. If you cut, it contracts and enters into the flesh; it causes an abscess to appear, and pus in that place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it should be treated gently, and drawn out gradually, until it comes out completely, and nothing remains in the body; and from this vein it flows out in some men which is of its length five palms and ten. And now it has come to me, because it came out from a man of twenty palms.
If it is cut at your time of treatment; then insert a radium into its hole and pierce it with a long hole along with the body, until all that is in it from the matter comes out; and administer the rottenness of the place with medicines for several days. Then cure it with the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself; and openings occur for it, and a branch flows out from every opening.
Therefore care for it as we have said in the division, and with what was previously mentioned.
Section on worms generated under the skin, and this condition is called Bouina.
This condition is called Bouina in a certain land among us; because it often happens to cows, and there is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it moves throughout the body, ascending and descending; and it is felt by the senses during its movement from limb to limb until it bursts wherever it bursts on the skin and flows out.
And its generation is from the rottenness of some fluids. As worms and snakes, that is to say, earthworms and roundworms, occur in the abdomen.
And it is feared from his malignancy. Because when he himself moves in the body, and is raised to the head, and reaches the place: then perhaps it opens there, and goes out, and destroys the eye: and this happens frequently.
When therefore one desires to cure him and extract him, it is not done except during his walk and his appearance to the sense.
Therefore, it is necessary that you tie what is above him and what is below him with a strong binding. Then cut above him, and extract him.
If it penetrates into the flesh and you do not find it: then place a cautery over the place with fire until it dies.
And a greater thing that is feared is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If however you see him already arrived at the head near the eye, then tie below it with a good binding of the eyebrows. Then cut above him, and extract him.
And it is necessary that the sick one use purification of his body with medications that dissolve corrupt, bad humors.
Let him beware for himself from foods causing corruption.
Chapter on the incision due to Nakir's disease.
This disease is called in our land Nakir: it is a pain that occurs in certain members; then it changes from one member to another.
And I myself have already seen it, as I tell you. I was called to a sick woman in certain villages. And she extended her arm and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And when an hour had passed, I saw a swelling moving with a probe, like a worm, ascending more quickly than possible to the shoulder of that man, as silver runs from place to place.
Therefore, pain left from that place, and it was fixed in the shoulder.
Then it sat for an hour, and it ran to the rest of his body until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that it revolved in his entire body, according to what I saw.
I was therefore amazed at the swiftness of its exchange from limb to limb. And indeed, before that I had not seen this disease in my eyes as it happened in such a way. Nevertheless, I saw many who experienced pain exchange from limb to limb; and I did not see it as I saw it in a woman.
And I do not think that it was anything but because she was one of those who are from dry bodies with dilated veins; hence it appears to be the windiness exchanged (from one place to another).
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this reasoning in those who are delicate and bodies with hidden veins.
When one desires to cure it and the patient feels that pain; then if it appears to you as we have said, then press upon it quickly and below it; and cut above it until that windiness compressed escapes; and cauterize the place.
If however you do not see it with your eyes; then cure it by means of the body's shaking and what drives out windiness, and mix them with foul pills and pills made from resin and similar substances.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrowheads differ according to their kinds and the places where they enter the body.
The diversity of them is as follows: for there are those which have large points and small ones; and convex and flat-headed. And among them are those with three corners. And among them are those which have tongues. And among them are those with stars.
However, those which fall upon the limbs, are of two kinds. The limbs are hollow like the main organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar ones. When one of these limbs falls and you see signs of death that I will tell you about later, then it is necessary to make an extraction of the arrow from it, for death follows where it is, in many cases. And when these signs are not visible to you and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then extract it, and take care of the wound.
Among the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the bone and exits through the siphac above the brain are: because strong headaches occur, along with scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion of mind, vomiting of cholera. And perhaps blood may come out from the nose or ears. And perhaps speech may be cut off and the voice destroyed. And whiteness similar to putty comes out from the wound site. And it resembles the consistency of boiled flesh.
If these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not come out on its own.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left breast and the person feels as if the arrow is fixed in a solid object, not in an empty one. And perhaps there is movement similar to that of a pulse, and blood runs out from the wound black. Then follows coldness in the extremities, cold sweat, and fainting. Know that death is surely approaching.
The mark of an arrow when it wounds the lung is the appearance of foamy blood from the wound; and the vessels that follow the neck should be cut off, and the patient's color changes. Expires a great and deep breath; seeks the attraction of cold air.
If the arrow falls into the lung, which is in the chest; then it is near the ribs slightly; and a great sighing with violent pain occurs along with a movement of all the shoulder joints.
If the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested comes out from the wound.
If the arrow falls into the abdomen and sticks there, something like feces comes out from the wound, or pus, or an intestine that has already been torn apart. Therefore there is no hope for its treatment, nor in the removal of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and comes out with urine; and something goes outside from it, and the pain is greater on the patient; then you know that it is mortal.
The rest of the members, such as face, neck, throat, spatula, help, dorsal vertebrae, crosspiece, thigh, leg, and similar limbs are saved in various ways; when the arrow does not hit an artery or nerve, and there is no poisonous arrow.
And I tell you what I saw about these arrows so that you may know it for your treatment.
It is that a man had an arrow shot into his eye socket of the lacrimal duct and nasal root. Therefore I took it out from the other side, under the cheekbone of his ear; and he was cured, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the Jew, which had fallen into his eyelid below the lower lid; and the arrow was already concealed, and I could not grasp it entirely, but only a small part of it that adhered to its shaft; and the arrow was large among the arrows of the Turks, with a soft iron, in which there were no ears.
The Jew was then healed, and no accidental harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
The arrow was Arabic and it had feathers. So I cut through the throat along the middle line; and it was already submerged in his throat. I became sharpened with that, until I extracted it; and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who it had fallen into his belly; and we thought he would surely die from it.
After thirty days had passed, and nothing had changed in his condition, I made an incision along the arrow; and I opened it up, and extracted it; and he was healed, and no accidental harm came to him.
And I saw a man who an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was solidified over it. After seven years, the arrow emerged at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman who an arrow had fallen into her belly, and the wound was solidified over it, and the arrow remained within her; and there was no change in her condition, and the woman found no harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man who an arrow had fallen into his face; and the wound was solidified, and remained, causing him little pain; and similar cases there were many of these.
And I removed an arrow from a man among the princes of the King, which had fallen into his nose in the middle and was beginning to deviate toward the right side slightly; and the entire arrow was hidden.
Therefore I was called for his treatment after the loss of the arrow for three days. Thus I found the arrow wound very constricted.
So I investigated it with a thin probe and did not feel it; but he himself discovered a puncture and pain from his right ear. Therefore I hoped that the puncture was at the end of the arrow.
I therefore applied the place with a plaster containing an attractant and digestive properties, confident that the wound would heal and appear as a sign of the arrow for me to cut through; but it did not happen at the expected location, indicating that the arrow had passed through that spot.
I therefore attended him for many days with the plaster; but it did not happen as expected, and the wound was consolidating; and he remained weak from the extraction of it for a space of several days until he felt the arrow within his nose one day. And he told me that.
And he told me that. Therefore I placed on that wound a sharp, corrosive medicine for many days until it opened; and when I investigated it with a thin probe, I felt the end of the arrow adhering to wood.
Then I added this sharp medicine in the wound's opening until the end of the arrow appeared to us clearly; and I passed with him a space of time about four months.
Then when the wound was swollen, and it became possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move it, but it did not obey to exit; then I did not cease to investigate and manipulate on it with various techniques, until on one day I began with well-made forceps according to the shape that will come at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored. I therefore restored it, and the wound healed, and the weak recovered with complete health: nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you the quality of the extraction of some arrows: so that you may place this rule and significance over what I have not said.
Since the parts and distinctions of this art are not grasped when narrated; nor does that book contain it, and a wise craftsman compares with little over much; and with what is present, regarding what is absent: and he discovers a new operation, and a new instrument in the descent of foreign matters of this art when they occur.
I say therefore that arrows do not leave the members to which they are fastened unless in two ways. Or by attraction from the place from which it entered. Or, conversely, by the part of the opposite side.
And that which leaves where it entered is either a proceeding arrow in a soft place: and it attracts and leaves.
If it does not obey to exit at the hour in which it fell: then you must let it alone for several days, until the flesh that is around it becomes putrid: and its attraction diminishes, and its departure takes place.
And similarly if it penetrates into bone, and does not obey to you for an exit, then let it alone even for several days: and you should touch and move it every day until it departs.
If it does not obey to you for an exit after several days, then it is necessary that you bore around the arrow in the very bone from all sides with a fine awl, until the arrows swell up. Then attract it and draw it out.
If the arrow is already hidden in the body's location, concealed and hidden from sensation: then search for it with probing. If you feel it (the arrow), then pull it out with the instruments suitable for its pulling.
If you cannot pull it (the arrow) because of the constriction of the wound and because of the long arrow deep within; and there is no bone, nerve, or vein there: then sew over it until the wound widens and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
If there are ears attached to it (the arrow): then free the fixed flesh from them on all sides with all the skill you can; and if you cannot free the flesh through dislocation of the ears or by twisting them, then break the ears until it comes out.
And when you apply the extraction of the arrow, wherever it may be, then use the twisting of your hand with tweezers in all directions until you make it come out; and with the greatest subtlety, so as not to break the arrow, and so that its pulling will be difficult for you, and its own extraction.
If you cannot perform it within an hour, then leave it for several days until what is around it putsrefies. Then repeat it: for the tunica will be relieved, but if it causes a flow of blood contrary to you, then administer what was said in the cure chapter, and keep your power from cutting the vein, or nerve, or tendon.
And administer all ways possible for the extraction of the arrow: and let it be with ease, peace, or slowness, firmness, as I have told you.
And it is necessary that when you pull the arrow, it becomes weak as it was at the time of the arrow wound in him. For it is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible from the figures.
The arrow that comes out from the opposite side of another part, or already proceeds to something on the outside, or makes a hump at the end of the arrow by feeling from the upper part of the skin nearby, and you see it protruding: cut above it, and make the incision according to the size so that forceps can grasp it.
Then pull it out: for it will become easy to come out.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness until the arrow presses into the bone and enlarges itself: then pull it out.
And if not: leave it for several days: then repeat it until it comes out.
If the arrow shaft is in it, then push it out with it.
But if the arrow shaft has fallen out, and you have the intention to administer a push: then insert an instrument with a hollow, so that it enters the hollow of the arrow: then push it out with it.
If however the arrow is concave, then push it with the instrument as it enters into it. The arrow is pushed through it.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to remove the entire concave flesh, where the venom is: if this can be done by you. Then take care of her with what is suitable for that place.
If the arrow falls into the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or on the side and it is near where you touch with your hand and it can be cut above it: then cut it, and be careful not to cut a vein or nerve and remove it.
Then suture the wound, if you see it, and take care of it until it heals.
And this is the form of Forceps used for extracting arrows.
The tips should be like a bird's beak, which are made of iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not let it go.
And they are made in many forms: large, small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, its narrowness, the width of the wound, and its depth.
The form of a Concave Pusher.
And the form of a Deaf Pusher.
This is the deaf tip like a Radius, to push it into the concave arrow and advance it.
Chapter on Phlebotomy of Veins.
Veins to be bled, whose custom is in the body, are thirty.
From which [veins] in the head are sixteen: two pulsating veins, which are after the ears, called two Herbs: and two arteries, which are appearing in both temples: and two veins, which are in both tear-ducts of two eyes, called Looking Ones: and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead: and the vein at the end of the nose. And two Jugular Veins, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are the veins called Algecherich. And two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which are bled in the arms, are five veins in every arm.
One of them is Cephalic, and it is on the forest side; and the common people call it vein of the head. And Black (one). And Middle (one), and it is composed from a branch of the Basilic, and a branch of the Cephalic; and the common people call it vein of the body. And Basilic, and it is placed on the domestic side; and it is also called Titillicaris. And the common people call it vein of the belly. And Arm-vein, and it is placed above the elbow; and that is the one which is bled, and it appears above the thumb with a clear manifestation.
And Saviatella (one): and it is the vein which is between the ankle and the little finger; and there are two branches for it.
And in the leg and foot, there are three veins. One of them is a curve under the nail on the side of the little finger. The second one is the saphenous vein, and its location is near the heelbone on the domestic side. The vein of Ness: and its location is near the heelbone on the wild side.
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to these.
Chapter on venesection of two veins after the ears.
Venesection of two veins which are after the ears, is a remedy for ancient catarrhs, headache, migraine, and chronic old wounds on the head.
The quality of venesection is according to what I said previously. And it is, to shave the head of the sick: and rub the back part of his head at the location of two veins with a coarse cloth for good friction. Then, the sick man should tighten his neck with a bandage until two veins appear. And their locations are behind the ears in two depressed areas of the head. Therefore seek them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse of these veins under your finger, mark it with hot wax.
Then take a venesection lancet called the Incisor. Then insert it under the vein into the skin until the venesectionist reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin towards the top, and cut the vein with a cutting incision. And let the length of the incision be the size of two joined fingers or approximately this much, and make as much blood come out as you wish.
Then tie it up with threads and let it heal.
And now the cutting of these [veins] and their cauterization has been discussed at the beginning of the book.
The phlebotomy of the two arteries that are in the temples is beneficial for an old-fashioned hemigraine: and for sodam prauam, and obtalmiam constant; and for clearing away excesses and sharpening the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomy is as I tell you. Let the sick man tighten his neck much, until two veins appear to the feeling by a clear manifestation; and their pulse is shown under your finger. Then, when the signs are with incense.
Then anoint the skin above the vein with your index finger, and insert the lancet from below, and anoint the vein to the surface. And cut it, as you did in the two other veins; and let blood flow according to your need.
Then loosen the sick man's constriction, and place your finger on the vein at the hour of one. Then place a woolen cloth and bandage on it, and tighten it strongly above; and let it go until it is healed.
And now the reminder of them, their cutting, and their extraction has passed at the beginning of the book.
The benefit of the phlebotomy of the vein in the forehead is after the phlebotomy of Cephalic, for old facial ailments; and for hemigraine, and redness; and for ugly sores.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is as I tell you. Let the sick man constrict his neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called Fossorium.
Place the pointed end that is on the head of the Fossorium upon the vein, and strike it with a pestle or with another such tool; and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish. Then dissolve the wound of the patient, and tie it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad lancet. However, it should not be one of sharp-pointed lancets, like the others; rather, it should have a broad end. And cut the lancet across; since it is near the bone; and perhaps the lancet will break if it is too thin.
The remedy for the two veins that are in the two tear-ducts of the eyes is for an eye with scabies and redness; and to clear the eye, and for diseases of the face.
And the quality of cutting these veins is that the patient ties his own neck with a bandage. Then cut them; and you stand over his head.
And the cutting should be across, short, with a thin lancet and a broad one slightly, for there is no flesh in that place. If the lancet is too sharp-pointed, it may break.
Then let as much blood flow out as is necessary for you. Place a cloth over them and tie them up at night and dissolve them.
The cutting of the veins of the nose serves to alleviate acute fever and violent swelling, as well as facial diseases such as migraines and redness that occur on the face; especially when it is chronic.
The quality of phlebotomy [in this case] is such that it tightens the sick man's neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a fine and long lancet; and fix it in the middle of the leper's nose, between that part which distinguishes the nose according to its straightness. Because the vein does not appear to the senses there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
It is necessary that you hold your hand with the lancet for a little while; and make the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it at night. For it heals quickly itself.
The benefit of Guy de Chauliac's two phlebotomies is for the constriction of shortness of breath, and the onset of leprosy, and melancholic ailments, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and corrosive, that is, herpes omenis.
And the quality of these phlebotomies is that it tightens a sick man's neck with a ligation on both sides; and the practitioner stands over the head of the sick man, and the sick man sits on a chair.
Then the vein should be incised to a length proportionate with the wide vein phlebotomy. Then draw out an appropriate amount of blood, or according to what you see, according to the need that is at hand. Do the same with the other vein.
Then loosen the ligation, and tighten two veins with a constriction in the middle; so that the sick man does not faint. And release it until morning. The wound heals.
Chapter on the venesection of Albucasis. The venesection of Albucasis has benefit for alcohol consumption in the mouth, and corruption of teeth, and bad ulcers, and fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you make the sick person sit before you; and bind his neck with a ligature. Then turn the lips of him and look at the two veins; one is on the right side of the lip, and the second on the left of it; and the demonstration of both is by blackening them. And that is true: because around those [veins] there are small, black veins. Make therefore an incision on both with a cutting incision.
If there is doubt about you and you do not know which one it is; then turn to the larger incision of them, and make it more evident.
And similarly do the same with the two veins which are in the upper lip; and indeed the custom is mostly with it; and make an incision on the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Section on Phlebotomy of the Vein under the Tongue after Cephalic Phlebotomy. However, the help of the two veins that are under the tongue for phlebotomy is that the cephalic phlebotomy is for the inflammations that are in the throat, and the illness of the voice, and the illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is that the sick person should sit between your hands before the sun; and pull out the tongue of his, and look under the tongue on one side of his, and on the other side of his a vein; and the color of each declines to blackness.
Make therefore an incision on both; and be careful not to go too deep when phlebotomizing them. For under there are the arteries, and perhaps there may be a bleeding from those arteries.
The three veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those whose phlebotomy is customary in all men.
And phlebotomy [is performed] according to two modes. Or piercing with a broad leech (myrtinus) and phlebotomy: or draining to the point of subtlety, using a slit: or cutting with a small knife, and this is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from these [methods], there are broad and subtle ones according to the width of the veins and their constriction. The form of leech (myrtinus) phlebotomy is broad, as you see. And it [Alnesil] is suitable for opening hollow veins, full, protruding, apparent, thick ones, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this [method] is smaller in width and more subtle for fine veins.
And it [this method] is suitable for the phlebotomy of fine veins that contain subtle, yellowish blood.
In the abdomen ascending [area], and in the head: the basilica (Basilica) is one of these three veins that benefit from phlebotomy. Because it drains blood from illnesses that are below the throat and neck, because it follows the chest and abdomen: it is suitable for the phlebotomist to bleed this vein, provided that he be careful, since beneath it is an artery. Therefore, if [the phlebotomist] errs and adds in the piercing of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery, and blood will flow out. Therefore, the phlebotomist must not pierce it [the basilica vein]: instead, he should cut with Alnesil.
If the basilica is not apparent by a clear manifestation, then it must be sought elsewhere, or one should exchange it for another, or find one of its branches: or use the arm vein in its place. The operation itself is clear; cut it with Phlebotomus Anesil, as we said.
If however you want to perform phlebotomy on this same [person], then it is necessary before the tightening of the arm, so that you touch the place, until you know the place of the pulse. Then mark the spot with encaustum (pitch), then the arm, and cut the vein with a curved incision by Phlebotomus Alnesil, as we said. And beware that the blow does not fall into the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligament, swelling at the spot which you marked with encaustum (pitch), then that swelling is the swelling of the artery; therefore avoid it.
If you see blood appearing at the phlebotomy site, as if it were urine of a boy, and it is thin, red: then know that it is from the artery's blood. Therefore, approach and place your finger on the spot for a long time, then remove your finger. If therefore the blood is cut (for it is often cut), then tighten the arm and let it go; beware that the weak one does not move from it, and it should be on guard over it.
And do not move it for several days, until it is healed.
If however the blood does not flow and it overcomes you, and medicine is not present for you at that moment, then cut the artery if it appears to you. For its ends contract, and the blood flows out.
Or take the bark of a fig tree and pound it; take half of it and bind it over the place where the vein was tied with a ligament and small pieces until another day.
Then if blood flows out, it is good. And if not (the case): then care for him himself with the one who preceded him, remembering the place of the dust particles causing blood flow removal; and the removal of his blood is not difficult in many positions, due to the small size of the wound, and the possibility of tying from the arm.
The assistance of phlebotomy for the Vein Fusca is that it draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower body; because it is composed of a branch of Basilica, and a branch of Cephalica, as we said.
And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist to know this vein, since there is a nerve under it. If therefore the nerve is touched during phlebotomy and found, stupor occurs, and healing becomes difficult; and perhaps it will not be healed completely.
And this nerve often appears to sensation. If however it is hidden in some people, and is subtle, and does not show; then you should place your phlebotomy where the vein is phlebotomized, with a section like Alnesil's, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then pierce the vein lengthwise.
Of the Vein Cephalica. The assistance of phlebotomy for the Vein Cephalica is that it draws blood from the head, and contributes to eye disorders.
And in this vein, if you want, it is appropriate for the phlebotomist to anoint it with olive oil or myrtle oil when puncturing; because it is safer than all veins, because it is not under an artery, nor a nerve.
It is fitting for you in phlebotomy that you ask the phlebotomist to take only the head of an arm, and seek a softer place: and it does not harm him if it is not found with the first blow, but he should repeat on it several times with phlebotomy.
Perhaps in some people it may be apostematized when not phlebotomized in the first blow, but the apostema does not harm him at all in any case.
Chapter on the utility of Phlebotomy and the precautions to be observed in it. The quality of phlebotomy, and its accidents from which correction is required, about which you should reflect.
First of all, you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in the preservation of health and its continuance, and with caution to prevent illness.
And phlebotomy should be performed on one of the three veins that are in the arm, namely the Cephalic, the Flexor Tendon (Fusca), and the Basilic. And phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring after fasting, in summer and autumn, or winter following consumption, when signs of fullness appear.
Phlebotomy should be performed on the first or third day, after three hours have passed since the previous day.
But phlebotomy administered in illness has no fixed hour; it should be performed whenever the situation and necessity require it, day or night, and at any hour, and at any time.
Phlebotomy should not be performed on boys until they reach the age of fourteen. A pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth to the seventh month. Old men who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
If anyone wishes to be bled for any reason, it is necessary that he cleanses his intestines before bleeding with a lenient enema, if much feces has been retained within them: so that no putrid superfluities from the intestines may attract near the veins at the time of bleeding and harm the main organs.
A patient should not be bled when afflicted with toctina, that is, satiety of the stomach; nor in a state of drunkenness or vomiting until it has passed away from them. A man who is ill with dropsy should not be bled.
Caution should be taken from bleeding again after a colic attack, and vomiting, diarrhea, increase in sexual activity, labor, exercise, wakefulness, fasting, and any other thing that weakens the body or animal strength.
Then consider in detail about humors before this, if the blood is thick with food and drinks, and medicines; if it is possible for him to do so.
Then enter a bath, unless something prevents it; or exercise with some exercise, to make the blood thin.
Place the bleeding of this person in the chest on the third day, as we have said; and strive to expel the chest of that person on that day from all animal ailments such as tightness, anger, fear; and from all bodily ailments such as labor, punishment, excess, and similar things.
And let him have present with him the things that are useful to him from aromatics and fragrances, and cheering things, and similar things, according to their availability in quantity.
Then the bloodletter should sit on a stool that is higher than the stool for bleeding; then he should draw out his arm and rub it with his own hand twice or thrice. Then bind the ligament with a cord and wrap it twice.
And let the ligature be moderate, because an uneven ligature, either by excess in the ligature, then it forbids the course of blood; or by softening, even then it also forbids the course of blood.
Then after ligature, it is necessary that the phlebotomist press his hands together alternately until the veins swell and are revealed to the sense.
Then the phlebotomist cleanses the instrument with a little oil, properly ancient.
Then he places his index finger of the left hand upon the same vein at the place where he wants the venesection, a little; so that the vein does not flee and the blow is confined. Because from the veins you find one as fleeing like an escaping cord at venesection; and there is one which is full of wind; and when you place the instrument upon it, it contracts under the phlebotomist, and the phlebotomist is deceived, and does not open the vein; and if he opens it, it is constricted; therefore for this reason the phlebotomist must be firm and careful in all these matters.
Then lay down the instrument (phlebotomum). If then a vein is opened from one side, it is good. And if not, then do the same on the other side at that place a little; or above it with haste, if the place is not displaced.
What if it is displaced, or the weak person starts and trembles, then let him rest for a day, or two days; and do not bind the ligament. Perhaps the abscess attracts the displacement (calidum). Do not enter the bath.
Then repeat the venesection if it is loved (amat).
If the opening is small, or blood flows subtly: fear that the quantity which you desire will not exit; then repeatedly perform venesection in the same opening and add a little more in the procedure.
Do it promptly before the site is closed, for in many people the closed site is difficult during a small operation.
If therefore you see that it has been closed, then do not go over it at all, for nothing will excuse you in your eyes. Place something from oil paste on it: because it alleviates the flow of blood. And it is better at this site than olive oil itself and other oils.
And likewise administer oil paste in every venesection of your own where you are stopping the flow of blood; and they do that in the East, the Tyrian alfarach and the Sagzena, when it is put on the site.
For the blood is made thin and dissolved when it is thick.
If it happens at the site of venesection a large abscess, which often occurs especially in those who are not a venesection expert except that day, or if the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated slightly, on the spot and press it for one hour; because it dissolves.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood exits from the vein itself, when it has been completed or from another vein.
If something black or green remains at the site after a few days, it does not harm; and if you want, put something of aloe or myrrh dissolved on it; or something from the juice of mint, that is, camphor or similar to it.
And indeed, abscesses and swellings frequently occur at the phlebotomy sites in the Basilica.
Place your hand upon it; if you find a soft spot under the pressure applied to it, then that swelling is harmful. Be careful, so that you place something on it from what I said. For perhaps blood from the artery will flow out of it.
But make an ointment for it with what I said, so that the place hardens. Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
It is necessary that blood be let from every person according to the quantity of its virtue. And what appears as a reddish color on top of the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it come out until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it come out until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, let it be removed until its sharpness disappears.
It is necessary for one who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting once to be increased in venesection of the vein, and that the venesectioner be on the left side; and for one who is weak, it should be the opposite of this.
It is necessary that it be let out in the veins and that the opening be narrow; and it is better what is given in venesection of the vein that it be a cross-cut, not a prick.
This method of venesection is safe from bleeding and from nerve injury; and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection by length and width.
And for one who frequently faints at venesection, it is necessary to give him a little bread soaked in water of honeyed mulberries or sekanjabin (a type of beverage), if he is heated; and let blood from three or four veins.
If it is of a cold constitution, then let it take bread soaked in syrup of honey, or in syrup of scented honey with spices, or in scented and fragrant syrup, before phlebotomy.
If fainting occurs during phlebotomy and the cause is excessive bleeding: then it is necessary that one drink meat water, subtle scented syrup, and use aromatics with seaweed, and let the chest be washed with it; and let the other things mentioned in the division on fainting from evacuation be used.
He who wishes to cut his arm and let out blood in the second stage: it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is due to a large evacuation, and the strength of whose arm is weak, that he lets out blood gradually according to the strength of his arm over continuous days.
But he who wishes to cut his arm and let out blood in the second stage, and his body is possibly weak: then let him do this after seven or nine hours following his first phlebotomy.
But he who wishes to draw blood from his body towards the opposite side of where it is inclined: it is necessary that this be done on the second or third day.
In a body where blood is already much heated and sharpened, causing fever: it is necessary that the blood comes out once, and a large amount is extracted; and the opening is enlarged until fainting occurs; after you have observed all conditions of phlebotomy: and place your hand over the pulse of his arm during the flow of blood, so that death does not occur in its place instead of fainting. For it often happens that this occurs when the phlebotomist is unaware and falls because of carelessness.
It is not appropriate when you wish to dissolve an arm, and to dissolve blood when the orifice of the vein has already been closed, and the exit of blood becomes difficult, that you apply forcefully upon it, and the injured one be quickly stretched out. That is very bad indeed, rather let it remain, until it can be bled a second time.
Either remove with sharpness the coagulated part from the blood in the vein's opening, and place something of salt dissolved in water upon it. And place something from turpentine, alfrax or sage root on it, and hold it with gentle pressure until the blood comes out.
If the vein has already burst, then let it be, and do not cover it up until the abscess subsides.
If necessity demands the dissolution of blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either bleed him in the same place or in another vein in the other arm.
The cord of the arm is bled in the place of Fuscus and Basilicus, when they are not found and are hidden because it is composed of them.
And the quality of bleeding is that a weak person should insert his hand into hot water until it turns red, and the vein appears clearly.
Then it should be bound over it with a cord of moderate tightness. Then the second bleeding should be done transversely gradually, not broadly or lengthwise, and let the opening be wide, and your second bleeding should be made a little above the joint of the hand.
If the outlet of blood is forbidden, then place your hand in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your need.
If you are in the days of summer, then you may excuse yourself from immersing hands in hot water (repeatedly). The course of blood is mostly placed in hot water during wintertime.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, since it is not under a pulsating vein, nor a nerve.
The phlebotomy of the right hand's Saviour (vein) is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that you should tie a leash to the thumb with a cord, or with your hand, after inserting it into hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and clearly appears to sensation. Then cut (make an incision) through the phlebotomy (vein). And if you make a complete incision on it, it will not harm him in any way.
Keep (your hand) clean, so that you do not cut yourself with the phlebotomy. Indeed, there are nerves of the fingers exposed from the flesh beneath it.
Then repeat your hand to hot water and let the blood flow in it. For if you do not repeat it in hot water, the blood clots at the opening of the vein and prevents its flow.
When you have extracted the necessary amount of blood from the blood, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not clot quickly.
And similarly, it is required that you do this with every constricted (vein).
The remedy for the phlebotomy of this vein from the left hand is that it is beneficial for spleen diseases; and similarly do with its phlebotomy as you did with the second one equally.
The remedy for the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases, retention of menses, kidney weaknesses, old sores of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
The quality of phlebotomy is that the ill person should immerse his foot into warm water, and make abrasion on it until the veins swell up; and bind above the joint of the foot with a tourniquet. The vein's location is at the heel, appearing towards the thumb; and many branches ramify from it on the face of the foot.
So, phlebotomy should be made in a larger branch of it, or at the heel in its group; for it is better and safer.
If phlebotomy is made on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy tool for cutting it across, as if you wish to cut it; and the name of the phlebotomist is Nesil.
If the outlet of blood is forbidden, then immerse his foot in warm water; and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
If the phlebotomist misses the vein in the first attempt, then let him go up with the phlebotomy slightly more towards the top; for it is safe, and there is no harm in it when you beware of the nerves, as we said.
Similarly, regarding the saphenous vein of the other foot (as well).
The location of the Sciatic vein, as we said, is at the heel from the wooded side.
The aid of phlebotomy is for the pain in the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
The quality of phlebotomy is that the sick person should enter the bath and hurry; and bind the leg from the side of the ankle up to the heel with a thin bandage four fingers wide, for it does not appear except for this reason.
When it appears [the tumor], then make an incision on it according to whatever skill you have, either by transverse or longitudinal manner. It is better, or to cut it with a cut, or to excise it with a section. The place of its location is safer, and it is very well hidden in many people.
The place of its location is safer, and it is very well hidden in many people. If you do not find it [the tumor] and it does not appear at all to the sense: then make an incision on one of its branches, and there is one that appears on the back of the foot and turned towards the ear; be careful about the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you wish.
Then dissolve the stricture, and place skin over the incision site, and tie it up. It heals quickly.
On ventosation and the quality of its use.
They are made from horns, copper, and glass.
Ventosation is done in two ways. With scratching and bloodletting; the other is ventosation without scratching.
And this ventosation which is without scratching, is done in two ways. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the places on the body where ventosation with scratching and bloodletting are administered are fourteen. One of them is the ventosation of Alnocrates, and it is the last on the head; Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; Alhagdahim, and they are two plates on the neck from both sides at the same time; ventosations of the brain, and it is under the jaw in the lower part of the mouth; ventosations of two spoons; ventosation of Alachosos above the tail; ventosations of two nuts, and they are in the middle of two arms; ventosations of two legs; ventosations of two calves.
And Venesection does not draw blood from you from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and because of that its power is not lost as it is in phlebotomy. It is not necessary to administer venesection either with fire or without it for any diseases caused by overfilling, until the whole body has been evacuated.
If necessity arises for venesection due to illness or custom, it should be administered at the beginning, end, and middle of every month, and at any time necessary.
Because there are some people who, when their blood multiplies too much within them, find a pain and swelling in their head, and a feeling of heaviness in the limbs.
And among them are those who find overfilling and redness on their face, head, and neck. And among them are those who find itching on their face and forehead, and darkness and confusion in their eyes.
And among them is one who scratches the place of his venesection. And among them is one who laughs too much. And among them is one who tastes blood in his mouth: or the tongue is cleansed and the blood is spit out. And among them is one who has excessive sleep. And among them is one who sees blood and redness in his dreams, dead people, wounds, and things similar to those in waking life.
When we see something of those conditions, and more specifically if it is in the third week of the month: we then prescribe venesection to be done after two or three hours have passed since the day.
The benefit of venesection in the neck is that it relieves headache and that which is drained out goes to the eyes. It is necessary that it [the wound] should be after the evacuation of the entire body.
This is indeed a ventose in place of cephalic phlebotomy.
It is not allowed to use it who has cold constitution or who has catarrh. For it causes him great harm.
Therefore, it is not fitting to use it by the elderly and who have cold diseases of the head.
He who continually does it generates oblivion upon him.
Therefore, you must warn the ventosator to lay down his hand with the ventose for a short while at the lower part, fearing lest it generates oblivion.
Ventosation or alkehel is in place of phlebotomy Fusca, and phlebotomy Basilica, and therefore causes asmati, constriction of breath, breathlessness due to the instrument's fissure, coughing, and repletion.
It is necessary to push the ventose alkehel for a short time, because if it is placed lower, it generates weakness of the heart and stomach.
Ventosation alhagdahim causes accidents of pain in the head, migraine, hemigraina, perforation, and tooth root pain; it is in place of phlebotomy Basilica.
You must warn the ventosator not to press his hand with the scarification, lest he cut an artery and cause bleeding.
Ventosation under the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; it stands for phlebotomy alieherich, which are in the two lips.
Ventosation with spatulas causes alchafacha, which comes from compression and heat.
Interior partitions' ventositation provides aid to phlebotomy of three veins, Basilica, Fusca and Cephalica; since it draws blood from all those small veins which are in the flesh, and those small veins draw blood from larger ones unto themselves until the attraction reaches to three veins.
It is necessary that you warn the Ventosator not to proceed too far in scarification; because there is a place denuded of flesh under which are nerves and arteries.
The ventosa that sucks on the anus provides help for hemorrhoids of the anus and for lower ulcers.
It is necessary that you warn the Ventosator to have a large ventosa and made of metal; because the place requires strong suction, and perhaps small ventosas break easily: and it should be scarified with a large scarifier.
The ventosae of the legs diminish clearly; because they draw blood from all over the body, and they bring old pains to kidneys, womb and bladder: they provoke menstruation, and they bring forth wind and phlegm: and they are in place of phlebotomy for two saphenas and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause fainting in many people.
The help of the ventosae of alhorcobeni is nearly the same as that of the ventosae of two legs.
The quality of the position of the ventosae is that you place the ventosa first in a vacant place and suck with moderate suction: and do not prolong the position of the ventosae, but put them quickly, and remove them quickly, so that fluids come to the location at an equal rate: and do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already redden and swell, and redness of blood appears: then scarify, and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider in the arrangement of bodies.
For a person who is from soft flesh and sparse pores, it is necessary to scarify him once, not more: so that the location does not ulcerate.
And command the Fan to expand the scarification and not to make it too deep: and moderate the suction in ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is thickening of blood, then it is necessary to scarify him twice. In the first instance, an opening is made for the subtlety of blood and its thickening: and in the second, a detailed examination is made for the extraction of thick blood.
But if the blood is very fetid, then the scarification should be done in the third instance: so that it follows the last.
And finally, when we wish to draw blood slowly or slightly, a single scarification is sufficient for us. But if we want the extraction of much blood, we scarify with multiple scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it is necessary to be scarified with a deep scarification: and the end equal in the scarification, is the depth of skin.
§ What that needs to be administered from oils at the position of Fans, and what the one who fans should avoid.
In the one whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary to anoint the places to be fanned with oils that are opening, soothing, resolving: if it is in summer, such as alkali oil, or camphorated oil, or oil from sweet almonds, or oil from pumpkin seeds.
And if it is in winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or sarbatinum; and similar things.
If there is excessive fat, cold: then use oil of amaracus, or oil of balsam, or oil of white poppy, or oil of dittany; and similar things.
If the wind-pipe is stopped by narrow passages of flesh: then it should be prohibited from oil, and those places should be washed with rose water, or cold water, or salt water, or water of cucumber, or water of purslane; and similar things.
But the one whose blood has much moisture, should wash the wind-pipes with vinegar or water of myrtle, and sumac; and similar things.
For the one whose excessive fat is coarse, wash the wind-pipes with old wine or water of sage, or infusion of dittany, or chamomile; and similar things.
And it should be cautioned against wind-pipes treatment in the bath or near the bath, indeed it should be administered after leaving the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not allowed that someone sleeps after wind-pipe treatment.
What is to be done before treating the wind-pipe, or phlebotomy?
And after that, it is necessary to consider: then if the wind-pipe or phlebotomy patient is choleric and his sharpness and inflammation prevails over his blood: then it is necessary for him to receive cooling things, such as pomegranate molasses; and also figs steeped in vinegar and lettuce, and shallots, and garlic; and similar things.
Place his food for the birds, and salted mutton pieces, and cooked meals with vegetables: and similar things to them.
If his condition is cold, he should take syrup made from honey, or from almonds, or from the seed of asafoetida in his drink; and use moderately aromatic wine, which is between old and new; and it must be prescribed that he use sparingly of food. Place his food for the birds, and chicken; and sparrows, that is, small birds; and he should crush pigeons eggs.
It is necessary that the drink on the day of venesection and bleeding be more than the food; and it is to be given in some people's drinks during the hours of Tyria alfaroch, or medicine made from musk, that is, musk, or ale-seltz at any time before venesection; and before or after: so that they may be strengthened and the blood may become thin. It is not necessary to take it in a hot drink.
Chapter on Venesection without Scarification. Venesections which are without scarification are those placed on the liver, spleen, foot, stomach, navel, and flanks of the kidneys, and anus: because these members do not bear scarification upon them.
Nor is it sought through them, except for the drawing of blood from one member to another; such as placing a venesection on the breasts in the sickness of nasal bleeding. And we use them to relieve cold and unbearable venosity in one member by another; such as placing a venesection on the stomach, and navel. For it makes the member thin, warms it, and removes pain because it has resolved that venosity.
Also it is placed on the kidneys, when there occurs in them an abscess or a stone. By virtue of its own attractive force, it possibly opens an abscess, or extracts a stone from its place.
Likewise it does when it is placed over the spleen, and for grinding the liver or spleen on either side in case of windiness.
These [windy conditions] are treated in vacuums during operation only. And at times they are administered with fire.
And at times they are administered with warm water in pleurisy diseases: and this is to fill the vent [cavity], and make it large, with only hot water or water in which herbs suitable for the case have been boiled.
Form of a vent administered with fire.
The width of its [vent's] opening should be two fingers apart, according to what we have constructed; and its depth should be half the size of a palm; and on one side, in a place about halfway along it, there should be a small hole, according to the size that an awl can enter; it should be made of brass, citron wood, smooth, equal sides, cleaned: so as not to injure the part when it is placed upon it; and in its middle there should be a crossbar transverse from brass or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And now it becomes this swollen one large, greater than what we spoke of, and not much smaller than that, according to the illnesses and age of the person using [it].
For swellings in boys are different from those in men, and thick-bodied ones as well.
The quality of applying heat to this swelling on a limb is that you should ignite linen with fire from flax or a small tallow candle, and place it on the middle rung of the crossbar which is in the middle of the swelling, so that the fire is about halfway up the swelling, so as not to burn the body of the sick person.
Then it is to be placed on the limb, and a finger should be over the opening I mentioned, until we hold the swelling; when we need it, we remove the finger, and steam will come out through that opening, and the swelling will immediately be solved.
Then apply fire to the linen in its manner, and repeat it if you need it [the heat].
In swellings administered for pleurisy with water, there is no crossbar nor opening; it is not administered except that it is filled with water and placed on the limb only.
And this is its shape.
And a swelling that is larger, so as to hold more water, is better.
Chapter on Suspension of Sanguisugars.
Chapter CXCVIII: Sanguisugas are not administered in many places except where there is no possible position for swellings due to their smallness, such as the lip, gums, and similar parts. Or in a bare member, such as a finger or nose, and similar parts.
And the quality of using them is that you should come from Sanguisugas which are in sweet, clean water, free from putrefaction.
Then they should be kept in sweet water, day and night, until they are hungry and nothing remains in their stomachs. The body shall first be evacuated with bleeding and with blistering. Then clean the sick limb until it turns red. Then they are placed upon it.
When they are filled and fall off, and there is the possibility of sucking out the place with blistering, then it is more beneficial for healing; if not, then clean the place with vinegar. Then wash it with much water, rub and squeeze it.
If the flow of blood persists after a leech application, and this is due to a discharge, then dip the cloth in cold water, place it on top, until the discharge ceases.
If the blood multiplies, then sprinkle on it powder of almonds ground, or gallnuts and similar things from poppy seeds until the bleeding stops.
Or lay halved, peeled beans on the place and let them remain until they adhere to the location, because blood is stopped by this.
And it is necessary that if a repetition of leech application is required, when possible, replace them.
If leeches are forbidden from suspension, then clean the place with fresh blood. Or make an incision in the places, until something comes out of the blood. Then place them, because as soon as they feel something from the blood, they will stick immediately.
When you want them to fall off, sprinkle something from ground aloes, salt or ashes on them; they will fall immediately.
This Chapter is also frequently necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations occurring in bones.
Know ye, O Sons, that foolish physicians and the common people boast about this Chapter, and those who have never looked upon the book of the ancients nor read a letter from it.
And for this reason, this method is deprived of knowledge in our land. And I have never encountered it in good form at all, nor have I attained that which I have attained except for the length of reading the ancient books and my devotion to their understanding until I extracted this knowledge from them.
Then I adhered to experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And now I have described for you from that Chapter all that my knowledge contains: and over what experiment failed me after I explained it to you, and released it from the burden of length, and shortened it from the end of shortening, and showed it from the end of declining; and I formed in it many shapes of instruments which are administered therein, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Title II.
It is necessary to say in the preface of this Chapter, the main points and chapters, which must first be understood by the artist at his station concerning their truth: namely that you, and those who are prompt, may know or learn this noble art from you, and others from you.
Therefore I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or fall occurs in someone, then it is necessary to hasten firstly to phlebotomy him, and to be drained or both at the same time: unless something prohibits this, such as weakness of power; or he who suffers from one of these things is a boy or an old man worn out; or there is a time of intense heat or extreme cold.
Then let him be content with his food, cold vegetables, and onions, and beans; and forbid wine, and thick meats, and filling himself with foods and all food that fills the veins with blood. Until he is secure from a hot purge, and no longer fears the flow of matter to a member; then let the sick person return to his own diet first with which his custom was accustomed.
When the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the sick person eat nourishing foods in abundance, coarse, heavy, with viscosity; such as food made from cooked flour and water, rice, heads, feet, entrails of cows, eggs, fresh fish, thick wine, and similar. When this regimen is followed, the setting of the fracture occurs more quickly and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in men who are in the first old age and decrepit, it is not possible for them to be held together and consolidated according to their nature always, on account of the drying up of their limbs; and they consolidate and hold together those which are from them at the end of softness, like the bones of small children.
However, nature connects something similar to glue around the broken bone from all sides, in which there is thickness, by which it adheres and tightens it until they consolidate opposite each other, and are bound together until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until it does not prohibit anything from its operations; and for this reason it is necessary that you place nourishment for the sick person in foods which have thickness, viscosity, and thickness, as we said.
And know, that the types of fractures are diverse, according to the differences of the members: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the breastbone is different from a fracture of the backbone; and similarly all other members exist differently to each other; and I come with the reminder of every type of fracture explained in its own chapter, distinct from one another. And fractures of bones are also diversified among themselves.
For there is a curved fracture (which occurs) besides the occurrence of stars (stellae). And sometimes there is a fracture along the length of the bone; and these are its cracks (stagiae, or stars), that is, splinters (astellae), as well as additions proceeding from them, such as in a reed, when a knife is sharpened for writing. And not proceeding (from the bone): and there is a fracture with wound and rupture in the head; and there is a small crack (fractura fissura parua).
And every type has a skill or its own tool in its restoration, according to how it will be remembered, distinguished in its places.
And from that which is recognized in a bone fracture, there is its twisting (tortuositas), and its protrusion (ipsius eminentia): and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when it is compressed with your hand.
When therefore there is no apparent twisting, nor sound when it is touched with your hand or compressed with pressure, nor does a weak great pain occur: then there is not fracture in that place; indeed, it may be a twisting (or a small crack): thus, do not move it with your hand and compression at all; instead, lay medicines on top of it, which will be remembered afterwards, after the appropriate time has passed: then the wound will be sutured with a fine string.
And know that when the place is curved and split, except for what happens in it as a result of strangulation, nevertheless, all its parts are separated from their own: then you should begin from your hour for its correction, equalizing it before hot ulcer occurs to it.
If a hot ulcer occurs to it, then let it be for some days until the ulcer subsides. Then equalize it according to whatever method can be done with gentleness and skill.
And know that the restoration of it, and its equalization, is easier than bones, where strangulations occur.
Then tighten it, according to whatever memory comes to you.
If there are strangulations in the bone, then necessary is the extension of this broken member from two parts, if it is a hand or foot: or with your hand, if the member is small: or with two ropes, or with a rope and your hand.
And let your position be when you place the member on a level place according to its natural shape, until the parts of the broken member are extended: then try, with all skill, and according to whatever method you can in their places, to bring back those additions; and be careful, according to your strength, that pain or injury does not occur to the weak due to your operation: and try, according to your strength, to apply one of two bones with its partner, according to the best forms.
And it is necessary that at that hour you try and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and equalize it according to the measure of your strength.
And be careful not to extend violently or compress too forcefully, as do many fools. They often cause to occur by their operation a hot abscess or contraction in the limb; as we have already seen from their operations many times.
Then attach after the amputation, and a suitable operation, and the tightening of that limb, and calmness, and tranquility; and warn the sick person about it. And make him be careful not to move himself in the hour of his watchings and sleep, at his turning and agitation, and during his illness, and all movements of himself with the utmost strength of his power. And let him be careful that the position of the limb does not follow a pain. Because when he feels pain or injury in the position of the limb, then it is necessary that he changes himself to another position from which he does not feel pain.
And be careful with him so that his position is equal and straight; so that no twisting occurs in the limb when it is being restored.
The quality of the tightening of the broken limb is as I have told.
Know that the broken limbs are diversified according to their smallness, and the size of them, and their shape.
Those that are small, such as the arm, and finger, and foot, and similar ones; then it is necessary that there be a wrapping of soft and delicate cloth. But those that are large, such as the hip and leg; it is necessary that there be a wrapping wide and hard in them.
Because a wide bandage connects a large limb and tightens it uniformly from all sides with an equal tightening, so that no stain enters it.
Then begin after your amputation to place a suitable ointment on it, on soft wool at the site of the fracture itself. Then begin to roll the ligament over the location of the fracture with three or four rolls, according as the limb deserves; and tighten your hand slightly with the ligament.
Then go with it to the upper part from the location of the fracture, and tighten it less than your previous binding that you bound the fractured place. Then stretch the roll from the location of the fracture slightly, and soften the binding gradually until you take from a healthy place a large amount.
Then take another linen cloth, and roll it again over the fractured place with rolls. Then go with the roll to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be in binding and softening of the roll, according to what we said in the upper roll.
Then place between the rolls from soft wool or cloth equal to the curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature; and if not, do not put anything there.
Then roll over another linen cloth. Then place stars evenly over these rolls immediately, if there is no swelling or hot abscess.
If there is swelling or an abscess, then place over it what sits under the abscess, and remove the swelling; and leave it for some days. Then bind over them the stars.
The stars should be made from the middle of a wide reed, shaved and well-formed; or they may be made of wood from which cribra are made, such as pine, elder, or palm branches, or calingi; and let the width of all the stars be according to this form and the same figure.
However, the star that is placed over the affected limb should be a little thicker and wider than the other stars; and the length of the star should be according to what is appropriate for the member in size and thickness.
Then bind over the Star with another plaster, according to the first binding. Then bind properly with threads, as we said regarding binding; and this is so that your binding over the site of the fracture is stronger than the fracture itself; and the farther away from the fracture the binding is, the less it should be.
The threads should be of medium thickness and fineness, and made of soft linen.
Because if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of fools binding with thick cords of twisted linen, there is a great error; for the binding falls away from them due to their poor quality.
And thin threads do not fit again; because you will not obtain with the binding what you wish.
It is not appropriate that there be less than a finger's width between one star (stitch) and another.
If the patient is injured by the extremities of the stitches after binding in healthy places: then place beneath them with soft wool or camel's hair until nothing is injured from it.
But when there is a fracture with a wound, and the break occurs in the skin, I will come back with regard to this matter in Chapter 2, specifically.
And know that not every fractured member should be bound with stitches from the first day. Because when a member is large, it is not necessary to place stitches on top of it unless five days, or seven, or more have passed, according to your safety from the risk of hot abscess.
This is the method of plasters, with which the ancients restored fractures and dislocations.
§ Common Plaster Method summarized, restoring a fracture, suitable for multiple temperaments, particularly women and children; because it is from that which heat does not prevail, nor cold.
And it is to receive from the flour mill dust, and it is the kernel of wheat that hangs on the walls of the mill during the movement of the millstone; and make it thus, except that you sieve it with egg white; and place its mixture not thick, nor thin. Then use (it).
Another emplastrum method, for healing a fracture, and dislocation, and twisting. Prepare almess, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mugath; squeeze, from all of them an equal amount of juice, 10 parts of myrrh, 5 parts of each aloes, and 20 parts of alethil should be ground and sieved, and mixed with water alethil, or with egg white if the covering is heated for the weak. Then use this emplastrum. For it is a good mixture, it heals broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Another emplastrum method, which also helps with fractures and twisting. Prepare mugath, mess, white alteae, all in an equal amount of 10 parts of myrrh, 5 parts each of both aloes, 6 parts of acacia, and 20 parts of Armenian pounded bulbs should be ground with much pressure, sieved, and mixed with water or egg white; administer them.
Another emplastrum method for joints and separated bones from their places; it relieves pain that comes to them, and fissure of the bone, and fracture. Take sheared wool, immerse it in vinegar, boiled oil; place it on the location.
And in this emplastrum there is no virtue of healing, but it is good for the relief of hot boils; and it drives out pains properly.
Method of Empalisting, which restores a broken bone. Take leaves from the fig tree of deafness and leaves from the wild papaver (opium poppy) tree; grind them all together and make an ointment from both.
Method of quick emplasting for the restoration of a broken bone and when you wish to dissolve a remaining boil. Take equal parts of root of althea (marsh-mallow), chamomile, flowers of violets, and herb flour; grind all together and make a paste with wine if the member is not heated.
If it is heated (the affected area), then make the paste with warm coriander water or with water and use it.
Another stronger method for the dissolution (of a boil), which is more powerful than the first, when a hard boil appears during the restoration of a member. Take equal parts of root of althea (marsh-mallow), linseed, balustium (balm of Gilead), melilotus, samsucci (white poplar), flowers of violets and chamomile; grind all together and make a paste with sweet water, salix water or wine. Apply this (paste) according to the warmth of the member and the calmness of its heat.
Hippocrates, however, did not say in his book that it should be placed on a broken member during its restoration except for a plaster made from beeswax and oil; no other (substance); and he said that it should be medium between thickness and subtlety.
Galenus, however, saw fit that such materials should be placed on a broken member during its restoration as those in which there is an absorption of heat, such as myrrh, aloes and frankincense, and similar ones from what we have mentioned.
Method of plaster application for wound and pain. Mix ground figs, chickpeas, human hair cuttings or bird feathers, alum and equal parts of salt. Grind and sieve them, then make a plaster from this mixture.
The amount that should remain bound depends on whether pain does not occur, nor itchiness, nor is the broken bone moved from its place. Then do not dissolve it for many days. If there is severe itchiness, disturbing pain or swelling at the site, then hurry and dissolve it within an hour, remove the plaster from it: take a soft cloth or seawater-soaked sponge, moisten it with warm water, wash the area until the itchiness subsides and the pain is relieved.
If there is severe itchiness, disturbing pain or swelling at the site, then hurry and dissolve it within an hour, remove the plaster from it: take a soft cloth or seawater-soaked sponge, moisten it with warm water, wash the area until the itchiness subsides and the pain is relieved. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then place on it a piece of soft, vinegar- and oil-soaked wool or rose oil: tie it over it at night until you are safe from a hot abscess, the swelling of the limb subsides, and the pain is relieved.
Then repeatedly apply fine binding and small plaster: do not bind it with your initial tight binding or delicate bandages until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling and all other symptoms have been completely removed, and if you need plaster and binding, then do as before equally.
If there is no symptom in the limb that we mentioned before, then do not dissolve it, unless after three days, four, five or seven. And when it is released after twenty days, according to your observation from the dissolution of the limb, as we said, until the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh grows on it: also add more binding in your binding than your first binding, and also increase the amount of weak food, according to the reminder of its presence.
If you see that the place of the fracture is already drying out and shrinking too much: then you know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Pour warm embrocation onto it at every juncture where you are dissolving it, and let it be for all three days, and alum tighten it slightly.
By this procedure, nourishment flows to the limb and it heals quickly.
But what foolish restorers do, replacing the fracture of a limb by another method, when it should not be replaced at all according to what is necessary, and it is replaced crookedly, is an error from their procedure, and great fear: and if it had been correct, they would have said it in their ancient books, and operated with it.
And I did not see any trace of theirs at all in that matter, and it is more correct to not do that.
[Section] On the making of an injury in the head.
Species of fractures are diverse, and their shapes numerous: and causes of it are distinguished.
From a fracture is one that occurs from a blow with a sword, and the blow removes the bone completely to where it reaches the pith, which is under the bone, just as an ax does in wood; and because of this, this type of fracture is called Axial Fracture.
Or a sword cuts something of the bone and cuts its face but does not cut through to the end of it; and this type of fracture is called Calcan, that is, Absolute Lever Fracture.
And there is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And from a fracture is one that is crushing, or grinding; and the cause of it is a blow with a stone, or a fall upon a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also penetrating, which already approaches the flesh that is under the bone; or it is on the face of the bone; and this type of fracture has a wound, either small or large.
And from a fracture is one that is hidden in the bone at its subtlety (the tip) of a hair; and it is a small crack, and because of this, this type of fracture is called Hairline Fracture.
And from these (fractures) is a fracture that occurs from a fall or blow of a stone and similar things, which make the layer of bone to enter inside and make a hollow place; as happens with brass caldrons when they are struck and part of them enters inside.
Indeed, it most frequently occurs in the bones of moist heads, such as those of children's skulls.
And all these types of fractures are set separately, and I will return with a reminder of this (treatise) to its place.
We know all these types of fractures through examination upon them, and investigation of their nature with probing, and removal of the rotten flesh that is on them.
The species of Capillaris is known by this, that it appears on the face and is scraped off and sewn over with an ointment; for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, consider first the condition of the patient; then if you see from his conditions that it indicates a manifest sign of fear, such as cholera vomiting, stretching, loss of intellect, absence of speech, fainting, acute fever, eye discharge, redness of eyes and similar conditions in multiple disorders, without a doubt it will not heal; but if you see non-terrifying conditions and hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
If someone comes to you wounded first with a wound, and this is in winter days, then it is necessary that you strive for the removal of the bone before the 14th day under any circumstances.
And if it is in summer days, then it is necessary to hurry and remove the bone before the 7th day, before what is under the bone from fat corrupts, and such conditions occur as we have mentioned.
If the fracture of a bone has already reached the fat touching the brain and is accompanied by grinding and pulling, then it is necessary to cut the grinded and smoothed part, as I have told you.
And it is necessary to shave the head of the wounded person; and to examine the face according to whatever method possible for you; and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light on the patient.
If blood flow or hot abscess occurs to you while examining the bone, then oppose it with what is necessary. And it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess settles, and be careful of bleeding. Then begin with the treatment of the bone, and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two methods.
One method is to cut the bone with a sharp knife; and this is its form.
Then administer another knife wider than the first, somewhat; and this is its form.
Then administer yet another knife even wider than the second one.
And the second method is that you have a number of different knives; some of which are wider than others; and some shorter than others; and they should be at the ends of sharpness, and made of iron or steel; and use them with ease in striking the knife, so as not to hit the head and hurt it.
If the bone is hard, then it is necessary to bore around its circumference before you administer the knife, with trephines that are not too deep; and they are not called thus unless because they do not penetrate through the bone to what lies beyond it; therefore the tip of the trephine is rounded above that which is beneath the head, sharp below, like an edge, and a small circle prevents submerging and penetrating the thickness of the bone.
And it is suitable for you to take a number of these trephines, one of which should correspond to the thickness of the bone, until the present bone has all the trephines; whose sharp edges should be of a quantity in length and width, according to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three kinds of trephines or trepans.
The nature of the perforation on the bone fracture is as follows: you should place the trephine upon the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has already been penetrated. Then change the trephine to another place and place there the size of a fingertip within every hole, or about that much.
Then cut with the chisels what is between each hole in the bone, and make that more delicate than possible on top of the edge of smoothness, as we said, until you root out the bone, either with your hand or with some other tools which you have prepared for it: such as tenaliae and subtle forpices.
And it is necessary that you take all caution so that the trephine or chisel does not touch any part of the skull.
When you are perforating the bone and it is separated from the skull, if it is continuous with it and you extract it, it is necessary that you file down, and even out the remaining part on the bone with another similar chisel. Nevertheless, it should be thin and delicate more than other chisels.
If some part of the small bones remains and the cartilages: then take them with ease, with whatever tools are at hand. Then care for the wound after that with linen and ointments as we said.
Another method of the operation is easy, completely far from fear: which Galen said and praised it greatly: this is his speech. It is necessary for you first to begin to remove the bone from the place where the fracture is more violent and clear: until when you have removed that part, and placed under it the end of this concave chisel, whose shape this is.
And the concave part of the lens, not cutting anything: and the sharp part of it extending in two sides of it, as you see: so that the concave part of the lens is attached to the siphoid, with its sharp edge incident on the bone.
Then strike upon the Incisorium from one side with a small hammer, until you cut through the bone easily, as is customary: and be careful that no cloth happens to fall into it, which might happen accidentally, which you fear entirely.
And if the physician were not more foolish than men, nor ignorant of it, nor asleep, then if anything remained attached to the bone from the cloth in some places, he would cut it off along with the edge of the incisorium lenticularis itself, and remove it easily. It is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate to the cloth, and that which is cut off from the bone is its face, and coarseness and subtle spicules remain in it: then it is necessary that you smooth out that roughness, and grind out those spicules with finer rasps, which you have prepared in various amounts, so that it is possible for you to apply them more conveniently and correctly at each place according to the operation, and the fractured bone, and its figure. And it is necessary that you administer it according to your own measure, first grinding the bone more widely with those rasps. Then use a finer one after it.
And it is necessary that you administer it according to your own measure, first grinding the bone more widely with those rasps. Then use a finer one after it. And do not cease to do that continuously until you reach administering it more thinly and finer of them all.
In each of the remaining small fissures and fine fractures, it is necessary to administer care according to that which leads to its correction.
And it is a matter that cannot be hidden over all, to which in this art every study applies, and it stands on what we have written and shown regarding large fractures.
If the membrane is found to be retained when you are removing bone: then it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth, either doubled or tripled, and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first one; make it as easy as possible to do so without burdening the wound.
Then administer it on top of the broad ligament, and do not tie it unless for the amount that holds the wound only; and leave it with this care for one day or two days, until you are assured of being free from hot inflammation. Then dissolve it and administer the following remedies with which excessive dryness is needed: such as the root of the lily, and grain of wheat, and pepper, and aristolochia, and similar ones; and it is to be made from these remedies a powder that is powdered over the wound like dry things.
And universally administer all medicine with the property of purging and not biting (or harming). And be careful according to your strength (ability), so that the wound is clean during your treatment; neither let it be dirty with ointment nor filthy.
And be careful according to your strength (ability), so that the wound is clean during your treatment; neither let it be dirty with ointment nor filthy. Do not allow the pus to accumulate in it at all, since when pus collects on a cerebral membrane, it corrodes it and rots it, and afterwards a great evil happens after that; and this has already happened in the head wound, when the bone is being cleansed from it, especially when care of it is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Consider then, if afflictions occur to the sick as we have said, know that it is certainly dangerous (or fatal).
If the swelling does not occur, unless it is caused by the medicine placed upon him, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause the swelling: then it is necessary for you to take one part from honey and three parts from rose oil, and anoint with them a cloth. Then place him on a sow's bladder: afterwards, take care of him with medicinal substances that are appropriate, until he is cured.
On the Restoration of the Nose when it is Broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except for its two superior parts together or one of them: this is because there are two bones in it; since its lower part is cartilaginous, it does not break and no other damage occurs to it except abrasion, twisting, and deviation.
If one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary for you to insert a small finger into the nostril and align the fracture with your index and thumb fingers from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape; and this should be done skillfully and easily. And beware that during your procedure you do not cause pain to the sick person.
If the fracture is in the superior part of the nose and the finger does not reach it: then the radius must be aligned at the end where there is a small bulge.
If the fracture is in two parts, then do the same: and hasten with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day in a warm room of sweating patients.
Then insert a strip of linen from a flax cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part; or insert two strips if the fracture is in two parts: and let there be a bulge of sufficient size on the linen to fill the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers said that linseed should be poured into butter and exchanged daily. That does not seem right to me, on the contrary, it should be that linseed is poured into butter made from cow's milk, mixed with flour milled powder. Then let the linseed go until the bone hardens and the cartilage becomes calloused.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the place of the linseed, after it has been covered with soft cloth; and this causes the fracture in the nose to be held more firmly, and prevents the weak from being prevented from breathing.
And this is not necessary. If you wish, do it; if you wish, do it with linseed.
If the nose again occurs while you are operating on a boil, fill the nose with hot plasters made of alum or pitch soaked in rose oil or with a little jalap.
But if it does not occur that the boil is hot, then it is necessary to fill it with plasters made of wheat bran and incense powder mixed with butter from cow's milk. Then place a soft wad on top of it, and do not tie the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are broken in a small fracture or ground, then it is necessary to cut through them and extract them with instruments that are suitable for them. Then take care of it with it until it heals and hardens with suitable plasters or ointments.
If a wound occurs between the nose, then it is necessary to treat it with linseed; and administer a lead tube until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of the lower jaw when it breaks apart.
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by a wound: observe then if the fracture is only on the outside and it does not break into two, and bends towards the inside: then its recognition is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, you should insert your left index finger into the weakened bone: similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert your right index finger: and press with it the swelling of the fracture towards the outside with ease using your other hand from the inner part of the bone properly, and push it equally.
If the fracture of the jaw has already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer traction from both sides, according to rectitude: until a possible alignment can be achieved.
If however movement or displacement of the teeth has already occurred, or if they are broken: then bind them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk. Then place linen cloth over the broken jaw. Then place over it a double cloth and place on top of the cloth a large cross made properly or an equal piece of leather soles in length of the jaw.
Then bind it above as you prepare the binding for it and its application is suitable until it is not destroyed: and tell the patient to remain calm and at peace: and place mild soft food for him.
If you think that something has changed in shape by some means: then go quickly and dissolve it on the third day. Then correct what has changed from it, and apply a plaster made of milled flour with egg white or with wheat flour, after you have removed the linen cloth: and place soft wool over the plaster.
While that adhering plaster remains on it, and the bone arrangement does not change, leave it undisturbed until it heals; or suture the fracture. This fracture is frequently sutured in three weeks.
If a warm abscess should occur meanwhile, then administer what I said several times for its alleviation until the abscess is removed.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, be aware. If already the bone fragment is separating out, or from a wound bed: then be skillful in this matter, to remove those fragments of the wound bed together with what fits with you in their removal using instruments.
If, however, the opening of the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a leech according to your need.
Then when you have removed the wound bed and nothing remains of it, or if the opening of the wound is wide: and if not, place on top of it ointments that are suitable for this, and let it heal until healed.
Chapter on Restoring a Fork (when it breaks).
The fork breaks most often from the front part near the shoulder, and its fracture occurs according to one of three modes.
Or it breaks apart into two parts, apart from the presence of wound bed; and this is easier to restore.
"Likewise, that which happens in ossify satagia: and it is more difficult for restoration.
"Likewise, that which is a fracture with a wound.
"And the operation in it when there is a fracture without a wound, is to have two assistants present, so that one holds the support for the broken furcula, and the other extends the neck towards the opposite side.
"Then make an equal fracture with your fingers until it takes the desired shape; there should be neither protrusion nor hollow in it.
"If you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a ball under the weak person's head made of cloth or wool; and let its size be according to your need; and stretch, lift, and compress the ball with your hand until an equal fracture is achieved, as required.
"If you cannot pull out the extremity of the furcula because it has reached deep inside; then the weak person should lie on his neck; and place a puluinar medium under his shoulder in size, and press an assistant's shoulder towards the bottom, until the bone of the furcula that is deep inside is lifted upwards; and then correct the fracture and make it equal with your fingers.
"If you feel a swelling from the furcula and it moves; then you should press on it and extract the swelling with ease.
"If it remains in the bone, then use your drill bit in its incision, after you have placed a saving instrument under the furcula; and the tool is made of wood or iron. "And this is its form.
"It resembles a spiral shell without hollow.
"And let its width be according to the need for it from the size and part of the bone. The length [of the instrument] is also as much as possible for you for the operation.
It has two ends, as you see: and one end should be wide, and the other narrow.
If the wound opening that you cut when extracting the splinter of bone is wide, and it gapes, remove the hot cautery; then bring together two lips of the wound with stitches.
If the wound opening is small, or if you fear hot cautery; then fill the wound with cloths and lint according to the size of the wound incision.
If hot cautery occurs, then soak the cloth in rose oil, vinegar and wine and place it on top of it.
But the binding of the bone without a wound and without cutting is to place plaster made from milled flour with egg white on it. And place a soft woolen cloth over it. Then place a sphere underneath if you need it. Then take the hemata, which is a roll that the Saracens hold, it should be very long; and its width should be one palm or approximately this much. Then place two lints on top of the woolen cloth and plaster. Then take a needle made from thin wood, whose width is three fingers, and similarly long. Then thread the needle with the lint. Then sew the cloth at the place of the hemata that falls on the break and location. Then place the hemata on the break as they are rolled, and sew it over his neck, and under his healthy side, and under his weak side: and bring it over all parts, and so that the binding holds the break securely; and this is what will not be hidden from you, and entirely, so that the needle does not remove the broken bone. It is necessary to examine the sick person every day. Whenever the ligament becomes soft and you see the knot moving, then correct it, and tighten the ligament.
Then place the sick person's sleep on his back, and put a small awl under his sleep near his side, so that when he is raised up, help comes to him from his side. Raise then the fracture of the collarbone through the elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck; and do not loosen the bandage unless it occurs at the place occurring from itch or abscess, until twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see his face toward that (it). And add to the incision, and let it be, until it is healed and coagulated.
The fracture of the collarbone is tightened and supported for as many as forty days; and sometimes it happens to some people in less (time).
Chapter on the Restoration of a Fractured Spatula.
A spatula rarely breaks, and when it does, it is usually at a wide place; and the edges are the only ones that break from it.
When it breaks at that place, and breaks in the middle of it, and is not known unless by touch; then according to its shape, prepare the treatment for the fracture. And bring it back to its natural shape in every way possible to you.
Then put powder of millstone with egg white and soft wool on top, and place a small piece of double cloth on it. Then put a wide knot made from thin wood of the same size as the spatula or slightly larger on top.
If there is a depression under a star in any spatula's handle, then equal the depression with soft wool until the star descends equally.
Then roll over it with long alchemilla thread, using a suitable tightness and the firmness of the star, until it is not moved from its place.
And consider the suture in every day. Whenever the suture is softened, tighten it and equalize the star if it moves from its place: let the weak lie on the side of the healthy.
And indeed the spatula is restored within twenty days or thirty days.
When this number (20 or 30) is complete, then loosen the suture: and you will be safe. For it is from bones whose fracture is not feared nor their solution.
If it proceeds from a bone fragment and pierces beneath the skin, then cut above it and remove it. And do as we have said in the fracture of a clavicle from the application of hot compresses if anything happens from it.
Chapter on the restoration of a breast fracture.
The breast is sometimes broken in the middle and it rarely happens. Its extremities, however, are much more often broken and crushed due to their accidents.
When the middle of it is broken, which inclines towards the lower parts, and there occurs a violent pain, difficulty in breathing, and coughing; and perhaps blood vomiting occurs, and a depression is revealed in the fractured bone, and it is not hidden from sensation, its restoration is that the weak lies on its back: and place pulvinar between its spatulas.
Then press the humeri of it and join the ribs from both sides or flanks with hands: and compress in equal alignment of it, as much as possible for that and it agrees, until the shape of the bone returns, as it should be.
Then place on top of it (the wound) an ointment and a stopper (bandage), and on top of that place a small wooden peg from subtle wood such as willow or boxwood, and similar ones in a thin form, after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then bind it (the fracture) with a bandage so that it is not moved: and go around it according to its roundness to the back several times, and tighten it appropriately with a splint.
Then consider the bandage in every hour, and whenever it softens, tighten it: and if its loosening is caused by itching, corrosion that occurs at the place, or pain, or abscess: then hurry up, and unbind it, remove the ointment, and correct what has occurred with the method of its treatment.
Then apply the ointment back to the wound if you see it coming off: and attach a splint until it heals.
Chapter on the Restoration of Ribs when they are Broken.
Know that the break of ribs does not occur except in large areas which follow the back and from their extremities on the front side. And it does not happen to them because of rubbing, but rather because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this (the broken rib) is not hidden from the sensation when it is investigated with fingers.
And the restoration of this (the broken rib) is done so that it is aligned with fingers according to the possible method until it is in its original shape as needed. Then apply ointment and bind the fractured bone with a splint if necessary.
If the break of ribs is towards the interior: then a severe pain occurs for the sick, and puncture, like that which occurs in pleurisy; because the bone pierces the lining, and even to him there occurs difficulty in breathing, cough, and blood vomiting many times; and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients have been skilled in this with many instruments: and among them are those who say, to place foods for the sick that generate inflammation and windiness, so that the stomach is inflamed, and extended, and pushed outward towards the outside.
We however abhor, that a cause for making a hot abscess should occur, unless it happens. If it has already happened, then add (something) to it.
And some of them said: place a windy substance on the spot, then suck it out with force, and it is more similar to reasoning. Nevertheless, it is feared that windy superfluities are attracted to the spot due to the position of weakness.
And some of them said: the spot should be covered with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil; and lice should be placed between the ribs until it is filled; so that the bandage is equal when it is folded according to its roundness.
Then the sick person will be treated with a treatment of pleurisy from food and medicine.
If something powerful constricts the sick person, more than he can tolerate, and wounds his flesh with a sharp point or puncture, and we fear over him; then it is necessary that we cut open the spot and reveal the broken rib. Then we place on it an instrument that conserves the sifac (a tool used for breaking bones), whose memory has gone before; and we cut the bone easily, and cut it ourselves.
Then we bring together two lips of the wound, if it is large with suture; and treat it ourselves with plasters, until it heals.
If a hot abscess occurs meanwhile; then run, and put lice in rose oil, and place it on the spot; and treat the sick person with whatever is suitable for an abscess.
The patient should also lie on his side regarding the side he sleeps on, until it is healed.
On the restoration of a fracture of the spine and neck.
Fracture sometimes occurs in the bones of the neck, and it rarely happens to them that there is rubbing: and similarly with the spondylus of the back. Whenever such a thing happens to someone, and one wishes to know whether it can be cured or not: then consider it carefully. If you see his hands already softened, stunned and dead; and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor contract them; and when you press them with your fingers and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it or any pain there: then you know that it is incurable, and in most cases it is mortal.
If he moves them and feels the pressure with his fingers and the prick: then you know that the hump of the bone is sound, and that what is weak will be cured with treatment.
If a similar thing happens to the spondylus of the back, and you wish to know whether it can be cured or not: then consider his feet; then if you see that they are softened, and that the same thing has happened as in the hands; when he lies on his back, flatulence and hunger come out without his will; when he lies on his stomach, hunger comes out without his will; when he tries to defecate, he cannot: then you know it is mortal. Therefore, no effort should be made in its treatment.
But if nothing like that happens to him, the condition is less severe.
And the treatment for what happens in that condition is to apply hot poultice; so place warm oil on the rubbed spondylus: or with the poultice of goose fat.
Place it on top of that frequently throughout the day until the hot poultice settles down; then place a plaster there, one that strengthens, dries and binds, and bind it with a bandage: and tell the patient to rest in peace and quiet. He shall not sleep on the part where he found pain until it is healed.
If it happens near the fracture of the bone sathaiatum, or something which is already separated from it: then it is necessary that you excise above the skin and remove it. Then gather together two edges of the wound if it is large, with suture. Then treat him with some ointment of the incarnation until it is healed.
If the last bone of alhausos is broken and it is the end of the tail: then it is necessary to introduce your left thumb into the anus, and with your right hand break the broken bone equally, according as possible, and with a second correction.
Then place him on his back and remove the bone: then treat the wound as before with the preceding care until it is healed.
Chapter on the restoration of ankle.
Chapter 11.
Rarely are the bones of the ankles broken. If they are broken, then the fracture is not except for comminution at their extremities; and they are cut in length and decline towards the inside; and it happens that a weak pain occurs at the location, and puncture; and the leg which is broken becomes paralyzed.
And the restoration of it is that you stretch out your hand over him until you know the shape of the fracture.
If the fracture is only at its extremities, then align that fracture according to the correction you are prepared with, until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is in length or already declines towards the inside: then make the weak one lie on his stomach until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. When you align it (the bone), place an ointment on it; then place a pin made of wood or hide over it, and bind the bandage on it so that you do not fear the displacement of the fracture or the removal of the pin.
Apply an equal concavity to those [things] that fill it, until it is seized by a ligature according to equality; and command the sick person to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.
If however it happens to be a hot abscess: then cease from its extension and its restoration until the hot abscess settles; and place upon what is sitting the hot abscess, according to what has preceded, then return to its restoration; and bind it as necessary.
If however a fracture occurs in bone, or it is crushed, extract it.
Chapter on the restoration of fractures, Aid.
Aid is that which extends from the elbow to the head of the spatula.
If it therefore breaks, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One is: that you take a flat board of medium thickness, according to this shape which follows.
And bind two cords at its two ends.
Then it is suspended from a raised place; and the sick person sits on a chair. Then throw the broken arm over the board so that it reaches its hinge, where a notch is attached to the middle of the board.
Then suspend something heavy above it so that the servant extends towards the lower parts. The physician then sets the fracture with his hands until it returns to its proper position.
And another method is to lay the patient on his back and hang the hand from his neck with a rope. Then command two servants to hold one of them above the fracture with their hands and for the other to hold below it and each should extend to their respective sides.
And if you wish a stronger extension, then bind under the fracture with rope and above it with another rope and let each of the servants stretch to their respective parts.
If the fracture is near the end of the upper arm, then a rope should be placed under the elbow and another one below the fracture towards the forearm.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then a rope should be placed at that place and above the elbow.
Then set the fracture easily and without strain until it is in its proper position and applied well. Then bind it if no warm abscess occurs.
But if a warm abscess occurs, then release the binding until the seventh day. Place on it soft, scoured linen soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess settles down. Then bind it and the method of binding is to place a plaster over the fracture.
Then apply a new cloth wrap over the plaster. Then raise the arm to support it and place your open hand on the shoulder.
Place a cloth and bind the supporting arm so that the arm remains in place like a star, unless it prevents you from moving or anything breaks off from the fractured bone.
If you fear that something might change from a broken bone, then use a larger and stronger awl: it is to place the awl over the fracture itself which is wider and stronger than other awls. Over every awl, place its width equal to a finger: and let the length of the awls be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from all sides.
Then tie over the awls the ligature that I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is to be your ligature over the fracture site stronger. As the fracture lengthens, let the ligature become smaller.
If you see the position of the awls and ligature, as we have said, at the time when you restore the limb immediately, then do so: and if you fear a hot abscess, then release the ligature and awls until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the ligature for three days, so that itchiness, swelling, or food not reaching the limb due to the tightness of the bandage does not occur. Correct it all, as we have said.
But if you are confident that nothing will happen from it: then do not release the ligature, unless after three days or more.
The sick person should lie on his back and place his hand on his stomach: and put under him a wool-filled cushion evenly.
Consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not loosened, or the ligature softened. Correct it all with your power.
Place the food for the sick person according to the order we have given, so that the food is subtle at first, until the bone begins to bind: then it is necessary for the food to be thickened.
In custom for assistance and of the leg, it should be bound for forty days: then therefore it is necessary, that it should be loosened, and a bath administered, and it should be treated with ointments which correct it.
If the break is foul, scrape it: then do not loosen the bandage and splints from it for fifty days, and until two months.
Chapter on the restoration of the broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two fore-arm bones.
One of them is small: and that is the one which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is placed below the small one from beneath.
Therefore perhaps only the larger fore-arm bone breaks, or perhaps both break.
When therefore the smaller fore-arm bone above breaks, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower fore-arm bone breaks, the breakage of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And that is worse, when both bones break together.
If the bone that breaks is the smaller fore-arm bone above, then it is fitting for the doctor at its restoration, to set a smaller extension with ease, until it becomes equal (to the other part).
But if the larger fore-arm bone is the one that broke, then it is necessary to set a strong extension.
And it is necessary to set the shape of the hand at its restoration, and the extension of it extended beyond the wrist. The thumb of the hand should be higher than all the fingers above it: and the lower joint (of the thumb) should be higher than all the joints or the rest: and the wrist should be level with the weak one sitting squarely upon itself, and the wrist should be in front of it, or directly under it, at a height so that the weak one does not labor.
Then, the servant shall extend the arm from the lower part, either with his hand, or with a ligature. And another servant shall stretch [it] similarly from above.
Then the physician shall equalize the bone, until he reduces it to the best shape possible.
If there are shards in a broken bone, then try to return every fragment to its place using your strength.
If it appears that a shard has been separated and punctures the skin, and there is no hope for its restoration: then seal over it, and remove it as we have said in the previous [instructions].
If there is a fracture with an open wound, I have already made a special chapter for that, so follow its treatment from there.
If a hot abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then take a cloth soaked with wax made from rose oil, white wax, and be in between thickness and subtlety; tie the cloth over it with a thin ligature until the abscess subsides; then remove the wax, and place an ointment prepared from flour mill powder and egg white. Then place the trepan (or trephine) over it, and let the trepan placed on the fracture be slightly wider and stronger.
And know that the number of trepans for the arm is six in multiple arrangements; whether it is a fracture in one hole or two holes simultaneously.
Then place a stronger and more intense ligature over the location of the fracture, and add some extra tension to the ligature above or below the fracture; or place a softer ligature slightly closer to the fracture, according to what was remembered in the beginning of the chapter.
And let the bandages wrapped around the fracture be made of soft, moist fabric; and they should not be hard or rough. And let the thread with which it is tied be made from linen, of medium thickness between subtle and coarse, as we have said.
Consider the limb and the ligament after days. If something happens for which correction is necessary, such as itching that occurs in a limb: then it is necessary, to anoint the limb with embroces and warm water until the itching ceases, and then let the limb alone until it has ceased, and then repeat the binding.
If the binding has already been softened and the bone has already been removed, and similar cases: then correct it completely with your skill, and consider it again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to an excess of binding, then it is necessary to soften it a little and let it alone for some days until it reaches its nourishment, and then bind it again.
But if nothing of what we have said happens to the sick one, then it is not necessary to loosen it unless after twenty days, or about this much.
Then the hand of the sick one should be suspended to his neck. And let his neck be kept straight and guarded with your skill against excessive movements. Make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty or thirty-two days; and it may be restored within twenty-eight days. Everything depends on the temperaments of the body and the qualities of strength.
Chapter on the Restoration of Fractures (Hand).
Know that fracture rarely occurs in shaving hands or tying fingers. And it does not happen to him unless he is rubbed many times.
When there is a fracture of the foot or rubbing: then the sick one should sit on a square seat and a chair be placed opposite him at an equal height. Then place his hand upon her extended [surface].
The assistant should then extend the broken bones and the physician should equalize them until they are united with a good union.
Then it is necessary that he places ointment and wool, unless there happens to be a hot abscess. Then place the wooden probe on it according to the size of the location; and you have already wound it up in linen cloth.
If the break is in the lower part around the heel of the foot, then make a similar sphere from cloth; and command the sick man to bend over it with his broken foot; then tie it with a long cloth.
And let the probe be made of skin, in which there is softness, so that it can be applied to the body of the foot; and tie it as necessary.
If the break is on the outside, then it is necessary: to place one probe on top and another under the foot; and keep your hand open and straight. Then place a tourniquet as the hand is rolled; and extend it between the fingers with a ligature.
If there happens to be a break in any of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, equalize as necessary. Then tie with the foot; and if there are any, place a straight probe beneath it, smaller, so that the break is raised and not moved.
If the break is in the other fingers, such as the middle, index, auricle or ring finger, then equalize and tie it with the healthy digit that follows it; or tie them all along its continuation; and it is better. Or place a smaller probe on top of it, as we said for the thumb.
And consider for yourself, and after this arrangement of hot abscesses; and confront with it what is necessary when anything happens from that, according to its narrative.
On the restoration of a hip fracture.
The thighbone is broken frequently and becomes visible to the senses; because it turns towards the inner and posterior parts.
And its restoration is done by tightening a ligament above the fracture, and another ligament below it. The patient stretches himself out on his face.
Then stretch all the tendons on their respective sides according to equality; and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If, however, the fracture is near the root of the hip, then place a tendon on the side of the wing, so that extension falls upward; and another ligament below it.
And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then place a tendon close to the knee so that extension falls towards the lower parts.
Then the doctor shapes the bone with both hands until it is returned to its natural form; and the bone unites by a good union.
Then it is necessary to place plaster and a ligature if there is no abscess in the limb. If an abscess occurs in it: then leave it for some days until the abscess settles down, and then return to your treatment.
The ligature is to be thus. It is necessary to wrap a strong bandage over the fracture, that is, a plaster; and double it twice or thrice; and there remains excess of it. Then wrap the leg until it reaches the heel at the root of the ankle.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee towards the lower parts; and the ends of the thread come from the upper part of both sides. Then roll over the leg and hip to remove the excess from another bandage.
Then place stars (metal studs) on the hip at the site of the fracture itself, and place one star from them on the leg bone.
Then fill in voids between the leg and hip with soft cloth, to make it equal (match) the compression bandage.
Then begin with a strong compression bandage from the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four turns. And as you extend the binding from the site of the fracture, let your compression be smaller, softer, and more relaxed.
Then direct the strings towards the two ends, which you inserted between the hip and leg. Tie three stars (metal studs) on each end. Then move with the two ends of the strings downwards until you reach the ankle. And tighten both the ends and the stars on either side, so that the binding is not dislodged from its place.
Then leave the compression in place as long as necessary to avoid rot (gangrene), abscesses, swellings and similar conditions in the limb. If something should happen from this. Therefore approach it with its resolution and correct whatever may have occurred there completely, as we have said many times.
If however, there is a splinter of bone protruding from the broken bone: then it is necessary that you level it if it is possible for you. And if not, fill in the area and remove it; care for the affected site remembering the previous instructions until it heals.
And when this hip fracture is compressed, as additional metal studs are added to it, as we have said in the help section for both arms and legs.
However, in healing this broken hip, no lame-making stiffness occurs. And if it heals without the application of another leg, then the limb on which it is must always be lame.
And know that the hip is to be bound for fifty days, or a little more, or a little less; all of this depends on the diversity of temperaments and other dispositions.
On the restoration of the fracture of the knee-joint.
Know that the fracture of the knee-joint happens rarely, but it often occurs due to rubbing.
But if a fracture should occur, then it is either a cleavage or an opening in its parts. And this may be with an ulcer, and without an ulcer. It stands upright on it entirely with sensation.
And its restoration is so that it should correspond to the parts of what was fractured with the fingers until it comes together and joins as much as possible through equality, ease, and construction.
Then apply a plaster made from rice flour or milled wheat flour with egg white; place a round stopper over it if necessary; and bind it on top with the appropriate bandage.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have mentioned in other fractures; such as hot abscesses and similar conditions; so that you confront every occurrence with what is suitable for it until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of a fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones; one is large and called the tibia, the other small and called the fibula.
And it happens with both of them that the kind of fracture that occurs with two bones in the arm also occurs; and for this reason the restoration of it is similar to that of the arm and the operation is one.
If both bones are fractured at once, the leg becomes bent in all directions.
If the bone is broken more delicately, the leg turns towards the front part.
If the bone is broken coarsely, you will find it lower; and it belongs to those things which are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, equality, and ligature of stars according to that equally.
Nevertheless, it is necessary, if the fracture of the leg is a foul one, having much setting-hay: so that the extension is smaller, and more gentle with your alluvial treatment.
In the leg indeed there is something of an operation like that in the arm: and it is, that when you tie the stars, and complete your whole operation, then take two bands from pine wood, which are used in the making of solaria [a type of sandal] which is placed under tables; and they are made from the flat parts of the hand; and choose from them those with small thickness, and neither too small nor too thin; and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee downwards.
Then fold over one cloth with two turns, according to its length. Place one part of the leg on one side, and another part of the leg on the other side; and let them be from the knee down to the foot.
Then tie the two bands at three places from both ends and in the middle. For when traction is forbidden, the leg inclines to the right and left, and stands firmly on both feet.
And now let a cradle be made from wood according to the length of the leg, and place the leg in it to keep it still.
It is indeed very necessary that you do that in a bone fracture when there is a wound specifically.
Then consider the leg every day, and care for it with the utmost diligence, either from swelling or inflammation, or from other things. If anything from those happens, then oppose it with what is necessary, until it heals, if God wills it.
On the Fracture of Bones in the Foot and Fingers.
The calcaneus does not have a complete fracture.
The bones of the foot sometimes have a fracture, and it happens less frequently with the fingers; it does not happen to them unless there is rubbing in many positions.
If a fracture of the bones of the foot occurs and you see that those bones have risen above one another, then place the affected foot on the ground prepared as if walking.
Then stand up and place your foot on that which is raised by those bones; then press or tread it, or hold it evenly; and keep it in its place until it returns to its original position.
Then apply the plaster and woolen cloth on top; place a small table under the arch of the foot, having two flat ends.
Then bind it with a suitable bandage when you have wrapped it with linen and whatever else is needed.
When three or four days have passed, then loosen the bandage. For you will find the bones aligned, whether they are fractured or dislocated. Therefore, the treatment for them is as you see.
If some fingers are fractured, then restore them, and align them as I have told you in the treatment of the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint along the length of your finger, and let it be wider by a little; then place this table under your foot that I told you about, and bind it with a suitable bandage.
If what is fractured consists of two or more bones, then place a splint of suitable size over all the fingers, wrapped in linen; and bind the table to the underside of the foot; and let the table stand on one side of the arch of the foot outside the middle, so that it holds it with good support.
It is necessary for you to remember, so that you do not forget, everything that I have told you concerning the other fractures from the accidents that I mentioned; and apply it to every accident as needed.
On the fracture of a woman's jaw, and the shoulder bone, and a man's thigh.
When a woman's jaw is fractured, then make her sit squarely. Then tilt her head towards the back of it slightly, and hold it back.
Then the midwife shall fill the womb of [the patient] with cloth until it is filled; and let there be within the wound as if it were a sphere.
Then the woman is to be shaken, and the back of her gradually scraped off. For that reason, the cloth comes out until it becomes before the opening of the wound as if it were a sphere, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a feather upon her back. When [the woman] wishes to stir [the matter within her womb], she shall easily remove the cloth, then stir; and return it in the same way as you first introduced it; then return to the feather first.
Let that be done for seven days or thereabouts, for the bone itself is restored.
And if [you] wish, take the bladder of an ewe, and tighten a reed tube over its opening, and insert the entire bladder into her wound. Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder inflates within the wound; for the fracture returns.
Then it shall be filled again with cloth, and remain for some days as we have said, until it heals.
And when the bone of the man's or woman's breast is broken, then administer for its restoration and for the equation described above to the bone of Ankles.
And do not hide the intestines in such close fractures, which occur less frequently, especially if there is something of study or use involved.
And understand my book much, for the fracture itself shows you in many positions of restoration and narrowing [of the wound], and understand this.
In the man's arm when broken, take the throat of a goose; and insert the arm into it. Then place a covering of cloth over the [broken] limb and wrap it, and let it be for three days or thereabouts; and it will heal if God wills.
On the restoration of a broken bone, when it is with a wound.
It is fitting for the one who suffers from a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially if it is large like the hip bone or the humerus, to hasten and call for the phlebotomist immediately: if you are informed of the conditions for bloodletting as we have stated.
If the wound is bleeding, then you should hasten for its amputation so that powder made from burnt eggshells may be applied on it; if there is no other present.
Then proceed to set the fracture on the same day and do not delay it unless an abscess occurs.
If however an abscess hot occurs, then postpone the setting of it until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. Do not approach him on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harm to him.
If the broken bone is protruding through the skin, then it should be reduced and set with your hands with ease and minimal extension.
If the extension is not prepared and the bone cannot be set by your hands, then reduce it with this instrument. And the tool is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers, and its width according to the size of the wound. Therefore it is necessary for the physician to take three or four from them according to the amount required for the treatment of any type of fracture in every case.
It should be round and its thickness should be small so that it does not become doubled during the hour of the operation under pressure on it; it should have sharp ends with a margin at its extremities. The upper part of it should be as thick as the middle up to the lower parts.
This is its shape.
It is necessary in this operation that the end of it be placed sharp and curved upon the edge of the projecting bone; and push him with it simultaneously, until when the bone returns and becomes equal to some approximation.
Make the ends of the fracture equal on both sides.
If the ends of the fracture are delicate and do not accept the tool well, then it is necessary that you cut the edge of the bone until the tool has power over it.
If you are not able to reduce them with it as we said, then cut it with it as suitable for it from the chisels which I mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in any way possible for you.
Then plane that which remains in the bone due to roughness and small layers.
When the bone is reduced and afterwards finds a weak place after its reduction causing a violent pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Make that. For you give great help to the weak one when you complete the restoration which you do for the bone.
Then immerse cloth in woad dyed water (woad is a type of dye used in the Middle Ages). And properly if it is during summer. And do not place vinegar or anything containing oil over the wound, so as not to cause decay and corruption at the same place.
Then administer starwort (an herb used for healing) during the hour of completion of the restoration of the bone. And let the wound heal closed; so that you cut with forceps the hole in the joints according to the size of the wound.
And beware with all caution, not to bind the wound with the fracture. For many times foolish physicians have done this; and they caused decay over the weak ones or death, or gangrene, that is, pus. Your constriction should be soft, gentle, and divergent from other fracture constrictions.
If the wound is bad or large and there are some adverse circumstances as we have mentioned, and you find pain at the site suspended: then it is not appropriate to place stars on it. Make them inversions from hard cloth at the location of the stars, and bind it with them.
And when it is one day or two days later, and you see that the wound has begun to produce pus: then remove from above it the cloth that you put on with wine. Then administer linen, and ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds: such as the four-drugs ointment and similar ones.
It is appropriate for you to loosen the binding. Consider the wound every day at morning and evening until it consolidates and heals.
It is necessary that the limb should be prepared in such a way that the pus runs out of it easily towards the lower parts.
If many days pass and the wound does not consolidate or the pus is not expelled from it: then you will know that there are small fractures of bones in that place. Therefore, you should explore the wound with a probe. How many of those small fractures are separated, remove them and extract them. And those which are not separated and pierce the limb and cause pain, attempt to cut them and remove them in any way that is possible for you.
If a boil or abscess, that is, an ulcerous sore or another kind of corruption and putrefaction happens on the wound: then it is necessary to apply to each one of them with what is suitable for its treatment, whose treatment was mentioned in its chapter.
And from that where my speech should be stationary, and to whom you present your mind when a bone breaks, and protrudes upon the limb, such as the hip bone, and the shoulder blade, and similar large bones, it is, that you do not presume on its attraction, for often death occurs from it; indeed, leave it alone until it putrefies.
Perhaps it will fall by itself after twenty or thirty days.
Therefore, take care of the wound if it seems to you; and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter on the treatment of a knot in the tread of a fracture.
Often this knot occurs in the tread of healing for a fracture. Particularly, which is near the joints; and it becomes corrupted from this shape of the limb. And perhaps it prevents the limb from its natural function.
Therefore, consider if the knot is recent; administer medications that are astringent to it, such as aloes, olibanum, myrrh, sarcocola, acacia, and similar ones.
Thus, to receive some of these or all of them; and cook them with astringent wine, or egg white, or vinegar; and place them on the knot on a plaster, and bind them over it tightly with good thread.
And leave the binding, do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and again another one, until the knot is removed.
Or bind tightly over it a flat piece of lead. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from the limbs.
If the knot has already turned into a stone and is bound and urgently calls for its removal; then bind it from above on its part, and cut away the excess projecting out; or file it with certain files until it is removed; and take care of it until it heals.
"Concerning treatment when a limb is restored and remains delicate, not according to its natural state.
"When a bone fracture is restored and the limb that follows remains delicate and weak, then it is not done except for many reasons. "One of the reasons is an abundance of loosening of the ligament and its tying, not as required: or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb: or due to an excess of superfluous embrocation at an inappropriate time: or due to a scarcity of blood in the body of the sick person and its weakness.
"And treatment for this is to feed the sick person and make his body soft until blood increases in him. "And administer a bath. "And pour joy and gladness over him.
"Then place pitch on the limb: so that it attracts much nourishment to itself. "And apply embrocation to it with warm water until the nourishment heals and returns to its natural shape.
"Concerning treatment for fractured bones when they are restored twisted.
"When a restored limb becomes twisted after healing of the fracture, and protrusion or nodulation of the broken bone occurs, deforming the form of the limb; yet the limb does not prohibit its natural operation: then it is not necessary to listen to the person who believes that the limb should be fractured again."\]     Sed si ossis fractio eius est ad modum lenta et incompleta, tunc oportet ut frangatur denuo.
And there were many foolish physicians and healers who performed that in our land.
This operation is highly to be blamed, leading to death or great fear, as it is certainly fatal.
But if lameness and swelling are recent: then it is necessary to bathe with warm water in which have been boiled soothing herbs such as althea leaves and the root of althea, sweet clover, and similar ones. Make for him an ointment with a soothing plaster, such as well-made dyachilon.
Or take the mucilage of the root of althea, grind it with chicken fat or sesame oil; and anoint with it.
Or take ripe figs, crush them with dove droppings and similar medications that are called to decrease concretion.
And sometimes the swelling is relieved by persistent, old-fashioned, and gentle friction which is done with moist hands. Move the limb to all parts at every hour.
If rigidity has already occurred before, and it has become strong and has turned into a stone, and the need for treatment with iron has arisen: then it is necessary to cut off the superficial part of it, and to relieve the continuity of the bone; and to incise what surplus there is from the swelling or bone with fine incisors; and administer ease in it with diligence and care.
Chapter on Dislocation.
Dislocation is the separation of some joints from their place. It forbids movement and distorts the shape of the limb. And it causes pain to come upon the weak and very severe injuries.
When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to hasten towards its restoration; it must not be delayed at all.
If it is delayed, the place becomes rotten, and perhaps with it the reduction of the dislocation.
Therefore, it is not permissible to move (the affected part), nor should it be extended during its rotting hour. Because it often causes a spasm, and painful injuries.
However, when that happens, then you should hasten to the phlebotomy of the sick person. Then it is let go until the rotting subsides.
Then anoint the limb with warm water and oil. Then reduce it gently.
And treat all the limbs with that of which the memory comes back to its place.
I myself have already arranged the chapters on dislocations, even according to what preceded in the fracture, from the top part of the body down to its lower part.
Chapter on the care of dislocations of the lower jaw.
The two Jaws scarcely dislocate unless rarely.
Dislocation of both [occurs] according to one of two modes. For, they are moved away from their places slightly, and softened somewhat. Or, they are dislocated completely, with an integral dislocation, until they soften up to the chest part, until the sick person runs out of salt and cannot hold it, nor can close his mouth, and his tongue is rolled up along with speech.
But when the dislocation is slight, then it returns by itself with a multiplicity of positions along with scarcity.
But if the dislocation is complete and integral: then it is necessary that its reduction be administered quickly, without delaying deeply; and there should be someone to hold the head of the sick person; and the doctor should insert his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocated jaw, if the dislocation is from one side. Or, he should insert two thumbs simultaneously, if the dislocation is from both sides. And the other fingers of his hands shall be outside, as required.
And command the sick person to clean his jaws, and purify them for eating in every part. The doctor commands the jaw, and pushes the jaw, until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are simultaneously involved: then administer fumigation with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easy; do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
When they return and are aligned, and the mouth of the sick person is closed, and they do not soften up: then place on them small cloths of fluff made from beeswax and rose oil.
Then it shall be tied with ease using soft sutures.
And the sick man's sleep should be upon his back: and his head shall stand between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left: nor let him try, or be forced to chew something: rather, let food be placed before him in a gentle manner, until the pain is removed, and the jaw is bandaged: then let him eat whatever he wants, and it shall be given to him with ease.
He shall not labor upon the operation of his mouth in eating and drinking, nor speak, until the jaw is bandaged and healed.
If the reduction of the jaws becomes difficult when they dislocate at some hour and do not return to their places: then often fevers occur, and continuous vomiting: and perhaps the sick man's bowel is opened, and he may vomit bile.
Therefore, when you see this: then know that it is a fatal mishap, and he who experiences this usually dies within ten days.
Chapter on the reduction of dislocation of the neck (Furcula) and the extremity of the arm.
The neck (Furcula) is not dislocated from within the side due to its continuity with the chest. It is dislocated sometimes towards the outside, and this can be felt.
The restoration [of the affected area] is such that the sick one lies down on his back and extends his arms. Then make room with your palm-like pressure, for it will return by itself.
Then place the plaster on top of it, and sprinkle powder and bind it [the wound].
However, the ends which follow the elbow should not be dislocated, except rarely. If it is dislocated on any day: then it should be reduced and set according to what has been said, and as you have prepared [the necessary tools].
Then place the plaster on top of it, and powder and bind it. And tell the sick one to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And with this same treatment, the arm should be reduced when it is separated even from its place [original position].
Chapter on the Reduction of Dislocation of the Arm.
Know that the arm is not dislocated unless in three ways.
One way is that it is dislocated towards the palm side to the lower part. The second one is to dislocate it towards the chest. And perhaps it is dislocated towards the upper part of the humerus; and this happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated toward the back, because of the splint. And it is not dislocated towards the front, because of nerves.
Indeed, it is mostly dislocated and goes out towards the lower part, turned like a thimble; particularly in those whose flesh is scanty. Because it comes out quickly in them, and enters quickly.
But in those whose flesh is abundant, it behaves otherwise, that is to say because it comes out with difficulty, and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps some people have a blow or an accident, and the humerus is dislocated by a hot splint, and it is believed that this is because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you must test it, until you are certain of its nature, and then proceed with its treatment.
A dislocation is known when it turns towards the lower part like a thimble; and distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a healthy one. For you will find a clear difference among them, and in the head of the humerus you will find a hollow, and under the thimble, when you touch the head of the humerus, it feels like an egg; and an injured person cannot bring his hand back to his ear nor move it with all its movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards; then you will find a clear touch, and it will not be hidden.
And this kind of dislocation has an easy reduction when it is recent, or if the child is weak.
The reduction consists in raising the hand above. Then place your thumbs under the thimble, and raise the joint with strength to its place; and the hand is raised, and it is stretched upwards. Then place her below, for he himself quickly returns.
If he does not return as we said, and there has been a dislocation from the beginning, then it is necessary that the sick man be bathed in warm water, and an embrocation that softens and soothes should be administered, just as if they decoct root of althea, fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and it should be administered.
Then the sick man shall lie on his back upon his back: and let there be placed under his spine a sphere and wool, which is equal in softness and tightness.
Then the physician shall place his heel upon the sphere, and push the head of the arm with force, and draw the hand of the sick person downward.
And if you wish, bring him back in this manner: and it is to be such that you make the present man who is taller than the sick person stand at his side, and insert his arm beneath the spine of the sick person: and push the spine upward until the sick person is suspended in the air. And another servant shall draw the hand of the sick person downward towards his belly. If the sick man is light: then it is necessary that he be suspended with something else in order to weigh him down; for the dislocation immediately returns.
And it is also brought back by another manner: and it is to be such that a long piece of wood is shaped on the ground, whose head is rounded in shape like a mitten, but not too heavy nor too delicate. Then let there be placed beneath the sick man, after they have been put on top of his head, soft pieces of cloth; and the sick man shall stand along the length of the wood.
Then extend his hand to its lower part and extend the body from another side with strength; for the joint returns to its place quickly.
If it is difficult to reduce it by all that has been said, then use this care: and there is the method of using a stick whose length is twice the size of an arm, and its width four digits, and its thickness two digits; having a round head to relieve the entrance into deep places, according to this shape.
Then tie soft cloth around the round head to avoid damaging the weak stick.
Then place it under the weak point, so that the hand or arm can be extended over the stick down to the lower part; and tie the stick to the helper and arm and end of the hand.
Then place the arm on the step of the ladder according to its width, and extend the hand downwards, and let the rest of the body hang suspended from another side. For the joint enters quickly.
When its entrance is completed in any way possible; then it is necessary to place a sphere of equal size under the weak point from wool. Then place a prepared plaster made from milled powder with balm and egg white over the entire shoulder, as it is turned above.
Then tie a suture below the weak point and roll the thread over the plaster above; and connect his hand to the neck of the same person and let it not be moved for seven days.
And it is necessary to place a light food until the limb recovers; because it is quicker in healing.
Then let him lie on a larger surface after seven or five days and rub gently with movement. If it becomes firm and does not become soft again, then he is now cured.
If the joint dislocates frequently due to moisture that occurs or because of another cause, then it is necessary to administer a cautery with three holes, as previously stated in the chapter on cautery.
If this is done completely and the ligament is dissolved after seven days and the joint does not heal, and the plaster and binding are applied but they do not hold and fall off and it cannot be lifted up to a higher place: then you know that the nerves which are at the head of the humerus have already been cut or stretched or softened. And you know that the joint will never heal in its place.
For a dislocation that occurs towards the chest and breast or is reduced to the back, this is done with pushing and stretching with hands until it returns, and then the rest of the binding and care are administered until it heals.
If pain and slowness of movement occur after healing in the limb, then the sick person should use baths repeatedly until that pain is relieved, and it returns to its original state.
Chapter on the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
You should know that the shoulder joint dislocates with difficulty and also returns with difficulty; it can dislocate to all parts, but particularly in front or behind.
And this dislocation will not be hidden from you since it falls with sight and touch according to whatever form it is dislocated. And when you join the dislocated shoulder with a healthy one, its abnormality becomes clear to you. The joint will be hollowed out and the arm cannot be doubled nor can it touch its own humerus.
It is necessary to hurry and return the dislocation immediately before a hot abscess occurs.
If a boil occurs that is hot, its reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps it will not heal at all, especially when it is in the rear region. For every kind of dislocation, it becomes worse in every aspect, and a more violent pain often accompanies it; and many times death comes with it.
And the restoration of it, when it can be reduced, is to extend the hand with both hands; and the arm should be stretched out, and the hands of the physician should be above the elbow and below it, and he pushes the dislocation together with the fingertips of his own hands or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Or if the dislocation is towards the front, then it returns in this way: by placing one hand on another until it strikes with the root of the palm the elbow that is dislocated.
If the dislocation does not obey in the reduction, then administer a powerful and strong extension; and it is to be extended by two assistants: and they should hold him also so that he is not moved during the extension.
Then the arm is turned to every side after it has been placed over the hand; a piece of cloth doubled and long or a broad bandage is wrapped around it.
And when the physician touches the dislocation with his hand, he binds it with oil; so that it will be among those things which assist in lubricity of the dislocation with ease. Then push the dislocation with a strong force until it returns.
After the reduction of it, it should be placed on a plaster containing styptic and drying with ox gall; and a decent ligature is tied around it. The arm is suspended from the neck of the sick person; and let it be for several days.
Then it is unbound. If therefore the union is solidified in its place, then loosen the ligament from it, and let it be.
And if you see the union not tight enough, then apply plaster and ligate it for some days, until it becomes firm. Then loosen it.
If however pain occurs to him after the reduction of the union, and the position is in motion: then administer humectation in bathing, and fine friction, and compression, until it heals, or place over the union ilium, that is, the fat of a ram's wool. Then tie it up, and let it be on it day and night. Then remove it, and introduce him into the bath. When he sweats, then rub the union with moderate friction. Then apply oil three times, before each bathing, until it becomes soft.
And if you wish, place over it cow dung, moistened, heated with butter, and tighten it over it.
Make that several times. It becomes soft, and returns to its former position.
Chapter on the treatment of dislocations by Albucasis.
The hand of Mahassem is often dislocated, that is, the union that is between the arm and the hand.
The reduction of its dislocation is easy. On the contrary, other unions. However, it is necessary that quickness be in the reduction of its dislocation at the hour when it is dislocated, before the place is removed; or a hot abscess occurs in it.
The reduction of its dislocation is that you place the weak hand of Mahassem on a table and stretch out the attendant's hand; and the physician places his palm over the protrusion of the union and pushes it until it returns.
It is necessary to consider if the palm has already receded towards the hand's belly: then the weak one should place the back of his hand on the table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then let his hand be placed intrinsically on the table, that is, the inner part of his hand should be placed on the table, so that the physician's hand may fall upon the same projection of the joint.
If it immediately returns, that is good; but if not, then bind it with a plaster sitting upon the abscess; and leave it alone, do not touch it again.
For if it does not bear [the pressure], nor can you perform its reduction after the days have passed, yet the joint remains twisted according to its own crookedness; and nothing harms the weak one except what softens his hand, and he cannot bind anything: then know that the nerves have been severed or rubbed.
Therefore, there is no skill in it except to bind with a cautery near to the dislocation. And perhaps it brings nothing about [the healing].
Since Almahassem does not return, then place a plaster upon him as I have said. Then bind it and let it be for five days; afterwards it is to be loosened and let go, and the hand is to be exercised.
If it is deprived of motion and something heavy happens to it: then soothe it with warm water, and occasionally rub it until it is softened.
Chapter on the Treatment of Finger Dislocations.
When a finger is dislocated from any of the parts or from the back of the palm or the belly of it: then stretch out the finger, and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then sustain the head of the digit, and suspend it towards the side where it is dislocated, and release it for two days.
Then extend it (the dislocated part), and hold it until it aligns with its normal position on that day.
When it becomes night, bind it according to the narrative; do not cease to loosen it during the day; exercise it with motion; and bind it at night.
Do this for some days until it heals.
And do likewise with the one in the hand if it is dislocated towards the abdomen; bind it to that part, and perform your first operation on it until it heals.
And do likewise with the one when it is dislocated in other parts.
Section on treating a spondylolisthesis of the spine.
When a man has a dislocation of the backbone or neck, complete dislocation, or many vertebrae are removed from their places: then there is no cure in it, for death approaches the weak one.
And the sign of this is that the disease of the weak one departs without will, nor can he hold it; and softening occurs in some of his limbs, or two legs, or two arms, or one of them, or a vertebra is removed from its place.
For it is often removed, for it often happens that they are removed to the four parts.
Therefore, what is removed towards the backside, is named 'Gibbosity'.
But the cure of it is that you consider whether 'Gibbosity' occurs from childhood; then there is no cure in it, nor is any healing from it at all.
But in that which occurs from an accident, or blow, or similar things, the ancients have said the methods of healing in a long discourse. For which very few return with a favorable outcome.
I myself have already abbreviated from that one, for which he makes little exception due to my proximity; and in my explanation, I presented it differently than how they showed it, and explained it.
Therefore, I say that there is no skill nor healing from 'Gibbosity' which occurs from the front part.
And similarly with one which occurs on both sides as well.
And it is not cured from those except the one which occurs in the back truly, as I say; and it is to be extended on his face over a platform almost equal to the wall; and to spread beneath him moist straw so that his chest may not be hurt.
Then place a straight stick fixed in the ground at the foot-end, around its head; and another stick around its other foot-end; and let a servant hold the stick, and it should not be fastened in the ground. And let another servant hold the other (one).
Then cover the head of the sick (man), and beneath his chin tie a tight bandage; extend the end of the bandage to the stick that is at his head, and bind it there.
Then tie another bandage above his ankles, and above his knees, and at the joints (of his legs). Then gather all the bandages together, and bind them to the other stick that is at his feet.
Then all the servants should extend the bandage to any part of the stick, and neither of the sticks should be moved from their positions where they are fixed; but they should not be fastened, as we said before.
And the doctor shall place his hands on the pelvis firmly until he returns; or he may place a board over it. Then tie his feet together on the board until he returns.
If he does not return after this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And carve a hole in the wall which we mentioned near the sick (man), into which the end of the board enters. Then place the middle of the board on the pelvis. And let the doctor place his feet on the other end (of the board). And tie it firmly until the pelvis is dislocated and he returns to his place.
Then, if you wish, work with the drill that moves by hand; and it is for you to carve two sticks into the ground at the head of the sick (man) on the last foot, whose length is an arm; and at his head on the last foot, two sticks.
And let the length be that which is between every stick and a palm's breadth; and now, a hole has been made everywhere where a tourniquet runs; and let all the sticks be firmly fixed to the ground very much, so that it does not move at all.
A round stick is to be inserted; and there is a tourniquet in which a ligament is rolled in the holes of two sticks.
And at its end there is a hole, where the stick is fixed, whose length is a palm with that which is rolled; and likewise in two other sticks.
Then tie the ligaments which you tied on the chest of the sick person to the tourniquet that is at his head; and tie the ligaments which you tied on his legs to the tourniquet that is at his feet.
Then let the attendant stand by each tourniquet who will turn his hand with a cloth, with which the tourniquet is turned; and the surgeon ties the ligaments (Spondile) as we said before.
This is the form of the tourniquet that follows.
Then after Spondiles returns and the place is tied, then it is necessary that you put on an asafoetida plaster with egg white. Then starch (stuppa). Then place a star-shaped piece of wood on top of the plaster, whose width is three fingers or about that. And its length is the amount that will contain the hump (Gibbositas), and above the healthy part of Spondiles.
Then it is tied with the ligament we said before. The sick person should be nourished with delicate food until he is healed.
If something remains as a protuberance in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe, with the use of the tablets (tablet) that we said before for a long time. And now, it is administered on that sheet of lead.
When it happens protrusion at the last vertebra of the back: and it is thought to be dislocation, and that bone is what now projects out. Therefore, it is not fitting for this medicine to be assumed without caution, perhaps it will cause death.
Chapter on the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Know that the joints of the ankle and shoulder do not occur unless it is a dislocation; nor does what happens to other joints by slight removal and concavity occur in them.
Indeed, the ankle joint is dislocated in four parts. This is because it is dislocated forward and backward.
Most certainly, it is dislocated more towards the inside; and less towards the front and back.
And the treatment of its dislocation towards the inside is that when you join the weak leg to a healthy one, it is longer; and the knee of the weak one projects more than the healthy one, and the weak one cannot double his foot at the knee; and there is a place following the knee which is pressed by a warm compress, because the head of the hip has already reached that place.
And the sign of its dislocation towards the outside is that there are symptoms opposite to these symptoms.
And the sign of its dislocation towards the front is that it extends the healthy leg abnormally; however, it does not double it without pain in the knee; and if it tries to walk on it, it cannot do so at the front; and urine retention occurs in it, and its knee is swollen, and during walking it is struck at the heel.
And the sign of its dislocation towards the back is that it does not extend the knee, nor can it double it before the thigh is doubled; and the leg is even shorter than the other; and the knee is softened, and the head of the hip is at that place.
Reduction of this dislocation is to consider then, if the dislocation is old, which has already become ancient with it. If you administer the reduction and it remains according to its position, then there is no cure at all in it. Therefore, it should not be presumed upon her completely.
In him whose dislocation is recent, and it belongs to one of the four kinds of dislocations: then proceed to this, that you desire a joint, and extend it to the interior and exterior, and move it right and left: forcibly, it may return, and it does not require other care.
If this does not return in this manner, then it is necessary to prepare a strong assistant and extend his leg from the lower part; either with his hands, or with a bandage that ties above his knee; and another assistant extends his hand upwards, so that he introduces his hands into the joints. Then tie a soft bandage above the root of the hip, and hold the end of another bandage.
And the extension is either from the front part of the groin to the part of the neck, or from the back to the backbone.
And let the extension be one for all, until the weak one is lifted with his body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this is indeed the common type of extension among the four kinds.
If the dislocation returns with what I said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to do all that I will say about its own treatment.
In the reduction of his [the dislocation], when it is to the insides, it is necessary for the weak one to lie on his healthy side. Then put a bandage above the root of the hip, in that which is between the head of the hip and the place under the groin. Then extend the ligament upward from the groin area to the higher part of the body, to the neck region.
Then let another strong servant take hold of his arm, and he shall reduce the large opening of the weak hip, and stretch it out by vigorous extension to the outside. Now indeed it returns to its place.
And this form of treatment is easier than the other forms, by which this limb is reduced.
If however it is excused over you, and does not obey you for the entrance with this form of treatment at all: then it is necessary that two weak feet are tied together with the strong ligament, loosely, on top of both heels, and on top of both knees: and let the length of each be four times the size of a finger: and let the weak leg be stretched out more than twice the size of two fingers.
Then the weak one is suspended above the head post (which should be in the house): and let its length from the ground be two forearms.
Then command a strong youth to brace the head of the hip: and suspend another youth with the weak one: and another youth shall push, bracing the hip with strength, for the joining (of the bones) returns to its place quickly.
In the reduction of its own (the hip), when there is a dislocation towards the outside, it is necessary that the weak one lies on a flat surface, as we have said in the case with a hump. And the ligament shall be tied above the leg of the weak one, and above its chest.
Then place two poles, one at his feet, and another at his head. Then place a third pole in the middle of the bed, firmly fixed: upon which wet cloths shall be rolled, so as not to hurt the weak one: and let the pole be between his hips, so as not to be pulled towards the lower parts during extension.
Then let every servant go to his part, and the doctor adjusts the reduction with his hand.
If he submits to the reduction, it will be good.
And if not, place it on the table and press it evenly, as we said in swellings, equally. However, it is necessary that the sick one lies on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is towards the front, then it is necessary to quickly extend the sick person's leg: and this is according to the same story on the table: and let the doctor place the palm of his right hand on the groin of the sick one. Then bend him with your other hand, and with this bending place him extended to the lower parts towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is towards the back: then it is not necessary to extend the sick one towards the lower parts and be raised from the ground: rather it is necessary for him to be placed on a hard surface, as it should also be done if his ankle is dislocated towards the outside, according to what we said about his position on two ankles: and it is on his face and extended ligaments: according to what we said recently.
And it is necessary that pressure is applied with a table also to the place where the connection departs, when completion of reduction is done according to what is necessary.
And the sign of his reduction is not hidden from you: and it is to extend two legs of the sick one: and when you see them even, and the sick one pulls his leg, and extends himself without resistance: then you will know that the limb has returned, according to what is necessary: then join the two pelvises, and apply a plaster, and tie it with bandages, that is, a wheel: so that the ankle does not move in any direction: and let the sick one rest for three or four days.
Then loosen the ligament, and apply the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in condition, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed: therefore leave the patient to walk.
If you see something softening: then return, and apply the plaster, and bind it according to your initial binding: and let it remain for three days.
Then loosen it and make him walk slowly on both for some days until he recovers well.
Part of a Treatise on Knee Dislocations.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated towards the outer side, towards the inner side, and towards the lower side, that is, towards the back.
And it is not dislocated towards the front.
The sign of this dislocation is that you instruct the patient to apply his leg to his hip. If however it does not adhere to the hip: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of this dislocation is that you make the patient sit straight, so that he can now extend his leg if possible over it, and let his back rest against his face, and place his foot between your feet.
Then make the knee adhere with your palms, and straighten them between your fingers over the knee. Then apply both sides of the knee with your palm with force. And another servant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place.
The sign of its return is that the leg adheres with the hip gently, not laboriously.
Then apply it (the plaster), and make the leg adhere with the hip. Then bind them together with lint for three or four days. Then loosen it (the suture or bandage).
And let not the sick person walk for some days until he is healed.
If he refuses to be reduced (reduced swelling), then administer a strong extension with ligatures as described in the treatment of hernia, until it returns.
§ On the Treatment of Dislocated Heel Bone (Calcaneus).
The heel bone is sometimes displaced slightly and at other times it is completely dislocated. Its dislocation may occur towards the inside or towards the outside (inward or outward).
The sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel bone swollen, protruding towards the side to which it is dislocated.
Its treatment (for reduction) is easy; the procedure is to extend it with ease using hands and align it until it returns to its place.
When the heel bone is completely dislocated, it is necessary to make the sick person sit upright; and let a strong assistant hold him firmly from behind, in the middle of his back.
Then hold the foot with your right hand from above and the foot with your left hand below, at the level of the ankle (talus).
Then draw the foot to you with your right hand. Then with your left hand take hold of it by two joints.
Then stretch it out with your left hand and push the shinbone of the foot towards you with your right hand without effort.
Do this twice as we have said.
Then push the shinbone of the foot against the leg joint for the third time and you pull on the ankle.
If therefore it returns to its former position either once or twice according to this method, and you see that the foot is equalized, then it is good. And if not, then repeat the procedure on him, because he will return (to normal).
If the reduction is prevented by him while we are doing it as we have said, then make the weak person lie on his back on the ground and fix a peg firmly in the ground, so that he falls between his hips. And now you have wound a cloth around him to prevent him from being hurt (by the fall).
Then let the attendant take hold of his hip. Afterwards, let another attendant stretch out the leg, either with his hands or with a strap that ties around the ankle. Then all the attendants should stretch out towards the extension (of the leg). And let the peg be standing between the hips of the weak person, holding him so that his body is not drawn downward toward the extension.
Then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant holds the healthy leg towards the lower part. For the dislocation returns quickly.
Whenever the dislocation returns and you are told of the health of its reduction, then apply an ointment and a poultice, tie them firmly with bandages, and bind the foot to the leg with a strap.
And you must be careful and take care not to bind too tightly the nerves that are above the heel at the back, so as not to injure them.
Then let him be released for two or three days. If the ligament becomes soft, tighten it; then loosen it on the third or fourth day; and forbid the weak from walking for forty days. However, if he tries to walk before that time, there is no safety unless it is loosened over him again due to dislocation, and it will be ruined, and it will not receive healing afterwards.
If a hot boil occurs to him: then it is necessary that you administer to him the recipe mentioned earlier in another place for treatment and embrocation until it is removed.
Chapter on dislocation of fingers and cure.
It is necessary that what is dislocated be adjusted with little extension without effort; and indeed this is easy, rather it is simple.
If dislocation is in some nodules of the foot heel, then it is necessary that the sick person makes his foot sit on a level with the ground or table, and stands as if walking.
Then you stand, and place your foot upon that which projects from those joints. Then press it with your foot with force until it returns and you see it adjusted and no longer projecting from its place.
Then put a board under the sole of his foot which can hold the whole foot, with two feet on it. Then bind it with a bandage suitable for three days. Then loosen it and let him rest from walking many days until it is bound and secured against dislocation.
On the types of dislocation with wound or fracture.
When something happens to it, and you try to cure it and restore it, death often occurs many times; therefore, one should not presume on its cure unless he is experienced in the art, compassionate, devout, patient, cautious, not bold, nor presumptuous: and that he uses only cooling medicines at first: and that he leaves the sick to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for healing from destruction with gentleness of illness, and where there is something that suggests hope. Therefore, try the reduction immediately at the beginning, before a hot abscess occurs.
If the limb returns as we desire, then administer a regime that checks an abscess: and care for the wound with what is suitable for it from dry ointments.
If dislocation occurs along with a fracture, and separated fragments of the socket occur, then try to remove them, and do as we said in simple diseases in those places.
And be careful according to your ability, and guard yourself from entering on the road of fear: according to what I have previously said to you.
For it is better for you before your Creator, and more enduring for your glory, and more beneficial to your body among them in your time.
