After I have completed for you, O Sons, this book which is the last in the knowledge of medicine along with its supplement and I have reached the end in it through expositions of it and its declarations, it seemed good to me to complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of operation, that is, surgery with the hand.
Since operation with the hand is laid low in our region and at our time completely absent; perhaps the knowledge of it has perished, and its trace has been lost, and there remain only small descriptions in the books of the ancients which have been corrupted by hands; errors and hesitation occur until intentions are closed off and the force of it is prolonged, It seemed good to me to revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise in it according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and to come with forms of iron tools, and the rest of the instruments of work; which occurs through addition to declarations and through appropriate application.
The reason why a skilled craftsman of it is not found with his hand in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and its author should exercise himself before that in the science of anatomy which Galen narrated, until he knows the remedies of limbs, and their forms, and their connection and disconnection, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, their number, and their origin, and veins, arteries, and quiet veins, and the locations of their outlets.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that name with name is much, and with work it is little, especially in the art of the hand.
We have already said about him at the beginning of this book.
Whoever is not acquainted with what we have said about anatomy, already falls into error, wherein men are killed: as I have seen many of those who are formed in this science, boast about it without knowledge, and without experiment.
I have seen a foolish physician cut off a scrofulous apostema from a woman's neck, and he cut some arteries in her neck: thus the woman bled to death in his hands.
I have seen another physician who presumed to extract a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large. Therefore, he reached for it and extracted it with a piece of the bladder. Thus the man died on the third day.
And I myself had already been summoned to extract it; and I saw, due to the size of the stone and the condition of the man, that he would die.
I have seen another physician who was receiving a stipend from some Duke of our land on account of his medical skill: and a black eunuch was with him, who was injured near the heel of his leg; and the physician, in ignorance, bound up the fracture above the wound with iron splints, strong bands, and nails, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he bandaged him according to his own devices. Afterwards he dismissed him after some days and ordered him not to loosen the bandage: and he stood thus until an aposteme formed on his leg, and on his foot, and it reached destruction.
I was then called to him: and I hastened to loosen the bandage: and peace ensued, and he was freed from his pains.
However, the corruption had already been confirmed in the member: and I could not stop it.
Let it (the wound) therefore halt corruption from spreading throughout the member, until it is destroyed.
And I saw another physician who pierced a malignant apostema; and it ulcerated for days, until the corruption of its evilness with the Lord (of the disease) was revealed.
Because if a cancer is pure from black bile (melancholy), then it should not be approached with iron at all unless it is in a member that can bear it, to be cut off entirely.
And for this reason, O Sons (of the art), it is necessary that you know that an operation is divided into two divisions: one operation which is associated with safety; and another operation, by means of which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have now awakened in every place of this book where the operation comes which has fear and dread.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of this and separate (it) yourselves from it; lest foolish men find a way to speak and disgrace (the art).
Therefore receive (the art) with care and protection, and treat your sick ones with ease and firmness, and use a better way leading to grace of God for health and praiseworthy success; and abandon terrible sicknesses difficult to heal; and remove from yourselves that which causes fear, so hesitation in faith and comfort may not enter upon you.
For it remains more to your glory, and higher in this world, and finally (leads) to the wealth of your possessions.
For Galen has already said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat evil sickness; lest you be called an evil doctor.
Now this Treatise has been divided into three Chapters. ¶
First Chapter.
On Cautery with fire, and Cautery with sharp medicine, the procedure has been divided, and arranged from head to foot, as well as the forms of the instruments and tools for Cautery, and everything that is necessary in the operation.
Chapter Second.
On incision and perforation, phlebotomy and wounds; on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, and all of this is divided and arranged according to the forms of the instruments.
Chapter Third.
On restoration and relocation, cure of twisting, and similar conditions; divided and arranged from head to foot, and according to the forms of the instruments.
Before I recall the operation with him, it is necessary that I say the qualities of the remedies and the harm caused by it, and in what composition it should be displayed.
I say therefore that the discourse on the quality of the cautery and the harm it causes is a lengthy, subtle, scientific, and hidden secret.
Also, there were many wise men who spoke about it and disagreed among themselves; for myself, I am content with little of their discourse, fearing a lengthy discussion.
I say therefore that the cautery applies universally to every composition, which is with matter or without it; except for two compositions, which are hot composition without matter and dry composition without matter.
In hot and dry composition with matter, they disagreed. Some indeed said that the cautery is beneficial in it (hot and dry composition with matter). Others said the opposite, that the cautery is not suitable for this illness, which is due to heat and dryness; because the nature of fire is heat, and it is inappropriate to heal an illness that is hot and dry with heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite said that by cautery it is beneficial for every illness due to heat and dryness which happens in the bodies of men; because when you compare a human body and its humidities with fire composition, you find the body of man cold.
And I myself say by his words; because I have already proven that to me many times.
However, it is not necessary that he comes to it unless the one who has already been proven and has experience in the last exercise of the chapter Cauterii, and knows the diversity of human compositions, and the disposition of illnesses in themselves, and causes of them, and their properties, and the space of time for them.
From the remaining temperaments (complexions), there is no fear for you; and especially in diseases that are cold and moist. Now all physicians agree on them, and they have not disagreed in the treatment with the cautery in those diseases.
And know, my sons, that from the secret of healing through cautery with fire, and its goodness over the cautery with medicine burning, it is because fire is simple, whose action does not extend beyond the member being cauterized, and it does not harm another joined member with it, unless there is a slight damage.
But the action of burning medicine extends to what is distant from the members; and perhaps it causes difficult healing of the disease in the member, and perhaps it kills (the patient).
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not do that unless it is excessive.
Now this has become known to us through experience, because of the duration and effort required for study and art, as well as the position on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of the discourse.
And if it were not forbidden to this book of mine, I would bring you the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies, by which it expels diseases that have been demonstrated in philosophical discourse, which would be clarified for your minds.
And know, my sons, that they themselves disagree on the time when the cautery should be done, and place the better time in truth.
And I say that the cautery is suitable at any time; therefore, the damage that occurs due to time is absorbed in the benefit that attracts with the cautery. And especially if the cautery is for pains from necessary, strong, sudden pains that cannot tolerate delay; therefore, it is feared that what occurs from them will be greater than a small damage due to time.
And let not that enter your minds, O sons, that they do not consider, except for the common people and foolish physicians, that there is no always a return to health in the illness which is cured by cautery: and they set forth this as a consequence, and matters are not as they think: therefore because cautery is not, unless in place of medicine, which alters the complexion, and removes the humidities which are the causes, whence arises pain.
Nevertheless, cautery is superfluous over medicine due to its quick recovery and the strength of its operation, and its power of dominion: and it is possible that illness may return at some hour of time according to the complexion of the sick, and the location of his illness, and the strength of its power: and that which is prepared in his body from an aggregation of superfluidities in him: and that which has reached him for acquisition by foods and similar things from such causes, unless there is illness, in which cautery is administered.
A subtle illness in a member of few superfluidities and humidities, such as cautery of the tooth, may be possible that that pain will not return to him. But this is rare.
However, the speech of the common people again, that cautery is the last medicine, is true: not for what they intend in it: because they believe that there is no cure given by medicine, nor by any other after the departure of the cautery.
Matters are, however, the opposite of what they intend, and the purpose that cautery is the last medicine, is not, except when we administer modes of cure in some illness, and these do not give medicine: then afterwards we administer cautery, and it gives a cure: thence comes the idea that cautery is the last medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than one with iron; and they said this only because of the equality of gold, and the loftiness of its substance; and they said that it does not cause a place for cautery to produce pus. That is not absolutely true; because I have proven that it does not do this in certain bodies without others.
And a cautery with it is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you make a fire cautery with gold in fire, it is not shown to you when it is heated according to the quantity that you wish, due to the redness of gold; and when it goes towards it, coldness, and if you add more heat upon it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls from that into occupation; and for this reason, a cautery with iron is faster and closer to us, due to its rightness for the operation.
And I myself have arranged this chapter on cautery, according to chapters; and I have ordered it from head to foot: so that those who seek it will find what they want from it.
Chapter II.
Here the cauterization is directed at the lordship of moisture and coldness over the brain; which are the two causes of soda and excessive flow of fluids from the head to the eyes and ears, and excessive sleep, toothache, sore throat, and all disease that occurs due to coldness, such as paralysis, soda, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The method of cauterization is that you command the sick person: to evacuate in the first place with purifying medicine cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the sick person, and his age, and his habit.
Then command him to make an opening in his head with a new nail. Then make him sit before you squarely, so that he has placed his hands upon his chest.
Then place the palm of your hand on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever therefore your middle finger comes to be, mark that place with an unburnt brand.
Then heat the cautery in oil: whose shape is this.
Then place it upon the marked place with the unburnt brand, and you pull it down with a descent, by which your hand is gradually tightened, and you turn it. Then you quickly lift your hand and look at the place.
If you see that a quantity of bone or herb is exposed from the skull, then lift your hand. And if not, you place your hand again with the iron itself or with another if it becomes cold: until the bones, which I told you, are visible.
Then take something from salt, and dissolve it in water, and immerse the cotton in it, and place it upon the place: and leave it for three days.
Then place the cotton immerged in butter upon him, and leave it on the place until the scab of fire is destroyed. Then care for it with the four-part ointment until it is healed.
They say that when a wound remains more open, it exudes pus; therefore it is better and more helpful.
And some of them say that the skin should be cauterized until it reaches the bone: and the cautery should be held, until something thick of the bone is burnt.
Then after what has been burned from the bone, it is shaved, then it is cared for.
And some say that when cauterizing, it should be reached to the end, so that it imprints an impression in the bone to such an extent that the bone falls out, which happens as the form of a keratosis; or an instrument which women place infused with small alphabet letters: and they believe, that vapors from the head expire at this location, and the wound remains open for a long time.
Then it should be cauterized until it solidifies.
For me, however, these two types of cautery are not seen at all, except for certain men according to the way of fear.
And it is better, in my opinion, to let it go along with his own health.
For indeed the head becomes weak from the dissolution of its own continuity; as we have testified in other members: and particularly when the head of the weak is naturally frail: and the first type of cautery, indeed, is safer and better for me, and I use it: therefore operate with it for safety.
Chapter III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the head and it persists in an unwell person, using hyson (a type of tea), mustard, leeches, hot applications, and unguents. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery as I have said, and none of those [remedies] provide any relief for him: then consider it. If the head of the unwell person is strong by nature and not weak, and finds intense cold: then cauterize with another cautery, but carefully. Then cauterize it on top of all his horns of the head with cautery, so that the skin is not penetrated and a quantity of bone as I have said is exposed. And cauterize it with one cautery at the occiput (the back part) of his head, in the place called "vas" (a hollow or cavity): it is a place where a ventous (pustule) is placed: grind your ointment and do not expose bone. For the unwell person finds intense pain due to this, and different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And I say that this cautery should be in its place: it is necessary that it be the cautery with which horns of the head are cauterized, and the occiput (the back part) of his head should be cauterized more subtly with the cautery with which the middle part of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur in part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and the head is treated with cleansing medicines, and other treatment is administered as I have said in the divisions of diseases, and this does not provide relief: then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with a hot medicine burning: or with iron.
The cautery with burning medicine, is to take one garlic clove, peel it and cut off its ends from both sides. Then cut the painful area at the time with a wide lancet until there is a space under the skin where the tooth can be captured.
Insert it [the tooth] there under the skin until it is concealed; then press upon it with a proper plaster and let it remain for fifteen hours; then dissolve it and extract the garlic; and let it rest for two or three days; afterwards place the cautery submerged in butter on it until the place becomes pus; then care for it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do this with certain burning medicines, which I wrote about in the twelfth treatise on poisons.
The cautery of this [the gallbladder] with iron is to be done according to this method. Fire Cautery, whose form is as follows:
It is called the "Clavile": because the head of it is like a nail's shape, in which there is something rough, and in the middle of it is a small projection.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand; and you turn the iron slowly with speed; and let the quantity to be burned be of the thickness of the skin, as its half. And lift your hand so that the artery below is not burned and there is bleeding.
Then immerse the cautery in water and salt, and place it on the spot for three days; then place the cautery with butter; afterwards care for it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this half-skull with the tip of a second cautery (cultellarius). Beware not to cut an artery in this hemicranium, not old one properly.
On the method of cauterizing in the ancient hemicranium.
When you treat the hemicranium, as previously said in cure and in the division of diseases, and healing does not help: and when, from the illness, you see that what was said about cauterization with the first cautery or cauterization with fire is not enough, then it is necessary to prepare the cautery iron until it turns white, marking a line on the place of pain whose length is half the digit, or like that: and place your hand aside, and tighten it until you cut the artery, and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to beware of continuous jaw movement during mastication so that the side or nerve moving it is not burned, thus causing a spasm.
And take care and caution regarding the flow of blood from the cut artery. There is fear in its cutting, and especially to him who does not know what he is doing, and is not diligent or experienced; and he gives up the operation with it first.
And I shall come with a reminder of the management of blood flow following the cutting of an artery according to its method, and in the place of this book.
If you see from the illness that this cautery is not enough for him, and you see the body of the patient bearing the cautery in the middle of the head as we said, then treat a wound until it heals.
And if you wish to administer the cautery as we said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with a cautery having two blades. Cauterization is indeed better in this way and more suitable.
On the method of cauterizing ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear due to coldness and is treated with solutions, and other treatment as we said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then cauterization with fire; and this is what is called a point, whose shape is as follows.
Then the point after its burning should be made circular around the entire ear, as it is turned; or around each side if pain is on both sides. And lengthen (the point) with the cautery slightly from the root of the ear after marking the places with hot iron; and let the quantity of the cautery be ten points on every ear, and so forth.
Then cure the areas until they heal.
Section on the method of cauterization in torturing.
Chapter VII.
The condition that is treated with cauterization due to torturing, is not anything other than those arising from phlegm, as we said in the division of diseases.
And avoid cauterization for types that occur due to exhaustion and spasm of the nerve.
When treating this type of torturing with herbs, mouth washes and gargles, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the weak person with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little lower than the earlobe, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
Place your cautery on the opposite side of the weak part. Since softening does not occur unless in the healthy part.
And the shape of cauterization is to cauterize the point itself with the cautery directly at the tip of the upper end of the ear, slightly below the horn of the head; and another one on the earlobe; whose length should be according to the length of a thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until the thickness of half the skin is burned.
And this is the form of a Cautery, and it is a species made from a knife, whose shape is as follows: nevertheless, it should not be too subtle, as you see; and it is necessary that the knife in it should have little excess bulk.
Then take care of the location, when applied: until it heals.
§ On the method of cauterizing in ancient apoplexy.
When the apoplexy becomes old and your treatment does not help and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on all the horns of his head, and a cautery in the middle of the head, as we said, and a cautery on the occiput of the head, according to what was mentioned; and the method of cauterizing should be according to what was mentioned.
Also, it is cauterized with a cautery on the face of the stomach: and it is more for the final treatment.
Then care for him, when applied.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in drink there are first of all large amounts of hyson tea, and cleansing pills for the brain.
Then shave completely the head of the sick one, and place on his head a plaster from synapism described in the book of plasters; place it often.
It is indeed the method of cautery; make this accordingly in the same order as I said there.
If therefore he is healed by it, that is good. If not: then make for him three cauteries on the back of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye; place between each cautery a thickness of a finger.
Then take care of the cautery, with that which came before it.
If you wish an addition and the sick one can endure it: then make a cautery in the middle. If you wish an addition: then cauterize him on top of both horns.
Then take care of him until he is healed; let the cautery be anointed in the form that was mentioned before.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter X.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleansing of the head using hyson, and as we said before.
Then shave the head of the sick person; afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the back part of it, and three over the spondyles of the neck.
If you need softening of the body with many of those [remedies], and if the patient is weak and the illness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries over the spondyles of the back, and the last one with a cautery, until most of his skin is burned off, and you scrape your hand. Then take care of him until he is cured; and thus the cautery should be used on Oliva (Olive oil).
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Epilepsy.
A epileptic should not be cauterized unless his epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain of his first, with hyson, and with the rest of the treatment that I have mentioned in the division: when he is severely ill or he endures the taking of medications well.
If, however, he is a child who does not endure medications, then gargarism is administered and cleansing mastication for the brain before that for many days with good food purification.
Then scrape his head, afterwards cauterize him with a single Cauterio in the middle of the head according to what was mentioned before: and with another cauterio at the back of his head, and over all the horn of his skull with cauterio. If he is strong and tolerating, then cauterize him with the cauteries that I have mentioned in having paralysis, and softening of the body on spondiles of the neck and back: let the Cauterium be oiled according to the method mentioned before.
If, however, he is a child, then place a subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries that I have mentioned in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of declivities leading to melancholy and his body is damp, then give him in drink what cleanses his brain according to what was mentioned before: then scrape the head of the sick man, and make afterwards a well-centered tortellum made from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of his head: let the sick man sitting square be held by all sides.
Then present the ointment. And it is more appropriate from ancient butter (of) sheep. And heat it over fire with a measured warmth that the finger can bear when it is immersed in it. Then evacuate (it) in the middle of its head in a circle, and let it cool down.
Do this to the sick one once a week, with the rest of his good regimen, until (he) is cured.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small holes in it, except that you hold (it) with the cautery; it should be smelling.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place on it a sponge soaked in butter (or) goose fat.
[Section heading] Method of Cauterizing for Descending Water to the Eye.
Chapter 13.
When you are told that water appears in the eye through the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and wash the sick one, with what cleans his head.
And keep him away from all moistness, and let him sit in a bath, on fasting days for some time.
Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize himself in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him on two sides with two cauteries, if there is no discharge of water from both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if there is no discharge of water from one eye: and cut off with the cautery all veins and arteries that are beneath the skin: and let the cauteries be long in width like the temples: and avoid bleeding.
If you see something coming from it (the affected area), then immediately cut it off with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting off, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two lastly produced cauteries.
Chapter on the ancient method of cauterization in tears (eyes).
When the tears of the eyes are old and frequent, and they are over veins and arteries which are manifest on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is from superfluidities of cold, phlegmatic humors: then cauterize with the same cautery as I mentioned in the discharge of water, cauterize in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck under two bones. And if there is need for addition, then cauterize him carefully on all sides of the eye, over the edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in nasal foul smell (nasal discharge).
When you treat it as we said in division, and the medicine does not help: then hurry, and give three nights of infirmocochia in drink; then shave its head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, using oil in the cautery. Then cauterize it with two cauteries and a small cautery, above two eyebrows under the hairs.
And beware of the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the Cautery Claw.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing for the softening of the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by sickness or moistness: then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, using this cautery in a lunar shape.
And if you wish, cauterize it above two eyebrows in any part with two cauteries; and the cautery should extend from both sides; and the length of the entire cautery should be according to the length of the eyebrow; and do not place your hand with the cautery at the very end, but rather according to the amount that is burned by the third eyelash.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn inward and poke the eye.
Cautery is in it according to two modes: either cautery with fire; or cautery with a burning medicine.
In cautery with fire, instruct the sick person to release their hairs before it, if they are among those who clean them, until they have been extended and matched in length. If they prick him at his origin: then constrict his eyes with a plaster so that they do not move until they are born.
When they are born and matched in length, then place the head of the sick one on your lap: then mark over the eyelids of his eyes with encaustic, mark what is in the shape of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a bowl soaked in egg white or slime of peas on the eye.
Then heat the fire-cautery, whose shape is as follows:
Then cauterize on the shape which you marked little by little in several places, until the surface of the skin burns, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, completely visible.
And the sign of the health of your work is that if you see the eyelid already contracted and hairs rising at the prick of the eye.
Then lift up your hand then: and release him for three days.
Then place a bowl with butter on it until the scab is removed. Then care for him with ointment until he is healed.
If some hair returns after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cautery on that place as you did at first.
If the hairs are in the lower part: then cauterize it until they rise to their own place and match so that they do not prick the eye again.
It is to be ordered for the sick man to shave his hair until they are prolonged and evened out. Make from paper a shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and from unsoaked chalk, each a weight of an ounce or about that; then grind these together well with good grinding, and make it quickly so as not to get cold. Then spread it out from that on a cloth which you have made, as the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the eyelid of one eye, or both eyes. Place under the eye a piece of cotton soaked in egg white, and place the head of the sick person on your chest.
Place your index finger on the medicine and press it slightly. You move it as often as the sick person feels the bite of the medicine, because his bite is like fire.
While it continues this which he feels as a bite, then release the medicine and move it with your finger. When the bite ceases, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And observe then if the eyelid is raised like when lifted by heat or incision, it is good; and if not, then repeat on the same place from the medicine where it does not press or darken, until your action is equal, and the eye is contracted.
Then place cotton with butter over it until the burnt skin is removed. Then care for him with diaphinicon ointment or another, until he is healed.
And it is necessary for you at the operation that you keep the last care, so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes soft after days and something from hairs falls into the eye, then repeat the medicine on that place which has been made soft by the eyelid, just as you did at first. Then care for him until he is healed.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And know that human eyes differ in size and smallness. Therefore, according to that your consideration should be: and the way of straightness for him who is dedicated to this art should not be hidden.
Method of cauterizing in lacrimal fistula.
When treating fistula, if the cure as we said in the classification of diseases does not work: then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Command the sick one to put his head in your lap and hold his head servant's hands in such a way that it is not moved or shaken with his own head.
Then place cotton soaked in oil or slippery elm poultice on his eye: then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows.
Let it be concave like the shape of a goose feather quill, from one end of which is made the cautery; and if you want it to penetrate to the other end, and if you want it to extend upward in this manner.
However, this concave form is better for your work.
Then squeeze the fistula if it is open and draw out pus from it; and if it is not open, then open it and draw out its pus.
Then place on it the hot cautery.
And hold your hand near it for a moment on the cautery near the eye, at the part of the nose, so that your hand does not move or the sick person is disturbed; and place the cautery on the fat of the eye and destroy it.
If you reach at the beginning of your cautery to the bone, it will be good. And if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it for three days.
Then place cotton with butter and heal it with an ointment of healing, until it heals.
If it exceeds forty days and does not heal, then place a sharp, corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed; and grind it according to its chapter.
And there is another mode of cautery for a fistula, which some of the first ones called it. Apply to the location of the fistula, and find it; then place upon it a fine cannula (camahan), that is, a fine tube, whose form this is [draws a diagram]. And pour upon it a quantity of drachmae of liquid lead, and hold your hand with good retention, and do not move the weak one at all, so that the liquid lead does not run or reach his eye.
It is necessary that you place on the eye of the weak one a hot compress steeped in egg white, or water.
For lead burns the spot of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
If the fistula is healed along with what we said through cautery, and cure, that is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer the nasal passage, and to bring back the fistula into the course of the nose, according to which it comes into its own proper place.
[Title: On the method of cauterizing in fissures of the lips.]
Many times fissures occur on the lip, which are called hairs, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you take care of these fissures along with what we said in the division of diseases, and cure does not help, then use a small cautery knife shaped like this [draws a diagram].
And let the hollow of it [the wound] be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Then place it [the hot iron] hastily into those cracks, until the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
Then take care of it with caustic until it heals.
Chapter on Cauterizing an Oral Fistula.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and bursts: afterwards it becomes putrid, and the pus runs and becomes a fistula: subsequently you should take care of it, and do not apply treatment to it, then it is necessary that fire be applied with caution according to its size, which can be contained in the fistula. Subsequently introduce the fire itself into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand, until the heated iron reaches its depth and end; do this once or twice.
Subsequently take care of it after that, with what has been said about treatment, until it is healed.
If the pus separates and heals, it will be good. And if it does not, then it is necessary to explore the place, and remove the corrupted bone according to what comes to its surface.
Chapter on Cauterizing in Softened Gums and Teeth.
When the gums become soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and it is treated with medicine but does not improve; then place the head of the sick person in your lap.
Subsequently apply fire cautery, whose shape will come later, so that you place the Cannula on the tooth; and introduce in it the heated cautery quickly; and hold your hand for a little while until the sick person feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And remove your hand; then again apply the cautery several times, as you wish.
The sick person should fill his own bone with brine water, and hold it for an hour; and rinse it.
For the tooth is hardened by movement, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
Method of cauterization for tooth pain.
Chapter XXIII.
The cautery is with butter, take butter from the cow, and carry it in an iron cauldron or earthenware. Then receive the pot and cover it over the edge of the wound. Then immerse it in boiling butter and place it on the painful tooth quickly and hold it until it cools; then repeat it several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or a cloth in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth; then place heated iron on top of it until the heat reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
The cautery with fire is to heat the iron or brass pipe. Let there be something bulky in the body so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the weak bone.
Then heat the cautery, whatever its shape will come; and place it on that tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools.
Do this several times as pain is relieved either on the same day or another day.
And when making an impression with the cautery, the weak bone should be filled with good butter and kept for an hour; then it is spit out.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
Cauterize with whatever tip you wish, as it is possible; and this is the form of the pipe.
Chapter on how to cauterize in ulcers.
When ulcers are due to phlegm and cold humors, and are not responding to medicines for digestion, and you wish a quick digestion; then use heated cautery with a hollow shape like this:
Having two open ends so that smoke exits at the cautery from one end: and place it ignited upon the ulcer once, and if necessary, again, until it reaches the depth of the ulcer.
If the ulcer is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the ulcer.
Then let it be for three days, and place warm butter on top of it until what the fire has burnt is removed.
Then treat it with tooth-paste ointment until the ulcer heals.
On the method of cauterization for the roughness of the vocal cords, and constriction of breathing.
When moisture collects over the windpipe and especially when it is accompanied by coldness of constitution, then the sick person should first be evacuated with dissolving medicines.
Then cauterize it in the neck at the root of the throat in a depressed place: and be careful not to reach the throat with the cautery nor the skin, unless something of the disease is involved.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck and collarbone in the lowest end of that joint: and let the cautery be small according to the method that was previously described.
Then treat it with what has been described before until it heals.
On the method of cauterization for diseases of the lungs and cough.
When there is coughing and sickness of the lungs due to cold moistures, and the patient does not have fever nor consumption (phthisis), and the illness is an old one: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the clavicle in shallow, empty, relaxed places. And (cauterize) with another one in the middle of the chest between two breasts; and let the cautery be a hollow one, as the previous one has been.
And if your (cauterization) is by pricking with a cautery called Punctum, whose shape has been described in the treatment of ear pain; and let there be pricks from thirty pricks up to about another.
Then take care of him with that (as described above), until he is cured.
And now let the cautery have three branches; according to this shape. Why is cauterization performed when you perform it with a substitute for three cauteries.
Chapter XXVII.
Chapter XXVII: When the head is dislocated for reasons of moistness and it does not heal within an hour of returning to its place after dislocation, until it has become accustomed to return, then it should be dislocated again slightly, as we have already testified about this, then you must first reduce the dislocation. Then the patient lies down on his back or on the healthy side. Then you scrape the skin that is inside the Titillico towards the upper part with your left hand fingers; and if it is a joint that is dislocated internally.
Then take the cautery heated by fire, having two openings. Its shape is as follows: (description of the shape of the cautery).
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side and you reach the shape of the cauterization with four cauteries.
And sometimes there is a cauterization with a cautery having three prongs, for which the figure of cauterization is then six cauteries: and they are prongs according to the fineness touched.
This is the form of the cautery having three prongs.
And sometimes an additional one is added to this method, for which there are eight cauteries.
Then place over the cautery compressed beets with salt. Then make the sick man become tranquil so that he does not move the limb during any time, until it is strengthened.
And if there is a dislocation towards the upper part, and it rarely happens, then cauterize it on the shoulder with a hooked cautery, or with many pointed cauteries.
For union strengthens, and moisture is removed: and the sick person is healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and much moisture occur in the stomach until it removes itself from its mixture, and catarrhs multiply for it, and continuous methods of treatment do not suffice: then the sick person should lie on his back, extend his legs, and put forth his hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, with a cautery of the size of a finger under the concavity of the chest and a hooked cautery, and two cauteries below the sides of one cautery, until the figure of the cauteries becomes a triangle. And extend between them so that they do not unite when there is pus.
And the depth of the cautery shall be the size of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be in this shape without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape: and let the cautery which makes this cautery be one in the shape of a circle according to this shape.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking it with the one who fears this cautery, and there is to be a mark made on the stomach according to the quantity desired, as with wax; then the same (stomach) is cauterized with the point cautery; then it is cared for with the cure that preceded until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing the epiploon coldly.
When there is pain in the epiploon due to coldness and moistness, or due to gross windiness until it exits from its natural outlet, and the sick person has been treated with what was said before, but does not improve, then the sick person should lie on his back on a table, and marks are made with wax with three points of cautery according to this figure, and the same quantity below the hypochondria, where the human elbow reaches; and there should be space between each cauterium equal to the thickness of a digit; and the cautery should be long enough for the body; and do not press your hand hard with the cauterium.
And the quantity to be burned should not exceed the thickness of the skin; half of it should not be added; and the sick person should stand on his feet.
If (the patient) is not standing, then let him lie down who has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of the cautery.
And it is possible for you to use these three points of cautionery with a sharp-pointed cautery when you have subtlety and wisdom in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed to the utmost in cauterization, and when the thickness of the skin is burned, the body is burned completely, and it reaches the intestines; because the skin there is delicate, therefore know this.
Method of cauterizing abscesses of the liver.
When it happens that there is an exiture, and you want to know if that abscess is in the liver flesh or its tunica: then, if it is in the liver flesh, a weak pain and heaviness without sharpness will occur; and if it is in the tunica of the liver, with intense pain, it becomes evident that the treatment has exhausted the doctors.
Therefore, the patient must lie down on his neck. Then form the place of the abscess with the hot iron; then heat the cautery that resembles a rod. And this is its shape. And cauterize with that iron until the entire skin is burned and it reaches the pus, until all the pus comes out; then treat him with treatments for discharge until he is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this method of cautery, unless the person's devotion to the art of medicine is prolonged; and whose hands these diseases occur with experience; then dare on such operations.
But it is better to abandon it in my opinion.
Method of cauterizing pleurisy.
The ancients said that the cautery with the roots of Aristolochia is to be used for cold pleurisy as follows. And you should receive from the dry roots of Aristolochia a longer root, which is found among them, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil; then ignite it. Then cauterize with one iron in that which is between the junction of the collarbone and neck, and with two small irons under the jaw a little downward slope to the part that is below the beard.
And with two cauteries also, in that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs downwards towards the back slightly; and with one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries from behind: one in that which is between the two scapulae; and with two cauteries from the sides of the chest, the lower one being the one that is between the two scapulae.
And it is not necessary that you press your hand with the cautery, rather it should be done so that the smell of the skin is evident.
And certain ancients have said that there are some who use the cautery made of iron resembling a rod; they heat it and insert it into that which is between the ribs until they reach the abscess with it, and the pus comes out: as we said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this perforation with the cautery there is fear, for either the weak man dies immediately, or a fistula occurs at that place which does not heal.
Chapter 32. On the method of cauterizing the Spleen Head.
When you treat the disease of the spleen, as we said in the treatment of diseases and your treatment does not work, then cauterization is used for it according to three modes, all of which are correct.
One is that you make three or four cauteries in the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, whose preceding figure has already been given.
And let the thickness between each cautery be as thick as a finger or more or less.
And the method of cauterization shall be equal to that which we said in the cauterization of the liver.
And you must not press your hand with the cautery; and let the patient be lying on his back.
Another method of cauterization is: holding two cauteries, as we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the humerus; and lift the skin, which is directly over the spleen, where it reaches the weak elbow on the left side; and your lifting of the skin should be according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert two hot irons deeply, until they pierce the skin from the other side; then withdraw the cautery; thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with another iron having three prongs.
Then care for the cautery after you release it to emit pus for many days; indeed, it is more beneficial than the others that have come before in the treatment.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in Hydropsy.
A cautery does not fall in Hydropsy, unless strictly indicated.
When you treat a Hydropsy patient according to the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, one over the stomach, another over the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back between the vertebrae, and one on the front of the stomach, and another on the front of the heart; and the depth of the cautery should be approximately the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open cautery to let it emit pus for a long time.
Do not evacuate the patient from treatment after cauterization, as it is necessary that two intentions be applied to him; and healing will hasten towards him with divine aid.
The form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be clavicular; according to its previous form. And the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to its previous form.
On the method of cauterizing feet and legs.
When they are incised in hydropic conditions and filled with citron water: it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot at the site between auricularem and anularem [joints]; then remove your hand with the cautery, without twisting it; afterwards, remove your hand; do not return to it at all.
For indeed, the citron water will boil, and let the cautery be in this shape [round or oval].
Then, make two cauteries on both legs and let each leg have two cauteries; let the cautery have an end like a small knife, and let it be along the length of the leg, one below the knee, and the other lower than that, about halfway down the leg; and above the hip, there should be two cauteries; leave the open cautery without prolonged treatment so that some water boils out of it; then treat it with what I have said before.
On the method of cauterization in the opening of the abdomen.
In cuius modi cauteri in fistula vesicae
When the abdomen is opened by cold and moisture so that its powers of retention and digestion in the stomach and intestines are weakened, it should be treated with methods of healing, but it does not heal: and you see a sick person who can tolerate an excessive cautery due to strong vitality, then you cauterize it with a large cautery over its own stomach, according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery and four fine cauteries around the navel and a fine cautery on the clavicle, and with a large cautery over the alum on top of the small intestines or with two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moisture and a sick person who can tolerate it, then you cauterize it with a large cautery over the breastbone and over the entire ilium: and possibly you may add two small cauteries near the stomach.
For it is a treatment that does not miss its effect.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
In cuius modi cauteri in fistula recti, in
When there are old hemorrhoids in the anus, many or one, and they are thick, cold or corrupted with moisture, and they are treated with what was said in the division, but healing does not occur: then cauterize it with three cauteries over the lower part of the hipbone slightly below the iliac crest in a triangular shape under the almond-shaped mark, and with a cautery under the navel like two fingers.
And if you think that its stomach is cold and its food does not digest, and you see its face shrivel up, then cauterize it over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned, and over its liver and another over its spleen with a cautery on the clavicle: and let the cautery remain open for some time: then heal it until it is healed.
Incapitulare de modo cauterizandi althelulum
When you excise althelul, then heat the cautery similar to a rod. Then introduce the burning cautery into the excised althelul and with your last hand move it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows; do this once or twice.
If there are many altheluls, then cauterize each one with a cautery as we have described. Then take care of them by applying what is applied to them from ointments until they heal.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery on the tumor, it is more beneficial in curing it.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Incipitur de modo cauterizandi fistulum in anum
When the sick person does not obey cutting and operation as we have described at that place, and he is afraid of it, perhaps he will heal with a cautery.
When a fistula occurs and it becomes old, pus flows from it, and the surrounding areas are corrupted. Therefore, it is necessary to probe it with a fine probe. Then know the depth of it by probing it with a probe.
Then heat the cautery which is similar to a rod.\] Then introduce yourself burning into the fistula and stop when the probe goes in as deep.
And repeat the cautery over it until all the corrupted bodies are burned, once, twice or thrice, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerve or major vein if it is there; or if the fistula goes towards the bladder or the intestine, then take care of all these places.
Do not do that except when the fistula is in a fleshy place: and think, because it does not penetrate.
Then take care of the location until it heals.
If however the place is sealed and the material is cut away, and it remains for a long time like that: then you will know that it has healed completely.
And if the material is not cut away from it, then you will know that it has penetrated, or its bone within it is corrupted, or as one of those: whose memory comes to mind in its place.
Chapter on the Method of Cauterizing the Kidneys.
When there is pain in the kidneys due to cold or gross wind, and it weakens the body, then you must cauterize it above the almethenes on the kidneys with a cautery over the entire kidney with a clavicle-shaped cautery, whose memory comes beforehand.
And perhaps we cauterize it for the second time in the same place on the almethenes. Why will three lines appear. Therefore, they will be more effective in providing relief.
Chapter on the Method of Cauterizing the Bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture, until it no longer retains urine, then cauterize it at the lower part of the scrotum over the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, with a cautery from one side of the scrotum and another on its other side; and let the length of this cauterization be according to the size of the knuckle of the thumb; and cauterize it with a lower back cautery or two cauteries, if necessary; and let the preceding cauterization be as deep as a nail.
When there is weakness in the uterus due to cold and moisture, so that it no longer retains the menstrual flow, then caut
When there is cold and moisture in the uterus that prevents conception, and its menstruation is spoiled, and their production is delayed, and pain occurs near their arrival, then it is necessary to be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said when cauterizing the bladder, and a lower back cautery or two cauteries; let the cauterization be as deep as a nail.
Chapter on how to cauterize the anus in dislocation.
When there is a flow of mucous humidity to the anus, and its exit from its place becomes a cause; and its sign is that a leg is extended over another when they are brought together; and a hollow place in it is found where there is dislocation.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the weak place on the anus itself with a similar circular cautery; after you mark its location with encaustum (hot wax) around the anus, as it is rotated; and let the anus fall into the center of the circle.
If this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, using a large oily cautery: and let the depth be made according to the thickness of the entire skin.
Then take care of it until it heals.
[Heading: The method of cauterizing in Sciatica.]
When pain occurs in the buttock of an ankle and its cause is coldness and dampness: and the sick person is treated as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help, and it worsens: then it is necessary that you release the sick person from thick humors with foul pills or with artificial pills and similar things. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterizing in this is according to two methods: either with a cautery with acting medicines, or with fire.
The cautery with fire, is according to many modes.
One of these is that you cauterize on the buttock of an ankle with three triangular cauteries in this shape. And let them make a good or bad depth. And let the space between each cautery be of the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be oily.
However, sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on top of the buttock of an ankle. Why are there four cauteries?\]   Cum enim exterius est cauterium: et interea
If you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose shape preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of an ankle, use one: so that it may contain the entire ankle.
And burn the thickness of the entire skin.
This is the method of cauterizing in Sciatica, when the pain clings to the ankle itself and does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, at the place indicated by the sick person where there is pain, and cauterize your cautery four fingers towards the side of the wood [limb]: let the cauterium be sharp.
Let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the sick person indicates that the pain extends towards the toes, then cauterize there with a puncture cautery, three, or four, or more if needed.
If he indicates that the pain is turned towards the leg under the knee, then cauterize it there with a sharp cautery.
And be careful with all your cauterizations so that you do not burn the nerve or a major artery and harm the sick person through this, or cause contracture.
And I myself have seen one and another who cauterized above the tendon [limb], and burned it in the cauterization, and the leg swelled until the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated all over, and the whole foot decayed; then there was a rupture of the abdomen, and death followed that.
If the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each one according to this method.
Some wise men have said that in the cauterization of an aneurysm, this is the method for doing it. Make a cup-shaped instrument of iron, whose diameter is half a palm [about 2 inches]; and at its opening it should be according to the size of the nail tip or less; and within this cup there should be a third cup.
And let the space that is between all the cups be equal to the size of a knuckle; and let the cups be open from two sides; and let their height be like a knuckle or two knuckles; and make handles of iron appropriately for the cups.
Then heat it in fire until it turns red and sparks; then place it on the dish of the weak anvil laid upon a healthy side. Therefore, cauterize it with three round cauteries at once.
Then let it be for three days. Then pack it with butter; and leave the open wound for many days. Then cure it with ointment until it heals.
Says Albucasis, in this form of cautery, we are not accustomed to use it much due to the terror of its appearance; and therefore, because few are found who dare upon it.
Nevertheless, it is among the good cauterizations for him who can bear it, and finds a place for it.
The cautery with stimulating medicines is to make two samia having a perforated armillary sphere, into which descends the hinge of its door from brass or iron, long enough for the wall; whose height should be two knots, or as if they themselves.
And let the space that is between them be of the thickness of a finger, and they should be open below and above; and let them hold each other according to this form.
Then place it on the dish of the weak anvil, laid upon a healthy side. And press your hand heavily on the dish of the weak anvil. Then pour water between the two circles that has been heated slightly with fire and hold it for the length of an hour; let the weak one bear its biting and burning, for he finds the bite like fire until the biting ceases.
Then wash your hand with the tool and clean the weak anvil with warm water along with sweet water; then let it be for three days.
Place the butter on top of it until the burnt blackness is removed; and let it stay for some days, and a pus will run from it. This is the last remedy.
Then treat that with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg, make a socket for it containing water, as you did with the anchor equally.
This is the method of hot water: and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medications. Take alkali and half the quantity of unburnt lime, grind each separately; put them in a new pot whose lower part is pierced with a small hole, according to the amount that enters the radius; put another earthenware pot below it; throw alkali and lime into water, which will submerge them by a finger; when you compress them with your hand, good compression; let go of the pot until the sharp water comes down through the pierced part of the earthenware pot.
Then combine all that water and throw it on another lime; boil until it is renewed.
For it will then be very strong for sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of other members. Since it performs the operation of fire itself.
And among the medicines are those with which anchors are cauterized, also as tesisie, and honey of cardamom, and lime with soap, so that each is mixed together.
And Galen himself reported in his telling about the cure of a man, from whom pain in the anchor and the sciatic vein was cured; he said it was very effective. And he said, because it does not require another treatment, and because it was healed from one application, until he returned, because perhaps he himself went into the bath, and already came out healthy from it.
And it is to be taken from green mustard: and if green mustard is not found, dry mustard should be taken, fresh: and it should be ground well with some fat, and placed on the place where there is pain, or leg, or hip: and it should be tied, and left for a quantity of three hours, or until the patient feels the relaxation caused by the heat. Then introduce him into the bath.
When his body becomes warm, introduce him into the sun. For the pain retreats, and it heals.
And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that goat's feces, when used to cauterize the sciatic vein, should be applied in this way: and make the cautery according to this method. Take wool and immerse it in ancient oil, and place it on the deep place that is between the big toe of the foot and the heel, and nearer to the heel.
Then take dry goat's feces and burn it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool and leave it until it is extinguished. Repeat this process. Do not stop doing this until the sensation reaches to the ankle and the pain stops.
And this method of cautery is called Vaccinum cautery.
Chapter on the cauterization of back pain.
Whenever there is pain in the back due to multiple causes, either from an accident, or a blow, or excessive evacuation, and similar conditions, it occurs from the infusion of cold and moist matter. Cauterization does not apply except in this one case which is made from the infusion of cold and moist matter.
Therefore, after the evacuation of the sick person with foul pills, and similar substances, they should be placed on the back where there is pain, three lines according to the width of the almend seed. After marking them with encaustic in every line five cauteries, or more according to the quantity that comes from the strength of the sick person: and cauterization should be done with cauteriopuncture.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries, along with the middle claw cautery, in this shape.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in the beginning of hump-shaped growths.
This disease often occurs in small children.
And the sign of its onset in children is: that it occurs over him with constriction during breathing and movement, and you find at the bottom of the spine and its nodes, which has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When you see that, and wish to make it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in this shape.
And the cautery should cover all parts of the vertebrae equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery, two lines or three; let the points be close together.
Then care for the place until it is healed as we have said.
And be careful not to apply cauterization to a hump-shaped growth that arises from spasm of the nerve.
On the method of cauterization for gout, and its associated pains.
Chapter XLVI.
When therefore gout (Podagra) is treated for a cold cause and the pains are not relieved, then cautery removes them.
And it is to cauterize him after evacuation at the joints of the feet, with many cauteries; and let the cautery be Oilvaire.
And if you need to make punctures on the sole of the foot, then do so with a cautery. If the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it on all parts of the knee with three or four cauteries, with this same cautery being Clauile.
If more than one cautery is necessary for you, then cauterize it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be about as thick as the skin.
If the pains ascend to the knees and back: then administer what was said in the chapter itself.
If the pains are only in the hands, then puncture around the knuckles, as if two lines were rolled [together].
If some pain remains in the fingers, then puncture them all, on every node and on the back of the hand.
If the pains ascend after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not evacuate a sick person from good care, from the reception of medicine. For if good care is given and phlegm is evacuated, it will be healed with the help of God with this cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing ruptures.
When rupture occurs in the groins and the intestine or spermatic cord descends towards the testicle, which is beginning: then it is necessary to order the sick person to fast on his own day. And he shall use from the softening substances, so that the stool may descend from his belly.
Then he shall sit between your hands upon his back: and command him to hold his breath until it comes out or appears a hernia or an intestine.
Then bring him back with your fingers and mark the place of rupture on his neck with wax seal together with a seal like half of a circle above his body.
Then heat the cautery in this shape until it becomes white and throw sponges on it. Then bring the intestine or hernia into its hollow. Then let the servant put his hand on the place so that the intestine does not come out: and you have already opened between the legs of the weak one, and placed a pan under him and another servant is serving at his legs and another one at his chest holding his hands.
Then place the cautery on the seal upon him with your hand holding it straight. Hold him until you find the bone with it; or if you have not found the bone in the first attempt, do it again with another position.
And be careful to observe the exit of the intestine at the time of your cautery, lest you burn him and harm or kill him by that or great suffering.
And know this, that when you do not find the bone with the cautery, your work does not succeed.
It is necessary that the cautery be subtle for children according to their measurement.
Then take care of him with ointments until he is well.
Let the weak one lie down on his back for forty days until the wound is closed.
It is necessary that you provide him with food according to the length of his treatment time, so that his belly may be softened and not expel the intestine in attempts or in evacuations.
Then when one wishes to operate after forty days, then administer a correctly made bandage and hold it for another forty days.
And reduce from labor, and fill with food and drink, and with vehement voices.
For when this treatment is used, thus it heals completely by cure.
And I will say the cure for hernias with an incision in its own chapter.
But when hernias occur in the rest of the abdomen, and they are beginning and there is a desire not to add them, then cauterize the hernia with a round cautery according to its size: and let that which is burned be as third of it from then on. Then care for it as I have said: and do not add it.
And some of the first ones have said that a hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this shape.
After signing it with an encase, and a line is placed which is across its width on the upper side of the hernia, and another line downwards. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery tongs.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in pains due to accident or trauma.
Chapter XLVIII.
When pain occurs in some members due to an accident or trauma, and the pain persists for a long time, and there is no healing with medications, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with a puncture cautery.
And let the cautery for all members be according to its size, and its smallness, and weakness, and power, and location of twisting, and pain from it.
If it heals with the first cautery, it is good. If not: then apply the cautery on him again.
Because it is customary for these pains to move from one limb to another that is nearer. Therefore, you must follow them with the cautery until the sick person is healed.
Chapter on the mode of cauterizing in leprosy.
Leprosy are sometimes benefited by cautery, with great benefit. And primarily the types of leprosy caused by corruption of phlegm and melancholy: therefore when considering cauterization of it.
If leprosy is beginning and you have treated it with what was said in the division and it does not improve or stop: then beware of corruption spreading over his entire constitution; then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, known as the fontanel, and the second below it facing the forehead at the end of the hairline, and two on top of the two horns, and one behind on the occipital bone.
And finally place your hand with the cautery slightly, until it makes a small impression on the bone, and the skin is separated from it; so that the expiration of gross vapors from it is alleviated, and cauterize also over the spleen, according to what preceded.
But if leprosy has spread over the sick person and is apparent: then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries which were mentioned on the head, and a cautery over the tip of the nose, and two cauteries over both cheekbones, and two cauteries over both shoulder blades, and six over both hip bones, and one large one over the alhahosos at the base of the spine and one above it, in the almeidati; and two on the ankles: that is, one on each ankle, and two on the elbows, and two on the wrists, and two on the tendons of the chest, and cauterize over the entire joint of his fingers of both hands and feet, and cauterize over the entire heel of both feet, and the soles of both hands.
Be careful not to burn the nerves that are on top of the heel bone, last one.
And sometimes it is burned with an iron over the cheek bone, and another over the bone of the stomach, and another over the jawbone.
And know that, the more cautery you apply, the greater is the help, and the better it is.
And know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery, as healthy people do; therefore, because his body has already become numb.
It is necessary that the cauteries be of different sizes and shapes according to the members and joints; following the types of iron tools.
Then take care to burn with cautery made from wheat flour and honey, and with other treatments until it heals.
Chapter on the mode of burning in unconsciousness.
When a member becomes unconscious and is treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and does not heal, then burn the unconscious member with cauteries, according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate somewhat into the depth of the skin. Then take care of it with an ointment until it heals.
And sometimes the burning is done for a kind of unconsciousness that happens in the hand and foot, in the joints of the back near the exits of the nerves that move that member; and the unconsciousness is removed.
But do not presume to do it unless he who knows the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves moving the body is present.
Chapter L.I (caput means chapter or head)
When an ulcer becomes old and does not improve with any of the remedies of medicine; then burn it with a deep cautery somewhat, according to the thickness of the skin, until the white part is removed and the color changes.
Then take care of yourself with a mixture of grain of wheat, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of fennel, and blood of a dove, and blood of a heron; from each of these be equal parts; mix all these together, spread them on a cloth, and let them adhere to the place until it heals.
Method of cauterization for Cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it; then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it, as it rotates (revolves).
The wise have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
But to me it does not seem good; for I fear that it will burn (ulcerate); and I have already seen this happen many times.
And it is better to cauterize around it with a circular cautery, as we have said; or with many cauteries.
Method of cauterization for Adubelati (carcinoma of the anus).
When someone has a boil, and it slows down in maturation, either due to an excess causing it or due to the person being old and weak with little blood, or due to time and the desire to hasten in the maturation of the boil, then cauterize its surrounding area with small and numerous cauteries. Then let it go [the boil]. For it will hasten in maturation by itself.
If you wish to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery with fire, which has this form.
Place it in the center of the boil until it penetrates the skin; let the cautery be weak, so that the flow of pus may be relieved.
Then care for [the wound] until it heals.
Chapter on cauterizing a cancerous tumor.
Chapter LIV.
Corrosion is nothing but walking corruption consuming itself, just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see corrosion in a place that can bear cautery with fire, then the cautery should be large, small and large nails as appropriate to the place where the corrosion is present.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you root out the entire corruption and there remains nothing of it deep within.
Then let it be for three days and place over the cauterized places ground sulfur with oil until all scabs are removed and all corruption is gone.
Then care for it with ointments that promote flesh growth.
If after three days you see that new flesh is growing healthily without corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery on the part remaining from the corrupted places.
Corrosion is sometimes treated with a strong medicine. The sore rises where the cautery was applied.
However, cautery with fire is more effective; and I have already said that cautery with a strong medicine is useful in division; therefore, use it when you need it there.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing nails and warts.
Chapter 50.
This ailment frequently occurs in the lower parts of feet: and it is a large, filtered matter that harms the foot.
And indeed, among them there are two modes of cautery: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
As for the one with fire, it is to be made like a concave cautery similar to a vulture's pen: which should be made of iron, according to its size containing a nail at all parts: and it should have delicate edges.
Then place the heated one upon the nail. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the nail, until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail: and leave it for three days, until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply ointment of wild malva leaves crushed with salt on it, and leave the ointment upon it during the night. For this, it will be uprooted from its roots.
Then care for the place with a healing salve until it is healed.
If they are not converted and frequently occur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet: then administer cautery with hot water: and it is to take a cannula of copper or iron or from a vulture's pen: and place it upon the nail or althea. Then pour a little hot water into the cannula: hold your hand and you turn it with the compression of your hand for a short time, so that the tip of the cannula is pressed against the root of the nail, and let the hot water find its way to the deep, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait for a short while after the bite of the hot water an hour.
Then release it, for the nail is uprooted with its roots.
Perform the procedure on each one (part) after the other, until you reach all that are within the body.
Then care for them once they have been removed, with that which generates flesh from ointments.
On the method of cauterizing in the tremor (shaking palsy).
When trembling due to coldness in a nerve occurs to someone, or from quartan fever, or something else: then it should be cauterized with four or five cauteries on the dorsal spine, and between each dorsal spine with a cautery, and in its chest with a cautery, and on its stomach with a cautery.
For trembling ceases with cauterization of oil, and health hastens from the illness of coldness.
On the method of cauterizing Albatheir (Al-Buhaitar).
Chapter LVII (67th chapter).
Sometimes in the body Albathir (Abscesses) are expelled, that is, pustules which come from corrupted materials.
Therefore, when they appear, they should first be cauterized on every head of the pustule with a subtle cautery and myrtle wood, whose tip is lit with fire. Or with the root of long Aristolochia (Aristolochia serpentaria). Or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized for the beginning of its (Abscess's) expulsion according to this method, and they do not increase; and excess is broken, making them (the pustules) disappear, and healed from it.
Nevertheless, it should be done afterwards with venesection.
On the method of cauterizing in bleeding from an artery in a wound.
Often bleeding from an artery occurs which is cut near a wound, which happens from outside, or at the incision of a boil, or a cautery member, and similar things; and it becomes difficult to separate him.
When therefore it happens to someone, then approach with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place your pointing finger upon it: and tie it tightly, until the blood is held under your finger and nothing escapes from it.
Then place a small oil lamp cautionery, and many in number: and blow upon them until they are very hot.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the wound and place where the artery is broken, and place the cautionery upon the vein, after you remove your finger quickly: hold the cautionery until the blood is cut off.
If it is expelled when you lift your finger from the opening of the artery, and extinguish the cautionery, then take another cautionery quickly, from those which are prepared in the fire.
Therefore do not cease to do that with one after another until the blood is cut off.
And beware, lest you burn the nerve which is there, and some other evil happens to the weak person.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to cut it off: especially since the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautionery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is pulled out, the ends contract and the blood is cut off. Or it may be tied with a strong thread. Or medicines of the property for cutting off blood are placed upon it, and it is tightened with a suitable constriction plaster.
But he who administers the cutting off with a thread and tightening with a bandage, or placement of burning objects and similar things, does not fully cure him, unless rarely.
If it happens to anyone and the physician is not present nor the medicine: then begin with the positioning of the index finger over the opening of that vein, as we have told, and with strong compression until the blood is obstructed from the superior part of the wound, and on the artery. And let the finger not be removed, on it with cold water of strong coldness always, until the blood freezes, and swells, and is cut off.
And meanwhile let him consider in it what needs cautery or medicine.
Chapter on incisions, perforations, and phlebotomy in wounds and their likes.
As we have said in Chapter One, every sickness where it is fitting with fire to burn and medicine burning, as well as its occasions, the causes of it, and the instruments of it, and the forms of cautery.
And I have placed there chapters from the neck to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter along the same path: so that it may be alleviated for one seeking what he seeks.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you, my sons, to know what is in this chapter from fear of that which is in Chapter One about cautery.
And for that reason, it is necessary that the caution be stronger because in the operation that is in this chapter, evacuation often falls with blood, with which life stands during the opening of a vein or an incision over an abscess, or the opening of the exit, or treatment of the wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision on a stone and their likes: from all of which are associated tremor, fear, and death occurs in many of them.
And I warn you, lest it fall upon you where there is hesitation, for sometimes it falls upon you in this art as with the modes of men with the modes of weaknesses. For there is one who becomes angry with his illness and death is easy for him; on account of the vehemence which he finds from his weakness, and the length of his wickedness. And when there is illness, it signifies death through fear.
And from these there is one who offers you his remedy and promises health to you, but his illness is destructive.
Therefore, it is not fitting that you should agree with him who comes to you of such a sort. Let your caution be greater than greed and rapacity. And do not presume concerning anything from him, unless after certain knowledge, which has been verified among you as to the matter to which it has come a commendable sequence.
And use in the care of all your sick ones, by prognostication and indication as to that to which it is fittingly healing.
For in this there is for you an aid in the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His understanding, and not remove from you direction and inspiration; for that is in His hand.
And I myself have arranged this Chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what preceded in the chapter on Cautery, from the neck to the feet; so that the matter sought by you is relieved and provided for your needs.
[Section] On the treatment of water that collects in the heads of children.
Chapter 1.
Know that this ailment often occurs in boys during childbirth: either when the midwife tightens the boy's head without restraint.
And it sometimes happens due to hidden causes which are not known.
And indeed I myself have not seen this sickness in others than boys: and to everyone whom I saw it happened, death followed: therefore it seemed to me fitting to abandon the operation in it.
And indeed I myself have seen a boy whose head was filled with water, and his head swelled every day until he could not sit upon himself, because of the size of his head: and the moisture increased, until he died.
And indeed this moisture, either accumulates between skin and bone; or accumulates under the bone on the sacrum.
And the operation on him, if there is moisture between skin and bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary that you make a slit in the middle of the head, one fissure in width: and the length of the fissure shall be as two knuckles, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the form of the trepan (trephine).
If then the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then place these two slits, according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the sign of it is that you see openings of the skull from every part: and water gushes out when you press it with your hand towards the inside, and it does not hide from you: then it is necessary that you make three slits in the middle of the head, according to this method.
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. Then tie the slits with bandages and small pieces of cloth. Then pour wine and oil on it for five days.
Then cut the ligament and care for the wound with probes and ointments.
And do not let go of the head without balance (or equilibrium). Feed the sick with dry food of slight moisture until the limb recovers and is healed.
Another method of incision is to consider where it appears that the size of the abscess is, and the collection of water (or pus).
Because sometimes it is more in the back of the head or in the forehead, or in the right or left side.
Therefore, with incision, ascend where it appears to you the abscess and filling of water: and cut it as far as possible for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and let blood flow, and the sick person dies from this blood loss with the evacuation of moisture.
Section on incising arteries that are after the ears.
Chapter II.
When catarrhs occur to the eyes or chest and it persists, and no treatment with medications is effective: then the final cure is in that, incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you wish to cut them (the arteries), let the sick person shave his head. Then scrape the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then let the sick person tighten his neck with any of his own towels. Then consider where the vein is pulsating. And both places are depressed areas that are behind the ears and are rarely hidden, except in some people.
Then mark both with hot iron and cut each one with a spatula on both sides, the incision reaching the bone: and let it be across the width of the head.
And if you wish, introduce a spatula under the artery and cut it from above with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be as two fingers joined.
When a vein is cut, blood gushes out by pulsatile discharge, which leaps to the inner parts with frequent jumps.
If, however, an artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary that measurements be made with the cubit (span) of three fingers. Then mark with encaustum (wax), and cut up to the bone.
And that which should be drawn out from the blood is 6 ounces, and perhaps you will draw more or less from it. Cut (the artery) entirely according to the quantity that appears to you from the strength of the patient and the fullness of the artery itself.
Then, consider for the wound. If there remains anything towards the bone from the sifac (gristle), then cut it so that a hot abscess does not occur; then stitch the wound with linen strips.
Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
Chapter on the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When an old hemicrania or acute catarrh due to acidic moistures and warmth in the temples occurs, or an old wound, violent, and similar ones: and it is treated with methods of curative medicine, but it does not help: then we have been experienced in dealing with such ailments, extraction of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have narrated.
The method of operation for these is to shave the sick hairs that are on the temples and stretch towards the visible artery in the temple. It is indeed shown to you by its pulse and it rarely hides except in a few men or when there is a violent cold.
If it hides from you, then the sick person should bind his head with any cloth of his, then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or fumigate the place with hot water until it appears to you in a clear manifestation. Then take the spatholem, which I have prepared earlier. Then scrape the skin with it easily until you reach the artery. Then thrust a hook into it and extract it upwards until you extract it from the skin, and make it come out from all sides of the tunics that are under it.
If, however, the artery is delicate: then turn it with the tip of the hook. Then cut off the part according to its length so that the ends contract and there is no blood flow. For if it is not cut and if it is not separated, the blood does not rise deeply.
Then evacuate the blood up to six ounces, down to three.
If the artery is large: then it should be tied in two places with strong double thread, silk or gut, or with alum-soaked threads so that putrefaction does not reach it before the wound is consolidated and there is blood flow.
Then cut off the excess, which is between two ligaments. Do that at that hour, or another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone, with a small cautery; until its ends are cut off and it remains in place for that same operation.
And it is better work, unless if he is weak with a fever, or of cool constitution. Because the cautery is from those that help to stop wetnesses. Therefore it is better remedy.
And after the extraction of the arteries, the place should be filled with old clay; and lumps well-made powdered charcoal should be placed on top of it.
And after the solution, it is to be treated with dry medications that cause flesh to grow and with linen until it heals.
If, however, during the operation there is a bleeding from an artery, then hasten to cut it off with a cautery, or fill the place with wax; and press your hand until the blood stops. If there is nothing from those present for you, then place your finger on the place until the blood freezes. And anoint the place with water of intense cold, until the sharpness subsides and it is bound as necessary.
And because the vein is lighter and easier to extract, it is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades; and the sharpness of the two blades should be like alum. However, they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they are as sharp as two knives, both freeze; and do not cut flesh with swiftness. Since they have some thickness, heat is to be kept in them and the flesh is cut swiftly; whence this work is better than any other, lighter and easier.
This is the form of the cautery.
And let the space between two knives be of the size of a finger's thickness, after you mark two places with wax; then place both hot ones until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places: to loosen what is between its extremities. They will not be completely fused with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
Chapter on the treatment of frequent and acute tears from the eyes.
When tears are persistent and their course is from the veins that are on the outside of the skull of the head: and no treatment medicine is applied to them with medicines, and you see the face of the sick person turning red, and you feel walking on the forehead as if it were the walking of ants: and the eyes are weakened, moist, so much so that the hairs on them are already corroded with corrosion: and the eyelids have been heated due to the sharpness of the tears: then, in the treatment of them, the ancients resorted to this operation, and they named it treatment, with a sword.
To command the sick person to shave the hairs on his forehead. Then make three equal cuts in the forehead, each as long as a finger, and let the length of one cut be approximately equal to the nose's length in the middle of the forehead, and the second one slightly longer than the movement of the elbow, and the third on the other side: and avoid cutting arteries that are on both sides: and extend your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the space of all cuts be the width of three connected fingers: and have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth, with which you can squeeze blood.
Then insert the sharp ends of two spatulas whose shape is as follows: From the first incision on the temple side to the second incision: and scrape with it the entire skin that is between the two cuts, along with the flesh above the eye. Then do the same from the middle incision to the second incision. Then remove the first spatula and insert another tool called a sharp scalpel from one side, not sharp on the other side. And this is its form.
Place the sharp side facing towards the flesh attached with skin and the blunt side facing the bone; push it until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut along with it all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes, except that the incision should be continuous as far as it appears on the skin.
Then make that [instrument] in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And when an equal amount of blood flows out, squeeze the places from the vessels that are coagulated.
Then place a linen cloth from an old oven on every fissure and put over them small pieces soaked in wine, oil or vinegar. And beware of developing a hot abscess.
On the third day dissolve the ligature and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then treat that [area] with a basilicon ointment and the others that are used for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
Chapter on treating sharp tears and catarrh of the eyes from the interior parts of the head.
When someone experiences sharp, frequent catarrh or tears, and you see that their eyes are weakened, small, and their sight is already diminished; and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall from them, and there is intense pain deep within the head, accompanied by sneezing: then take, among these conditions, what those materials or catarrh do not come unless from many veins.
A better treatment for them is this. And it is to advise the sick one to shave his forehead. Then make one cut in the middle of the forehead, or a little less wide on either side, starting from the left temple to the right temple; and let the incision reach as far as the bone; and move your hand away from the temples that move during chewing until the bone is exposed; and dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the cut between the two lips of the wound with a heated iron or with linen rags. Then tie it above with thread; and soak the thread with wine and oil to prevent a hot abscess from forming.
And when you release it, and see that the abscess is about to subside: then you must break open the bone until flesh begins to grow within it.
Then care for it with a drying dressing that promotes the growth of flesh; as if you were to take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and prepare an ointment from them, which should be applied for the growth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
[Paragraph on the treatment of an ear wound.]
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone, similar to a stone such as iron and wood; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is liquid, such as water, vinegar, and similar substances; or it is some kind of animal.
When a stone falls into the ear, or any kind of stone not growing within the ear, expose the ear alone: if therefore you see a stone, then pour something from violated oil or sesame into the ear. Then administer extraction of it, and make him sneeze with some snuff, and place cotton in the nostrils at the coming of the sneeze, after you put around the ear fragments from cloth or wool, and stretch the ear towards above.
For many times it goes out with this care.
If it does not go out, then administer the extraction of it with Genti, that is, with subtle Pizigaroli: whose shape is this.
If therefore it goes out with Genti, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a blind subtle hook in little repetitions.
If it does not go out by that, then make a pipe from copper and insert the end of the pipe into the ear opening quite a lot, and plug what is around the pipe with wax softened with oil so that there is no wind path except the pipe: then draw out with your strong attraction.
For many times it goes out with what we have said. If it does not go out in this way: then take from helkalimbat or from liquid, that is, prepared gluten which birds are caught with, a small amount of it: and put it at the end of the radius when you have placed a suitable cup over it: then insert it into the ear opening with ease after you have removed the ear from moisture.
If it does not go out with all that we have said, then hurry to cut it before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
And the method of cutting is, to take an unwell person first in the head: and draw out from his blood according to its power. Then make the patient sit with you and turn his ear upward, and make a small opening at the base of the ear in the fatty part at its lowest point; let the opening be in the shape of a moon until you reach the stone; then remove it together with what is possible for you using your instruments.
Then make an opening with caution and care from your side until it heals.
If something falls into the ear that is one of the grains which grow and swell, then administer extraction for it.
If it does not come out on its own, then take a thin, delicate probe of this shape.
And administer with it the removal of that species from the grains which fall into the ear and do not do this when you think that the grain is already humidified by the ear's moisture before putting it in many fragments; then remove it with forceps, or with a delicate implement, or with suction, as we said, since extraction is relieved.
However, when water enters the ear, the patient should use sneezing with it at first and already fill his ear with some heated old wine; and the water is lying on top of that ear where the water is. If it comes out through this [the probe], it is good.
And if it does not: then take many small and soft stones, heat them slightly with fire, and have the patient insert one from them into the ear's opening; and salt his foot on that side and strike with another stone upon the stone in the ear. Therefore, do not stop doing this with stones and stones until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out in such a way that you can take one from parchment or reed and insert its end into the ear; and ignite the other end with fire until it burns as much as possible. Then proceed with another syringe, and do this repeatedly until all the water comes out: and extract it with a cannula according to what was previously stated on the stone.
When extracting an animal that has entered it (if its body is small, like a flea, or similar), care for it as I said in the division.
But if it has a large body, which can be felt by touch: then administer its extraction with forceps and curettes: and its substance is easier for all who are required to work in the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you care for it with what I said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and your care does not help: then it is necessary to look at the ear in sunlight. If therefore something appears there from worms, then extract it with forceps or subtle curettes.
If however nothing appears there, then take a cannula with this form, narrow at the bottom, wide at the top: and insert its fine end into the ear according to the capacity that the sick person can tolerate: then suck with strong suction. Repeat this until all the worms come out.
If they do not obey you to leave (the ear), then surround the cannula with poppy seeds and beeswax, as I said on the stone.
If they do not come out with what I said, then administer the distillations that the ancients have been familiar with for killing worms: and you will find this in the treatment of distillations.
And let your outflow be with olive oil and medications into the ear with this tool, whose shape is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or brass, narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, with a small hole at the bottom.
The implement within the concavity of the cannula should be made of suitable bronze. Take therefore the radish, and roll its surface with an appropriate covering; then pour oil, or juice, or whatever medicine you wish into the cannula; let it be made of gold; then insert the heated radish tip, and press it gently with your hand until the oil in the concavity is forced out and the sick person feels it inside; and whatever is poured into the ear should already be slightly heated by fire; take care not to distill anything cold into it; for medicine does not tolerate extreme coldness.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of auricular impaction (Gold filling).
Sometimes, some infants are born from their mothers' wombs without the auditory passages being pierced.
And it also happens to some people that an auricular impaction occurs as a result of a wound or growth within the ear.
And this auricular impaction sometimes occurs deep within the ear canal, which is not visible to the eye; and sometimes it occurs near the outer ear opening, and can be seen.
Therefore, that which occurs deep within the ear, and is not apparent to the eye, is difficult to cure in many cases.
And in that which is visible to the eye, one should place the sick person's ear on the sun and observe it; then if you see the impaction, open it with a fine spatula whose shape is as follows: its end should have a small notch, part of which is sharp; the rest of the spatula should be made of two rounded sides to avoid damaging the ear.
If the auricular impaction is due to a growth within the ear, then hold it with a fine tweezer and cut it out easily and forcefully until all the growth is removed.
If there is an opening in the depth of the ear: then take thin radiation, linen, and heat it slightly with fire; afterwards send it into the ear's flesh.
If you find an opening with it, when the patient is weakened by illness and deafness, attempt to open it easily; be careful not to wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place linen in the ear according to the size of the hole you have made, and wrap it with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are assured that the wound is healed.
Or take linen and immerse it in rosewater, grind zinc into powder over it, and use it.
If you see the ear already discharging pus: then take out the linen and let it dry with another piece of linen that has been wrapped in a cerotic made with rose oil, until the warm pus settles; then care for it until it is healed.
If there is bleeding instead (of pus): then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear; and use the rest of the treatment that was mentioned for removing the blood flow, in the treatise on distillations.
Chapter on treating Eyelids by Althelas.
Chapter VIII.
Those who occur in the eyelids of the eyes are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore, hold them with forceps or tweezers, and cut them at their roots with a spatula. Then place powdered zinc over the area.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautionery.
And cauterizing them is better after an incision. Multotiens enim redeunt quando remanet ex radicibus suis aliquid: They often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and they do not return.
§ On the care of swollen eyelids.
Chapter IX.
Often it happens that something similar to a swollen eyelid occurs in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called Grando; and it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper eyelid, and on the lower eyelid.
Therefore, the operation is to see if it is a Grando proceeding from that which appears on the eyelid, and if they move to all parts, and its nature is easy.
Make an incision therefore above it in a lengthwise direction. Then scrape off from all sides with ease, until it reaches the end. Then hang it down with a hook and cut it off.
If, however, the cutting off of it is not prepared for you beforehand, unless you pierce the eyelid with a slight incision first, then it hurts the weak one in some way.
If the incision is large: Then join it with a stitch, and take care of it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. Anointing restores it and fleshes it out.
If the Grando is turned towards the inner part of the ear and lies on its outer surface, then turn the eyelid inside out, and hang the Grando down with a hook; besides that, you will need an incision, and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is stretched by the incision, no harm will come to you from it.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the Grando with salt water; and take care of the place until it fleshes out, until the weak one heals.
On the treatment of swellings on the eyelids.
De curatione ulceris oculi qui est
The swelling which arises on the upper eyelid is called Axirnath, and this happens most frequently in children. It causes their eyes to become heavy, and they get cataracts in the mornings and are unable to see the light of the sun, because tears flow towards it; and for that reason you can always see them lying on their faces and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are wet under the eyebrows, which have already been covered by swelling. The appearance of the Axirnath is visible to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the Axirnath between them.
And the method of treatment is that the patient should place his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a bandage in it. Make a circle of the bandage according to the size that contains the Axirnath on all sides. Place it on top of the bandage, and press it with your fingers on all sides to gather the Axirnath in the middle of the circle.
Then find a place in the middle of the wetness with a small incision, and the incision should not be larger than that which occurs in phlebotomy in deep veins.
Or it is necessary to make an incision through the entire skin until you reach the Axirnath, because in many cases the Axirnath comes out from the opening like a piece of white fat.
Pull it out with the cloth that you have inserted between your fingers on the outside; and you turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed. Be careful not to add anything in the incision so that you do not reach the eye with the spatula and harm it.
If the Axirnath is not apparent to you at the beginning of the crack, you shall add a little into the crack with ease until the Axirnath appears. Then remove it as we have said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the place, and tie it with small stones.
And there are men who grind salt, and they place it in the hollow of the crack, so that it melts what remains from that moisture.
Then take care of it until it heals.
If, however, a boil occurs at the place, then take care of it with soothing plasters until it heals.
[Chapter heading:] On the methods of Ataxmir for eyes, that is, when the eyelid softens so that it weeps as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow on the eyelids beyond the natural course of hairs and turn white, then they harm the eye and bring about symptoms such as continuous tears, softening of the eyelid, and opacity, until it leads to the cause of eye destruction.
And Ataxmir indeed cures the eyes according to four methods. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, as stated in the chapter on cauterization. Ataxmir is treated by incision and suturing. By reeds, as I shall say.
You should place the head of the sick person on your lap. Then, turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is thus turned, it is good. And if not: insert a needle into it where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate through the thread above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and pull the thread towards the top with the eyelid, and turn it with a rod.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with a spatula slipping from the greater tear duct to the lesser tear duct.
Then extract the thread, and put a small piece of cotton or cloth under the eyelid: then mark the eyelid with pitch (encaustic), as if it were like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Nevertheless, the figure must be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid, since this is varied among humans.
For there are those who require that the amount be cut from the eyelid according to the size that is softened by the eyelid.
Then with the spatula find on top of the lines that you marked, and begin from the greater tear duct to the lesser tear duct, and let there be a split near the natural hairs, as thick as the radius.
Then insert a hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then scarify it entirely. Then join the two lips with suture using a sharp needle and fine wool thread: and remove blood, and make what exceeds from the threads on the eyebrows adhere, with some things that stick to it, if you wish to do this: and if not, do not treat it.
Then release the suture and threads for three or four days, afterwards take care of it.
And if you wish, release the wound without suture, and take care of it as it dries and contracts. For the eyelid should be lifted during bandaging of the wound and its dressing, but it will be better in the future.
This method of healing was taught by the ancients (Ataxmires).
However, there is concern about the patient in this procedure, but it is a good operation and there is no fear in it.
And another method is also in Ataxmires: it is to mark signs on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have told before.
Then lift the eyelid with three separated or united combs according to the following shape, then cut off what is excess with small scissors according to this shape with equal incisions.
If it is not possible for you to hold the comb and it does not fit, then take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the figure; insert another thread near the larger tear duct and another thread near the smaller tear duct; and bind threads on your fingers with equal tension.
Then lift your hand with an equal elevation; and lift the skin where the wound is marked, as we have told before.
Then bind together the lips of the wound with suture and take care of it until it heals.
If a boil occurs at your incision or tear, bind it with thread and pitch and similar substances from soothing ointments.
And sometimes the eyelashes of the eyelid may also turn.
Therefore, you must use what we have said in the incision; but suturing on both sides is more artificial. On the treatment of Ataxmir with dogs.
And turn the eyelid over, and cut the fissure that is within, as I have told you. Then make two canines or two thin sticks, whose length is equal to the length of the eyelid and their width less than the width of a spatula; and you have already cut at both ends of each where you hold the sutures.
Then attach each one to the superfluous part of the eyelid of the eye with a spatula and tie two canines from both sides with a tight knot, and let it be for several days. For the contracted skin will die, darken, and rot until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, then cut it with scissors. Then take care of it until it heals.
When it has consolidated, clean the eyelid and do not pluck the hairs.
And this is the form of two canines which you should make according to this figure and size.
Chapter 12.
On the removal of irritating hairs from the eye with a needle.
The operation is to take a thin needle and insert a fine silk thread into it gently. Then tie the ends of it and knot both ends with a very thin knot; and let the length of the threads be one palm (about 5 inches).
Then take another fine thread for Alinxotatis and tie its ends if you wish.
Then place the patient's head in your lap and let it be near the sun so that the operation may be seen; since this is a delicate or fine operation.
Then insert the needle with Alinxotatis into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you pull out the natural hair from above.
Then draw the needle above the aneurysm and insert it into the aneurysm; if there is one, or two, or three, not more than that.
Then draw your hand along with it, until the needle emerges from the aneurysm with its own hair.
If the aneurysm is drawn out and its own hair does not come out with it; draw the aneurysm downwards, with the thread you have inserted into it, until the aneurysm comes out through the upper opening, and you see it with your eye; then draw out the aneurysm and the thread, and pull both out, close the eye, and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then take a long hair from among natural hairs and draw it along with it; or leave it until it grows out, and then draw it out when it has grown sufficiently far.
Chapter XIII.
When this aneurysm happens to the eye, it is called "Leporina.
This aneurysm may be natural or accidental.
Therefore, the accidental aneurysm arises from the consolidation of a wound, a cut, a cauterization, or similar things.
The method of treatment for it is to find the consolidated area and separate the lips of it, and put a linen cloth inside, tie it until it heals.
It is not appropriate to use medicines that dry and constrict when treating it; for if you do so, the aneurysm becomes worse than before; instead, use softening substances such as fenugreek; and embrocation with water in which althea has been boiled, with linseed; and apply daquilon ointment, which has been melted with some oil; and wrap it with linen, and treat it with that.
Thy treasure of care is, that thou strive with all thy skill, so that it not harden, according to the former shape that was first.
This operation indeed, which we have said, is no more than a correction of Alzahrak, so that the form of the place does not return to what it was altogether.
Section on the care of Alzahrak in the lower eyelid, which is a wrinkling or contraction upward towards right and left.
Chapter XIII.
This Alzahrak which occurs below, is indeed what is truly called Alzahrak. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one is made from wound, or split, or cautery, and similar things.
And the method of operation in it is, that you take a pointed instrument, in which there is a double thread, and you stain it in the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both extremities of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with a point, and cut it with a broad chisel. If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take radium, and place it in the split, and turn the eyelid with it: and cut two splits on the inner side of the eyelid, and let their extremities be at the angles of the incision, until they converge and form an angle: until when they are gathered together, the shape becomes this shape, and is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh in quantity, which is its sharp edge below, from what follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts: or her with a wool thread.
Then care for those (injuries) with what we have said, regarding softening medicines and linen, until they heal.
And if Alxatrati occurs from a split or suture, or cautery: then it is necessary to find a flat split beneath the eyelashes, as previously described. Then separate between two lips with linen, as we have said.
The summary of the treatment for Alxatrati, whether above or below, is that the operation should be performed on it, as prepared according to the form of Alxatrati.
Indeed, it has many variations in its shape: and the skillful craftsman prepares his mind with any method that is possible for him, until he brings back the figure to a natural form or close to it, and the patient himself, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in numerous positions.
Chapter XV.
§ On the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, it is necessary that you insert the end of a rod under the eyelid and lift it up: or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a thin spatula, which should not be sharp like the edges of spatulas, but rather blunt for a short distance: so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is removed, and does not harm the eye with its sharpness: and your incision should be as if you are scraping off that adhesion easily, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the adhesion heals completely.
Then pour salt water into the eye, rinse it with water: or distill it on him from sifted snow dissolved in water.
Then separate between eyelid and eye with a linen strip: and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white: and use after the third day or when solidified, until it heals.
On the incision of the nail and the protrusion of flesh from the tear ducts.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the nail is in two ways. Or it is nerve-like and resembles a hard horn, delicate. Or it is not nerve-like, resembling frozen wetness of white, which when struck with iron or attempted to be picked up with a nail, is broken off and the nail does not embed in it.
And neither of these types begin except from the larger tear duct, until it gradually enters, covering the eye, and prevents light, and movement of the eye.
And the method of operation in its incision is that the sick person places his head in your lap. Then open the eyes of him and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then grasp the nail with a few-times folded nails and extend it towards the upper part. Then take a needle and insert it into the nail with a horse's, cow's or sheep's hair, and make sure it is thin; bend the tip of the needle slightly and pierce it through the middle of the nail and tie the nail with thread and extend it towards the upper part; and scrape the side of the nail following the pupil as if you were pulling it with hair up to its end.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or small forceps; and let the natural flesh of the tear duct remain, so that no continuous flow of tears occurs from the incision.
And sometimes the nail is extended with a forceps alone; or with a thread, as we said. Then it is scraped with a soft spatula, whose shape is as follows.
And beware, lest the spatula touch the nail's cornified layer and cause a break there, and the hole is punctured through.
Then after the incision, throw something crushed salt or made of wine vinegar into the eye and let it remain for another day. Then care for it as necessary, until it is healed.
If the nail is not nerve-filled and you cannot insert an awl into it nor does a forceps fit into it, then this kind of nail is repeatedly treated with medications and heals as I narrated in the division.
If you wish to cut it (the nail), then open the eye of the patient and take a delicate, soft, fragile and sharp spatula in the following shape. And grind the nail above with a fine file. If you see that it is becoming rarefied and crushed and a file has been pressed into it, then pour from your hour into the eye vinegar made of wine vinegar or red vinegar or ground salt and close the eye until another day.
Then repeat the procedure until the entire thing is removed. Unless it is a warm abscess in the eye, then leave that alone and care for the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the procedure with a file until it heals.
The protrusion of the eyelid flesh (chalazion), if it causes great harm in the eye, is suspended with a forceps and cut from it; not too close to the incision so as not to disrupt the flow of tears.
Then apply milk or red colocynth (or one made from zinc), until it heals.
On eye-lid incision and flesh born therein.
Chapter Seventeen.
There arises sometimes in the eyes of men a red flesh, either composed or laid over, until it covers the pupil or approaches or presses upon the eyelids and perhaps turns the eyelids outward; and it resembles the rose of Balaustium.
And the treatment for this is also that the weak one should put his head in your bosom. Then open his eyes and collect the entire flesh with suitable forceps; and hold it with a single forcep or tongs.
Then cut the flesh first, until you finish it all with the knife. And be careful not to hurt the eye during the operation; and let your cut, when you make it, be as we described in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps, such as those used for cauterizing the asebel (a type of wart), according to its shape after this chapter.
When your cut is completed and all the alguardenic (the red flesh) is removed, then fill the eye with brine; or sprinkle in it red powder and similar substances from corrosive medicines; and place over the outer eye a piece of warm cotton with white egg: to protect it from hot inflammation.
If some of the alguardenic remains and you are dominated by hot blood, and fear a hot inflammation; then let go of the eye and take care of it with what soothes the inflammation.
Then repeat the operation over him until it heals.
And do the same with any additional flesh that may occur in the eye of this type.
It is necessary that every weak eye of an alien, whether from a natural or accidental cause, be treated with iron in surgery: and you shall not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that this member is able to bear such operation.
Chapter on the collection of Sebel (Seba) from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Chapter XVIII.
It is necessary for you first, that you consider whether the eye in which is Sebel, is strong and there is no sickness in it except Sebel; then collect Sebel from it.
And it is that you command the weak to place his head in your armpit.
Then suspend the veins with one or two needles according to your discretion; and let the needle be subtle in doubling, according to this shape, or let there be two needles graduated in one body, according to this shape.
Then collect the veins with subtle forceps and remove the blood by the hour after the hour until you see the veins removed from the eye and resolved; and beware lest you harm the eye with the tips of the forceps.
And let your operation be at midday before the sun, and be very firm in your operation; so that you do not cut except the veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye whether green or red; so that with its own sharpness it may burn what remains from Sebel.
If however it is not possible for you to collect all of this in that hour, then plaster the eye with that which relieves the pain of the eye; and leave it for some days until the pain subsides; and secure it from infection with warm covers; then repeat on it according to the same method until it heals.
And this is the shape of the forceps.
Chapter: On reducing Arissat to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
The surgeon is named Arisato. He cures a fistula with a cautery or with sharp medicine burning, according to the account that preceded it.
If it is not cured (the fistula), then there is no skill in it: except to lance over the abscess at its birth, and extract all moisture that is in it and pus, until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is exposed, and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with the instrument, which has this shape.
And it is called the rasp of the skull.
Make it from iron india, and its head should be round like a razor, which is pierced with a file, or pierced with the fine point of aliskilfer: and place it on the corrupted part of the bone.
Then turn it with your fingers, and press your hand slightly, until you know that the corruption is already scraped away: do this several times.
Then restore the place with dry medicines made of styptics.
If the place consolidates and flesh grows in it, and the course of pus stops: and remains forty days, and does not renew, and does not abscess, and no accident occurs in it: then you will know that it is already healed.
And if not, then there is no skill in it, except to lead the fistula back to the nostril, according to this shape.
And it is to scrape the bone in the second joint with iron, or with sharp medicine: and when the bone is exposed, then take a drill according to this shape, the tip of which is iron, triangular: and the wood of it should be a pyramid extended to the tip, as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and extend your hand slightly away from the eye. Then turn your hand with the lancet until it penetrates the bone and feels weak. By this you will know that air is coming out of it, when you hold your hand over his nose.
Then restore the place with medicines drying, as I have taught you.
When the flesh is born and the place hardens; then the matter that flowed outward, returns to the nose; it is therefore lighter above the sick man.
Chapter on the Reduction of Eyelid Protrusion.
Chapter XX.
When the eye bulges completely and no harm or reduction occurs in vision: then it is necessary to release the patient; afterwards, apply leeches to him; subsequently, place blisters on the neck without incision, but with suction.
Then apply a liniment on the eye which is made from acacia, aloe, myrrh and pitch resin. Then tighten the eyelid above with plaster containing many small fleas.
And the method of fleas is as follows: you should take soft cloths in large quantities and fold each cloth four times; make many from them; then place one on top of another according to how much the eye needs; then tighten them with a strong bandage.
And repeat the application of blisters with suction without incision.
Then remove the blisters and allow the eyelid to remain closed during day and night.
If the bandage becomes soft again, then it is necessary to tighten it a lot; afterwards, remove the bandage after day and night as previously mentioned.
If you see the eye returning to its normal appearance, that is good; otherwise, repeat the plaster, fleas, tightening and blisters until it heals.
[Paragraph on] Incision of the conjunctiva.
Chapter XXI.
When there is a rupture in the tunica Vuea, then it protrudes and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of Vua, and the human form is disfigured by it; and it is to be cut: then surgery on it is necessary, as I have said; and it is that you insert the point of the knife into the root of Vua from below to its upper part.
Then insert another point (of the knife) where there is a double thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate; then release the first point according to its position.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie it with a suture around the root of Vua; and tighten it strongly.
Then remove the point (of the knife), and place a moistened wool on the white of the eye; and let it remain until the thread with Vua falls off.
Then take care of the eye with whatever comforts it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes tie off Vua on all sides with a circle made of cloth until the eye protrudes significantly.
Then puncture it with a fine spatula that reaches to the depth of the eye, and moisten the white of the eye; let it sink and enter immediately; then tie it up until it heals.
Chapter on the treatment of Alcomnat.
Chapter XXII.
This ailment called Alcomnat is nothing but pus that accumulates in the eye, similar to water descending from it, and it is not the same.
And the method of treatment for this is that you make the patient sit on a prepared chair or straight chair.
Then take hold of his head with both hands from the sides and move him until you see pus come out towards the lower parts of your eyes. Then it is shaped and does not descend, and the vision is cleared; let the patient see as he did before; and if it does not descend towards the lower part, know that it is water.
If, however, no preparation for the descent of pus is made as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine probangue and puncture it with it slightly on the horny pad near the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane at the corona, until the pus comes out.
When it comes out, then pour warm water into the eye in which you have mixed honey; or water boiled with burned hay and honey; then cleanse with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
On the care of the water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have already said the kind of water suitable for division and expulsion, then take it accordingly in health.
Then you should make the patient sit with his head between your hands square and facing the light, near the sun; bind the healthy eye, and squeeze it tightly; then close the eyelid of the affected eye with your right hand if the water is in the left eye; or your left hand if the water is in the right eye.
Then take with your right hand the almudga (a type of plant) if the water is in the left eye; or take with your left hand if the water is in the right eye.
Then place the end of the almudga near the corona (cornea) through the thickness of a radial ray on the visible part of the white sclera appearing at the lacrimal sac; then push the almudga with force and you rotate your hand along with it, until it penetrates into the sclera of the eye; and feel that the almudga has already reached an empty space.
And it is necessary that the length of the journey of the almudga to the depth is the measurement of the space from the pupil to the end of the blackness; and this is the cornea of the eye. You shall observe it indeed within the very pupil vision of the eyes, due to the clarity of the cornea's coat.
Then place the almudga up to the place where is water. Then press it downwards with one blow after another.
If therefore water goes down immediately, then the sick person sees it directly on what opens his sight immediately, and almudga in his eye.
Then you rest for a little while. If therefore water goes down, then you remove it with the second, beyond the exit of the almudga.
When it is pressed and does not rise up: then you remove the almudga with ease; and you turn your hand slowly.
Then you dissolve something from clear salt in water; and wash the eye with it inside. Then place outside of the eye the whole mop of wool soaked in rose oil and white egg: and bind with it the healthy eye.
We, as well as those who are of our time, place chamomile pulverized with egg white on it.
If the almudga does not obey you to enter into the eye due to its hardness, since it is from a man whose eye is very hard; then it is necessary that you take a spatula called Alberid, which has this form:
Therefore bore with it only the conjunction itself, and not the end of your hand into the hole; and there is no other than to make a subtle way to the almudga place.
Then introduce the almudga, as we said before.
In addition to the performance of your work, it should be prepared for the sick a bed well made, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark house; and let him be kept away from all movements, and from coughing; and put food for him that calms his nature; and do not move his head right or left at all.
And let the ligature be according to its own arrangement until the third day.
Then unbind it in that dark room and test its sight; make it see things. Then return the ligature until the seventh day.
And it should not be done during the hour of cure, or immediately after the incision; rather, it should be done by another because water rises quickly through an intense opening.
If however a hot abscess occurs: then it should be unbound before the seventh; and correct it with what soothes the abscess until it is soothed; then without its sight, place over its oral opening that which regulates its vision for some days, while it remains in that dark room.
Then gradually leave the house and change into his own clothes.
And know that the student is not exempted from observation several times; then he shall dare on the operation.
Now indeed one of those from Alayrach has come to us who said that a perforation was made in Alayrach's stomach, through which water flows.
Therefore, I have not seen anyone in your land who did that; nor have I read it in any of the old books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the shapes of the incisions from the Maghda (operation), for them who do not know about it to stand on them.
Make them of bronze; and let their ends be with this same subtle trangularity, and the end sharp.
Chapter XXIII.
Chapter on the treatment of a newborn's flesh in the nose.
Whenever diverse fleshes are born in the nose, some of which resemble the many feet of a scorpion: and from it is cancerous flesh, stony, dark colored: and from it is the gentle flesh, not dark colored.
Therefore, for that gentle flesh which is among those fleshes, not fraudulent, nor cancerous, you must make the sick person sit with his face opposite the sun and open his nostrils; then thrust a hook into those fleshes; afterwards drag them towards the outside and cut what you have grasped from it with a thin, sharp spatula on one side, until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
If something remains of it from whose removal is not possible: then shave that with a small instrument easily, until nothing remains from it. If however blood dominates over you or a hot boil occurs: then apply to it as required; or if it is from malicious boils, then quickly proceed with cauterizing it until the blood separates and all the flesh is removed.
Then pour vinegar, water, or wine into the nose after cutting. If however the nose opens and moisture goes up to the palate, then you know that he is already well.
If however the moisture does not penetrate as required, then you know that there is flesh born within the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument did not reach with cutting.
Then you must insert a thread of linen with some thickness and many knots; and place between every knot an amount equal to the length of a finger or less; and let the sick person thrust one end of the thread into his nose with a rod, or with whatever he can manage after making it similar to a syringe: and pull out the smelly stuff until it reaches the cavity, and goes out above the throat.
And indeed many times do boys in schools perform this, and it is an easy matter for him who desires.
Then place two ends of the cord, one that exits through the nose, and the other that remains inside the nose. Then, with a pair of scissors or a knife, cut the flesh along with the knots that are on the cord. Do this until you know that the flesh is now separated from the knots of the cord.
Then remove the cord; place linen moistened with Egyptian ointment in the nose after bleeding has stopped. Do this for three days or more until the ointment has completely corroded all that remains of the flesh.
Then place a lead tube at the end in the nose for some days until it heals.
If, however, it requires a dry cure, use this method.
For the purge to be made with oil and other medications into the nose, make it of silver or copper; it should resemble a small lamp, open like a snail shell, and its passage should also be similar.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, as in a tube.
And the snail shell instrument for the purge should be filled and perforated; it should have a handle at its end with which to hold it while heating oil or whatever you wish from infusions and fluid substances within it.
Chapter 25.
A deviated nose, known as a Thelul, often arises at the end of the nose and grows larger with days until it becomes an ugly sight.
Therefore, when it first appears, cut it off completely at its base. Then place on the spot, either cautery, or a medicine burning at its place.
If the incision does not widen, then consider if it is hard and black, with few senses; then do not touch it with iron because it is cancerous ulcer.
For I have often seen one who made an incision in a tumor and great evil happened to him who had it.
And if the tumor is soft and not black, and you see that it is possible to make an incision in its entirety, then evacuate the weakened part and incise it without fear or timidity; and care for the place with it as it exudes and constricts, until it heals.
Chapter 26.
Chapter on stitching the nose, lip, and ear.
Know that when there is a loosening of continuity in one of these cartilages, the operation does not help much unless in some people.
Therefore when something happens to anyone of these, you should examine if it is a recent wound with its blood; and then gather two pieces of the wound together with stitches; then care for it until it heals.
And if there is a loosening of continuity in the lips and they are already separated, and each part has become healthy; then it is necessary to remove all parts appearing from the skin until it bleeds. Then gather two lips with stitches, tie them and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood and pulverized aloes over the bleeding; then place a piece of ointment plaster called diafinicon on top of the powders, and another piece of any consolidating plasters; and leave it bound for two or three days. Then loosen it, change the medicine; and leave it until the threads fall off by themselves. Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
The method of suturing is to gather the solution of continuity or with needles, as we have explained in the suturing of the abdomen; or gather the solution with thread, as I have shown you.
Chapter 27.
Chapter on the extraction of lip nodes.
Many men happen to have hard lesions on the inside of their lips, similar to grains of grass; some of them are smaller and others larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to turn the lip, find on top of every node of it, and hang it with a hook, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the place after the cut with wax, until the blood is separated.
Then it is rubbed with vinegar and the place where there is an inflammation is treated with it until the wounds heal.
Chapter 28.
Chapter on cutting the flesh of a child over the gum.
Often, flesh grows on the gum which is called 'abulus' by the ancients.
Therefore, it is necessary to hang it with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, and let the pus run out or the blood.
Then place wax on the spot or other healing powders over it.
If that flesh comes back after treatment, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it; for it does not come back after cauterization.
Chapter 29.
Chapter on grinding teeth with iron.
Whenever abscesses form on the surface of teeth from both the inside and outside parts, and between the gums and hard enamel, they sometimes turn black, become citrine-colored, or green, until corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul due to this.
Therefore, you must make the sick person sit between your hands, and his head in your bosom, and shave the tumor and tooth, where the cortex appears to you, and something similar to sand remains until there is nothing left; and similarly do with blackness, and greenness, and yellowish, and others until they are cleaned.
If what is in them is removed from the beginning by reason, that is good; but if not, then repeat the razing upon them on another day, the second, and the third, until at last the study comes to an end in that which you desire.
And know that the tooth requires razors of various shapes and forms, according to which it is prepared for your operation; because the razor with which the tooth is shaved from the lower part is different from the razor with which the tooth is shaved between the teeth, according to other shapes.
And these shapes of the razors should be prepared by you, which you see.
Chapter 30.
Chapter on the extraction of tooth pain.
It is necessary that you treat the tooth from its pain with all diligence and to delay in extracting it. For it is not possible to replace it when it is extracted; because its substance is lofty; until there is no excuse for extracting it, then if the sick person must be compelled to extract it himself, it should be strengthened and certified by you that the tooth in pain.
For often the sick person is deceived by pain and thinks that it is in the tooth and extracts it himself; then the pain does not subside until the diseased tooth is extracted.
We have already seen this from the operation of phlebotomists.
When the sick person is certified by you that the tooth in pain is himself, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is something of virtue, until the gums are loosened from all sides; then move it with your fingers, or with delicate tweezers in the first place gradually, until you shake it.
Then place the large forceps in those places well, and hold the head of the weak between your knees so that it remains still; then pull the tooth straight out, so as not to break it.
If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from every side with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded, then it is necessary to fill the hole with a cloth and tighten it with the tip of a thin radius so as not to break it during your extraction with forceps.
It is necessary that you perform careful scarification around the gums on all sides in many places.
And be mindful of your strength so as not to break it and a part of it remains and returns over the weak one from that greater evil which is its original pain.
And beware that you do not make the same mistake as those who are ignorant in their haste and audacity during extraction, and instead administer what I have said.
For many times they make great illnesses come upon men, which are difficult to break and all of whose roots remain or some of them; or extract it with some jaw bones, as we have often testified to this.
Then after extraction, it is washed with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If bleeding occurs from the places (for it often happens), then grind some wax and fill the place with it; if not, cauterize it if you do not have wax.
The handles of the fine forceps with which the tooth is moved should be long at the end and short at the grip, thick so as not to split when it is pressed against the tooth; they should be like the grips of large forceps, until when you tighten them, they do not bite themselves, nor split; the ends should be short and made of iron or well-made file, straight at the ends; and in their ends there should be teeth, some of which enter into others and tighten with a decent constriction, strong.
And sometimes [there are] extremities like the shape of a bird's beak, which is called ciconia, and [they are] strong constrictions.
Chapter XXXI.
On the extraction of teeth, and the removal of fractured jaw bones.
When something remains at the site of tooth extraction that breaks, then it is necessary to place warm butter on the spot for one or two days until the location softens; afterwards, introduce algasti, or forceps, whose tips are similar to the beak of a bird called ciconia. This is the shape of the forceps.
The tips of them are made like a file inside out; or like an aliskilfegi.
If it does not come out of you with these forceps, then it is necessary to carve a cavity over the root and peel off all the flesh, and introduce an instrument called Palanca parva, whose shape is as follows.
Let the tip be short and slightly thicker; and not soaked, lest it breaks.
If the root comes out through this, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to help with other instruments whose shapes are as follows.
The shape of the first one is a triangle with a certain thickness.
The shape of the thin triangle tip.
And with other instruments and tools which have been mentioned for tooth extraction.
Also helpful is this instrument resembling a large nail with a twisted triangle tip and some thickness, so as not to break; and it should not be soaked.
And know that there are many tools for teeth; and likewise, the rest of the instruments are not mentioned; but a prudent and skillful craftsman finds for himself the tool according to the operation and diseases indicated by them.
Because there are diseases for which no ancient instrument was found, due to the diversity of their species.
If however a bone from the jaw, or any bone of the face, breaks or putrefies: then examine over it in its place with what suits it from the instruments and forceps which I mentioned for extraction of roots, and assist with the device whose shape is this.
Let something of thickness gradually be placed within it to tighten or hold the bone, so that it does not flee and move away, until the bone is expelled; then restore the place with appropriate medications for it.
If there is a small decay in the bone, then scrape it away from its decay, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter XXXII.
On the suture of prominent teeth over others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, it becomes ugly due to that shape; and especially when this happens in women, and girls, namely in the soft ones.
Therefore, you should examine. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and it does not settle, or its suture, nor cutting of it is possible; then extract it: and if it is attached with another tooth, then cut it with this tool, whose shape is this.
It resembles a small beak, and it is made of iron with a very sharp tip.
And let your cut be such that you make the cut over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another tooth is not disturbed.
If it protrudes for suture cutting: then cut it with a file made of iron, whose shape is this.
Let it be entirely of iron, and its handle small with many sharp points, like a file used to make a needle; with which you should gently file the tooth little by little over many days, so that another tooth is not disturbed and it falls out; then smooth it, in the end scrape it with some rasps.
If it is a tooth, from which a piece breaks off and injures the tongue, then it is necessary that the edge be smoothed out until its roughness is removed, and it becomes level; and it should be flattened so as not to injure the tongue nor corrupt speech.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the extraction of teeth with gold threads.
When there occurs a shock or jolt to the front teeth from being struck or by accident, and the weak person cannot hold what he eats to prevent it from falling out; and you have treated them with medicinal poultices, but the treatment has not been effective: then it is appropriate that they be fastened with a gold thread, since silver becomes green and putsrefies after days, but gold never changes.
And let the thread be of a medium thickness between fineness and coarseness according to its quantity that it may hold between the teeth.
The shape of the extraction is such that you take the thread and insert it double between two healthy teeth; then you wind it with its two ends between the moved teeth, whether one or several, until you reach the sutures up to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then wind it again up to the part from which you began; and hold your hand with finesse and wisdom until it is not removed entirely; and let your pressure when you tighten the thread be at the roots of the teeth so that it does not come out.
Then cut off the excessive ends of the thread with scissors; and collect both, and twist them together; and conceal these beneath the healthy tooth and the moved tooth so as not to injure the tongue; then let it be tightened until it remains in that state.
If it loosens or breaks, fasten it with another thread, and it will remain in that state for a long time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of grinding of two healthy teeth, and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth or two return to their places after the loss of each (tooth), and remain as we have said; and this does not occur unless the skilled and experienced craftsman makes it happen.
And sometimes a tooth is shaped from the bones of a cow; and it is made like the form of a tooth, and placed in its position, so that it is strengthened and held firm as we have said; and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIIII.
When this ligament that happens under the tongue is natural, because it is born with man, or accidental, from a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation in it is to open the weak bone in its head in your pouch and lift up its tongue; then cut that nerve-ligament through its width until it is disconnected from its restraint.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it is from the consolidation of a wound: then thrust an awl into it, and bore through its width until you cut the ligament, and the knot is released.
And beware, lest there be a cleft in deep flesh, and you cut an artery there, and bleeding occurs.
Then it is to be lapped up with water of rose, or with vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a piece of linen cloth which the sick man holds all night so that it does not consolidate again.
If there is bleeding, then place over the place a piece of mustard seed powder. If blood conquers you, then cauterize the place with a lentiginous cautery which is suitable for it; then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
Occasionally there occurs under the tongue a boil resembling a small frog, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function and perhaps it swells so much that it fills the bone.
And the operation in it is to open the weak bone before the sun: and observe the boil.
If therefore you see it of a black or dark color, hard, in which no unhealthy sensation is found: then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
If it is hollowed out towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then throw in a hook and cut it with a fine chisel and free it from all sides. And if your blood is constrained by it during your operation hour, then place a gauze soaked in vinegar upon it until the blood is removed; thereafter return to your operation until you extract it with its appendage.
Thereafter it is washed with vinegar and salt; care for it with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Chapter on the treatment of two cysts (abscesses).
Chapter XXXVI.
Whenever cysts (abscesses) resembling boils occur in the throat, that is, swellings that occur outside; and they are called the two Amigdalae: which, when you treat with what we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then consider.
If therefore it is a hard abscess, of dark color, with few senses: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and the root of it is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing bleeding, but rather let it be until it matures. And thereafter either perforate it or it will burst by itself.
If it is white in color, round and the root of it is subtle: then it must be cut.
And the operation on it is to consider before its operation whether the abscess has become quiet and warm with complete rest, or whether it decreases somewhat: then have the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in your lap; and open his mouth and receive a servant between his hands, and press his tongue downward with an instrument of this shape.
Make it from silver, or brass, that it may be as subtle as a knife.
When you press it with your tongue and the boil is shown to you, and falls before your eyes: then take a hook, and pierce it in the middle, and pull it out as far as possible, besides pulling some of the skin along with it.
Then cut it with an instrument, whose form is as follows. It resembles forceps; but its ends should be curved, so that the opening of each is in the direction of the other's point; take care therefore that it is made of steel or brass impregnated with aluminum.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, whose form is as follows. Be sharp at one end, not sharp at the other end.
And after you cut one acorn (boil), cut the other according to this same form of cutting.
Then, after the cutting, let the sick person gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If there should be a flow of blood, let him gargle with water in which the rinds of pomegranates have been boiled; or the leaves of myrtle, and similar ones from other herbs, until the flow of blood is removed: then take care of him, until he is cured.
And sometimes boils other than acorns (boils) arise in the throat. Therefore, cut them according to what I said about the cutting of two acorns equally.
I myself have healed a woman from a boil that was born in her throat, which was dragging towards the flesh, and only a few senses remained, which had almost closed her throat: and the woman breathed through a narrow mouth, and she had already prohibited her from eating, and drinking water: and by now it had come close to death, if it had lasted one day, or two days.
The wound or sore had risen to such an extent that it expelled two branches, until they emerged through the two nostrils.
I therefore hastened and fastened a hook onto one of them. Then I pulled it out, and a large piece came away with it.
Afterwards, I cut off the remaining part where it was seized in the nostril.
Then I did to the other what had come out from the second nostril.
Then I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue; then I fastened a hook onto the sore; afterwards I cut off a part of it, and nothing more came out except a little blood; so the woman's throat was healed, and she began to drink water immediately, and afterward took food.
I did not cease to cut from that sore repeatedly for a long time; and the sore would follow wherever I was cutting, until it became too prolonged, and with it that.
I then heated an iron and cauterized the sore in the woman's throat.
She then remained well; afterwards I went away, and I did not know what God had done with her after me.
[Section heading: On the incision of a sore in the throat.]
Chapter XXXVII.
When a catarrh descends to the throat and a sore forms, which is large; it is then called perpendicular; and if it is round and thick in the lower part, it is then called a goitre (gland).
When it is treated with what I have said in the previous division, and there is no improvement; and you see that the sore is warm and soft; then it should be cut.
And if what is gathered around it is round and not long, and is red or blackish or dark in color, and there is no feeling; then it should be cut. There is fear concerning the sick one.
Therefore, when you see it as I have said from its whiteness and its length, so that you make the sick one sit before the sun; and press his tongue with the instrument of which the story has gone before: then fasten a hook in his wound, and pull it downwards: and cut it with one of two instruments which I said for incising two amygdala.
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it, unless what is added exceeds the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut from it more, you harm the voice and speech.
Then after the cutting, use what we have said for the incision of two amygdala; and take care of it until it heals.
If the sick one fears cutting: then it is necessary that you use cunning for his cauterization without fear and dread.
And the method of cauterizing it is not unless with sharp water: and it is, that you place the head of the sick one on your breast. Then press his tongue with the instrument which I said. Then take from the water which I said to you in the chapter of cauterizing, and fashion a ladle with it not extinguished, and place it neither thick nor thin, and fill with it the depression of this instrument, whose shape is as follows:
The cavity where medicine is placed should be concave, like the cavity of a cochlea's radius.
Place the instrument along with the medicine upon the ulcer itself: and let the sick man lie on his side, so that the salve may run from his mouth due to the internal medicine, so that nothing may fall from it into his throat, and thus harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you apply it to the ulcer by handfuls for half an hour until you see it become darkened and the bite of the medicine subside.
And if you wish to apply a poultice, you wrap it around the extremity of the radius and pour the poultice with medicine, then insert the radius with the poultice into the cannula until the poultice sticks to the ulcer.
Do this repeatedly, until you achieve what you wish from the cauterization of the vein. Then let it go: for it burns and falls away within three or four days.
If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it; and after cauterization, clean the area around the vein with a poultice soaked in butter and make it clean with that which is around it from the medicine; and wipe it with cold water.
Externally it is to be treated with embrocation, and internally with gargarisms, until it heals.
Therefore, this method of treatment is healthier than incision and less fearful.
And sometimes an ulcer is also treated with something more subtle than cautery and incision: it is treated with suffumigation, according to this method. Take camphor, hyssop, origanum, rutus, asafoetida, chamomile, abrotanum and similar herbs: and grind them all together or some of them in a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, and boil: the pot should be well coated with lime: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which a concave instrument is placed according to this method.
Make it from silver or copper, and introduce the tip, where the grain is, into the sick man's bone, until the vapor reaches the wound through the cannula, until the ulcer becomes much darkened.
Then repeat over it many times, until it burns.
And beware not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess's onset. Generally, add in abscess: and it is not proper to do this unless at the cooling down of that abscess's heat.
If this tool is not present to you, then take a reed, and prepare the rind of an egg on its tip so that the bone does not burn because the eggshell rind prevents the heat from burning the bone; and this is good treatment with benefit.
Chapter on the extraction of thorns, and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Often a bone or a fish spine adheres to the throat.
Therefore, you should remove what appears from among them that lies beneath the vision, after pressing the tongue with an instrument in the sun, and it is revealed to you that it is in the throat.
And what is not apparent to you and hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make a weakened man vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the thing attached will come out through vomiting.
Or the weakened man swallows a piece of nutmeg or radish root or a dry bread crumb, or takes a piece of dried sea sponge, softens it and ties it to a thread; then he swallows that. When it reaches the place where the thorns or bones are and they are being removed, then it comes out.
If it does not come out with what has been said, then use a lead tool in this shape.
The object should be thicker than the radius slightly, and at its end there should be an opening, which can easily pass through the throat; and it should have its head raised upwards.
And let him be careful of touching his epiglottis to avoid a cough and push with it a bone or a splinter, or introduce it himself with his hand (the instrument).
But if the patient introduces it (the object), this is better, because of his knowledge about the place where it is attached; and he should push downward or pull his hand with the instrument upward, all that according to its quantity which is prepared for him until it comes out.
Chapter on Extraction of Leeches.
Chapter 39.
When a leech is treated with what I said about its division in the cure with medicines and it does not work, then consider in the throat of the sick person before the sun or after pressing his tongue with the instrument that I told you.
If your vision falls upon a leech, extract it with a small hook or with fine forceps.
If this is not possible with them (the fine forceps), then take a concave tube, insert it into the throat of the sick person as far as the throat; then insert into the concavity of the tube hot iron with fire. Repeat this often: and let the sick person abstain from water for the whole day.
Then let him take cold water rinse and open his mouth in it; and wash his throat with it and do not swallow anything from it; move the water one hour after another with his hand. For a leech, as soon as it feels water, it falls out.
If it does not come out with what we mentioned, then fumigate the sick person with bedbugs or with camphor with the instrument that I told you about for the fumigation of the windpipe.
Repeat it frequently, because it will fall by itself.
The method of suffumigation is to take the pot containing live prunes with fire; and let the pot be covered with a cover, having a hole in its middle; and arrange the end of the instrument in that hole.
Then cast the suffumigation and let the patient put his mouth at the end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the suffumigation does not escape before you know that the suffumigation has reached the bloodsucker. For the bloodsucker will fall immediately.
If it does not fall, then repeat the suffumigation frequently.
Let the patient endure thirst, eat salt and other things, but drink no water.
Therefore it is necessary for him to come out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker is extracted from the throat when it falls upon it.
It resembles forceps, as you see; except that it has this curvature which penetrates into the throat. And its end is similar to the beak of a bird called ciconia, which has the roughness of a file; when it grasps something, it does not release it completely.
[Chapter: On opening abscesses, and their cutting, and treatment in general.]
Chapter XL (40).
The species of abscesses are many, according to the memory of them, that is one and one in this book; and they are various in their perforation, and cutting of themselves from two modes.
One of them is of the species of an abscess on itself, and because it encompasses moistures.
And the second method is due to places, where it happens from the body.
Because an abscess happening on the head is one thing, and an abscess happening in the anus is another: and an abscess happening in a fleshy place is another from an abscess happening in joints: and each of them has its own judgement according to operation.
And from abscesses there are some that it is not necessary to perforate, unless after the maturation of pus in them and its completion: and there are those that it is necessary to perforate, while they are raw and do not mature according to their completion.
Like abscesses which are near joints.
Because when an abscess happens near a joint, and extends to be its length, until it putrefies that which is around it perhaps corrupts ligaments or the nerves of that joint's union; therefore it is a cause closer to the contraction of that limb.
Or is an abscess near the main part of the body; because if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, it will harm either him or through that main part of the body.
Or it is near the anus, perforate it while it is immature: and it is not necessary to perforate a raw abscess, not completed digestion, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not rot deeply and spread to the inside of the anus, and become a fistula, or become at its end that does not heal.
It is necessary that you know the hour of perforation of the abscess, when it has matured according to its completion: and it is in sedation of pain, recovery of fever, and diminution of redness, and pulse, and acuteness of headache of the abscess; and other signs.
It is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower part of the abscess, and of more prominent protrusion: and let the perforation extend along the body's length, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of arms, shoulders, tendons, nerves, arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
In those which reflect, proceed with the perforation according to that limb.
When the abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better to leave the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to our completion.
Since if you perforate it beforehand, the course of the pus is extended from it, and there are many filths and dirtiness, and perhaps its opening hardens and deepens.
And some abscesses should be perforated according to the width of the body due to necessity, or according to that limb which it needs.
And it is necessary to make a small perforation for small abscesses and a large one for large ones: or many sections according to the size of the abscess.
And there are abscesses in which the skin should be concaved: and it should be cut when it has become like a cloth, and made into an end, which is already dead; just as what happens with many of them, that they bubble, and with buboes.
And there are those which should be cut by a section having three angles. And there is one of them, from which it is cut as the shape of the leaf of the myrtle tree.
Like an inguinal abscess.
And there are those in which a round incision or crescent-shaped incision is administered, and similar ones by sections.
What has no head, such as are the soft ulcers, should be pierced through with a shallow puncture, or only superficially.
It is necessary that when an abscess is large and has collected much pus, you pierce it so that it does not spread and you extract all the pus at once; rather, extract a part of it from it. Then the abscess should be opened until another day. Then, extract something from the pus again.
Do this frequently according to the degree, until it comes out; especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a woman pregnant, or a small child, or an old man decrepitus: for the animal spirit often dissipates with the exit of pus; and perhaps the weak one will die, and you will not receive payment.
Therefore beware of this chapter with great caution.
After your puncture, by which you pierce the abscesses, it is necessary that you clean the wound; and reflect. If then the wound of the abscess is small, or the incision is plain, then apply linen cloths, or an old bandage. If the abscess is large and there are many cracks from the puncture, then you must insert linen into every crack until they meet each other.
If in the abscess you have cut off a part of the skin, or hollowed out its circumference; then it is necessary that you fill it with an old bandage, or as when fabric is woven or flax is combed without wetness; and bind it for three days.
Then cast it out, and care for it with whatever is necessary from the salve until it heals.
If blood flow occurs during your procedure, then apply cold water and vinegar, after which a cloth is soaked in them; and place it over the site of the blood flow many times.
If the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer a regimen, treatment, and powders which I have mentioned in many places of this our book, and from division.
If it is winter time and the place of the boil contains many nerves: then it is necessary to pour hot poultices with wine and oil onto those areas.
And if it is summer, and the areas are fleshy: then it is necessary to place cold poultices that have been soaked in water, oil, or wine and oil, and let it all be cold. Until the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary to dissolve the boil, remove it, and administer treatment for its healing until it heals.
Therefore, this is what is essential for the universal knowledge of treating boils.
According to the way of distinguishing, I have already said about every boil, how the pathway for its healing is discussed individually in chapters.
Chapter 41.
Chapter on cutting boils that occur on the head skin.
Small boils that occur on the head skin are of the types of knots contained by layers like small bags; as if they were inflated with chicken pus.
And their types are many.
They are fat ones: and there are those that contain a moisture similar to mud: and those that contain a moisture similar to soap and poultices: and others like them, and there are hard stone-like ones.
And in the cutting of all of them, and their removal, there is no fear, as long as it does not make an opposition to the artery during its cutting.
And the operation in their cutting is to try it out with a tool whose shape comes after this, which is called the Probe, until you know what it contains.
If it contains moisture, then dry it by making a cut along its length with a surface incision: in this manner.
Begin with an incision along line b to line g. When the moisture is evacuated, then remove the scab that contains that moisture, and do not leave anything beneath it.
For often it returns if anything remains from it.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt. Fill the wound with it and leave it until another day. For what remains of the scab will corrode itself.
Then repeat over the wound with the second Egyptian ointment, and the third, and as often as necessary until you are confident that nothing remains from the scab. At this point care for the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If an abscess contains a thick knot: then cut it open in this manner, making an incision with the shape of a cross; and place probes between the divisions of the incision, and scrape off all the scab from every side; and try your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if it opposes an artery, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And similarly for an abscess that is a stone, cut it open and treat it the same way as we said for the others.
Cutting into an abscess that is a stone is easier since there is little blood and moisture. Sometimes these types of abscesses are found in the head in some humans, where there is no moisture deep within them.
This is because I made an incision over an abscess in the head of a very old woman, and found the abscess to be as hard as a solid stone, rough, white, that could not be broken; and if someone struck it with a probe, they would injure themselves.
In other kinds of boils occurring in the head, except for those boils that occur on children's heads and at the roots of ears, section of all of them should be a superficial incision.
Always perform perforation from the lower part of them to ease the flow of pus towards the lower parts.
Then, take care of it with whatever is appropriate for its cure.
Chapter on the incision of Goiter.
Chapter 42.
These boils occur frequently in the neck, under the chin and groins; and sometimes they occur elsewhere in the body.
And above those that occur in the neck are one and many; and they originate from each other; and every goiter among them is within its proper tunica, as is the case with nodes and boils of the head, as we have said.
And the types of these goiters are numerous. For there are among them those that are like stones; and there are those that contain moisture; and there are malignant ones, which do not obey the cure.
In the good disposition that is visible among those of these goiters, which has a clear color close to the skin and moves towards every part and is not attached with nerves of the neck, nor with the glands, nor with the artery, nor is it deep: it should be cut off by superficial incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body along the line b-line g and scrape it from all sides; and open two flaps of skin with a scalpel or with several scalpels if needed, as we have said in boils of the head, and slowly remove it.
And it is advisable to be careful not to cut a vein or a nerve.
The spatula should not be very sharp: so that it does not cut your hand during the incision, or disturb the sick one, and you make an incision where it is not necessary.
If you cut a vein or an artery, it prevents you from operating, then place in the wound a piece of zegi crushed, or certain powders that dissolve blood, and tie up the wound, and leave it alone until the sharpness of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes soft: or if it begins to rot.
For the blood is dissolved with the tunica (linen), so return to your operation when you have finished.
Then ask your index finger if there remains anything of the Strophulus (small pieces), so cut them and clean them.
If there is a large vein at the root of the Strophulus (small piece), then it is necessary that you do not cut the Strophulus from its root: but rather tie it with a strong double thread and leave it alone until it falls out without harm.
Then fill the wound with an old linen that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of him.
If the whole Strophulus is cut, then it is necessary that you gather together the lips of the wound: and sew it immediately, after you see that there remains no excess.
If you see that there remains an excess due to the size of the Strophulus, then it is necessary that you go to cut the root of it and pull it out: and administer the stitch as we have said.
And what contains moisture from the Strophuli, pierce it with a superficial perforation: so that you see the place of maturity of it: and place the perforation below, as we have said.
After perforation, administer linseed with ointment, and similar things, to corrode what remains from corruption, until you see the wound already cleaned: then take care of it with regenerative flesh ointment, until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
Section of the epiglottis due to an ulcer within the throat.
The ancients said this section of the epiglottis and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; this is their writing.
In those with synanchysis (swallowing difficulties), it is necessary to avoid the section of the epiglottis, since it does not provide any benefit; because all veins and lungs are weak.
In those who have a hot ulcer in the mouth, throat, or both salivary glands, when there is no illness in the channel (canal), it is necessary to use the section of the epiglottis to avoid destruction caused by swelling.
Therefore, when we wish to section the epiglottis, it should be done under three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small section along its width, in that which is between two circles by quantity; this location is suitable for sectioning, since it lacks muscle and blood vessels are distant from it.
If the surgeon is afraid, then it is necessary that he spreads the skin of the throat with a hook. Then make an incision in the skin until you reach the channel; avoid blood vessels if you see any of them.
Then section the sifac as we have said; it is indicated by the mucus that comes out of the channel along with what breaks and the separation of the voice.
Let the open wound heal at some time.
When the fear of inflammation arises, bring together two pieces of wound skin, and if possible only the skin without cartilage.
Then administer medications that make flesh grow, until it heals.
Says Albucasis. Thus ends the discourse we have narrated, its explanation is only when they see that one of these abscesses has already opened up the throat of the sick person: and he is raised up above death, and desires to be cut; they go to cut the Epiglottis, so that the sick person may breathe over the wound site with a certain breathing, and save himself from death: and for this reason they commanded to let the open wound heal, until the malice of the disease is consumed, and the malice is three days long, as if it were itself: then they commanded to sew up the wound, and care for it until it heals.
And that which I saw myself was that a maidservant received a knife and sent it into her throat, and she cut a part of the windpipe with it.
And I was summoned to treat her, and found her groaning, as is the groan of the dead.
I then tore open the wound and found that blood had come out from the wound, though not much. Thus I was reassured that she had not severed the vein or artery; and air was coming out of the wound.
Therefore I approached and sewed up her wound, and treated it until she was well: and nothing happened to the maidservant except a hoarseness of voice; and she returned after a few days to a better state of health.
Thus I say: that there is no fear in cutting the Epiglottis.
On the section of hernia of the throat.
Chapter XLIV.
This called hernia of the throat, is a large abscess, according to the color of the body; and it is much in women.
It is according to two modes: for it is natural, or it is accidental.
In the natural one certainly it is not a birthmark.
The accidental one is according to two modes, of which one is similar to fatty knots. And the other mode, is similar to an abscess that comes from a knotting of the artery. And there is fear in it, and it should not be presumed upon with the iron, unless in that which is small; and you test it, and investigate it with an instrument. If you find it similar to a fatty knot and not suspended with any of the veins; then cut it, as knots are cut; and extract it along with what contains it from the cyst, if it is in the cyst; and if not, then examine its entirety. Then care for the place with what is required from the cure, until it heals.
Chapter XLV.
Chapter on the section above the knots.
There are many kinds of knots, and I have already said all their species in division; and it is necessary that here the difference between a knot and an abscess be explained, since there is a doubt about it.
Therefore I say that when an abscess is hot and feverish, and intense pains, until the ebullition of superfluity is suppressed and putrefaction is completed; then indeed fever and heat cease.
But a knot is not hotness nor fever, nor pains; and it contains them in a kist or sac, which is their own proper bag, and it is according to the color of the body; and its origin is as a chickpea, and it is made like a grape, and greater or lesser.
And they are according to two species: either fatty: or containing moisture. The colors of moisture are many, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a knot, you must try it and inquire about it first with the instrument that is called Intromissum, according to its form as it will come in the chapter that follows this.
The method of examination for boils and all knots is to receive this instrument and insert it into the moist place that you find in the boil: and you rotate your fingers with it slowly until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then lay your hand upon it according to the measure of the size of the boil.
Then extract the Intromissum, and observe what comes out following its trail.
If moisture flows out running, regardless of its color: then cut it off with a superficial incision, as I have said regarding the other boils.
And if no moisture flows out following the trail of the Intromissum: then you know that it is fatty: cut off over it with an incision in the shape of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and hang it up with tongs, and strip off the skin from all sides easily: and guard the kistin if possible above it, so that you extract the healthy one along with the knot.
If the kistin bursts during the operation and it is not possible to extract the healthy one: then extract it in pieces until nothing remains of it.
For if something remains little or much from it, the knot returns most of all.
If it overwhelms you and something remains little: then fill the wound at the completion, with certain corrosive powders: and tie the wound, and place on top of it what sits the boil, warm: and care for it along with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If therefore it is a large knot, then its two lips, and care for it with that which adheres to it because it has become flesh.
If it is a pulsating vein that is opposite you or if it is not pulsating: then be careful, and fill the place with boiled wine and leave it tightly bound for two or three days until the wound rots and the boiling of blood subsides; then return to cut what remains from the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
[Paragraph on the tools for cutting and piercing from outside.]
Among these (instruments) there are forms of those to be inserted, and they are of three kinds.
One of them is large, one of them is medium, and one of them is small.
Make it from iron with square ends correctly, so that it fits snugly into the aperture.
And these are the forms of those who experiment (or perforate), and one of them is called "beris," that is, piercing; and there are three kinds.
One of them is large, one of them is medium, and one of them is small.
They are used to probe openings for fistulas, draining wounds, and boils from what is between the bones.
And others are round, smooth, blunt, like large needles for which seats are made, namely from citron or brass, bronze, iron, or silver.
Better ones among them are those made from citron.
Also experimenting instruments are made of black lead, which are used to probe the concave part of the fistulas whose reflections are reflected back with their smoothness.
And there are three kinds again. Because among them are long, medium and short, according to the size of the fistula and its constriction.
Form of Unguents, and there are many species.
Since they are simple (meaning single in action), that is, those which have one cure, and there are three species as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And from them (unguents) are blind unguents; and there are three species.
And from them (unguents) are unguents having two cures; and there are three species. Also from them are unguents having three cures, and there are three species. All of these are necessary in their place.
These are the forms of scalpels, with which knots and tumors are cut and scabbed; and there are three species, because there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
The ends of those by which cutting is done are sharp, the other ends are not sharp; they are not placed thus except for the purpose of providing help in scabbing knots near the fear of vein or nerve incision, and to heal the weakened and find some relief from the pain that is found during scabbing of tumors.
They are made of iron, and are similar to the rod with which alcohol is made; and at one end there is a hidden spout (or small opening); and within it runs (the fluid) both to the inner parts and to the outer parts whenever desired, as you see.
The form of spouts hidden between the fingers during the perforation of tumors; these are not perceived by the weakened; and there are three species, large, medium, and small.
Forms of wind-pipes with which the flow of blood is cut; and there are three species, large ones, medium ones, and small ones.
Make round from copper or brass, slightly smaller in length as you see, and make them subtle.
These shapes of the veins at your place should be large and small: to cut blood quickly when necessary, and then when you are not present with medicine.
However, do not use them in cutting blood at any part of the body, nor do you use them except on fleshy places: such as arms, legs, hips, shoulders, breasts, abdomen, groin, and similar to these, from fleshy places that are moist.
And sometimes they are made from these into small instruments resembling fists, according to their shape: with which blood is cut when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or incision of a vein, or an artery; and sometimes they are made round according to this form.
Chapter XLVII.
[Section Title] Care for the Breasts in Men Similar to Women's Breasts.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell during sleep (that is, when they begin to become dirty in sleep) until they resemble women's breasts; and they remain putrid afterwards.
Whoever dislikes that [swelling], it is necessary to cut the breasts with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this shape from line b to line g. Then scrape off all the fat. Fill the wound with a healing ointment. Then attach two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
If the breast droops to the lower part and softens due to its size, as it happens with women: then it is necessary to make an incision in both of its upper sides with two crescent-shaped cuts similar to this shape, one containing the other at the ends so that the larger line contains the smaller, according to this shape from line b to line g. Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and administer what I said about stitches and powders that are necessary for healing until it heals.
If, however, you do not close the incision as required for you to cut, due to the restlessness of the sick, or due to blood flow: then it is necessary that you fill the wound with a cothorned plaster soaked in corrosive ointment, and leave it until it consumes what remains of the fat. Cure it until it heals.
On the Perforation of an Apostema, which happens under the Titillicus (testicle).
Chapter XLVIII.
These apostematas that happen under the Titillicus are of the types of Strophulas (abscesses), which contain cysts and those that contain moistures.
Those that contain moistures should be cut by a lunar section according to this form, from line b to line g. When everything inside the apostema has been evacuated through pus, then fill it with old plaster and leave it until another day.
Then remove the old plaster, and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the apostema is of the type of nodular Strophulas (abscesses), then cut it through as we have said in the section on Strophulas equally.
If the wound extends such that it discharges pus, then administer cautery to it, as we have said in what has been mentioned before.
Chapter XLIX.
On the Section of an Apostema due to an Artery and a Vein.
When an artery ruptures and the skin above it consolidates, it often happens that an apostema forms there; and similarly, a vein may also rupture, causing an apostema and inflation to form in it.
And the signs by which it is recognized that an apostema and inflation are due to an artery or a vein are as follows: when the apostema is due to an artery, it is long and clustered deep in the body; and when you press the apostema with your fingers, it feels as if there is a hissing sound.
And what is for the Vein, is round in obvious body.
And the incision over this abscess is an error, and especially what is under armpits, groins, neck, and in many places of body; and it is very large. Therefore, care must be taken with iron in its treatment, and what is also in the extremities or head, care must be taken there as well.
Over that which is from the inflation of the opening of the Artery, pierce through the incision in length on the skin. Then open the incision with forceps, then the Artery; and free it from tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert under it a point and make it penetrate to the other side, and bind the Artery with double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of two Arteries which are in the temples.
Then puncture the place that is between two ligaments with a lancet until all the blood in it comes out, and the abscess is dissolved.
Then administer a treatment that generates pus, until the ligaments fall; then care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
If the abscess is from an incision of a Vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can from the abscess with skin. Then insert a point under the place that you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be double thread in it until you pull it out from the other side. Then bind the abscess with a good ligament; according to what I told you in the ligature of a vein, with two parts and two ends of thread.
If you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another point with another thread under the entire abscess near the incision; press, and bind your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle of it, until when it comes out what is inside: then cut the redundancy of the skin, and release what is tied from it.
Then place on top of the boil that you have submerged in wine, and oil. Then administer a treatment which is made with linen cloths and ointments until it heals.
Book of the Head.
Chapter on abscess occurring from the twisting of nerves.
As an abscess occurs in an artery or vein, so it occurs in nerves: which occurs in them by a blow, or it occurs from excessive labor and similar things: and it happens most often in places assisting the bones (or joints), or heels, and in any place where the joints are moving: and the abscess is severe.
It resembles its color to the rest of the body and is found in several positions without pain: and when it is compressed with violence, it feels weak, like a faintness.
And the abscess is not gathered deep within the body, rather it is under the skin, and it moves to every part: and it does not reach forward or backward, neither towards the front nor towards the back.
What is found in the joints, therefore, should not be invaded with an iron tool. Perhaps there will be contraction.
But in that which is found in the head or forehead, puncture the skin with a lancet. If it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps and cut it from the root.
And if it is large, then tie it with a hook and scour it: then remove it, and pack the wound with stitches: and treat it until it heals.
Head 101. (This is likely a chapter
Chapter on the incision of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
Some men frequently have warts, in their belly and on the rest of their body, which are named like mushrooms (and resemble mushrooms).
Their root is subtle, and their head is thick, and the lips of them are turned around. It is small from it, and there is something that can be greatly magnified from it.
I myself have already seen a man, and in his belly there were two warts, which were similar to mushrooms in many ways: there was no difference between them, white, with small roots, and their lips were turned around, they were swollen, and moisture always flowed from them.
I then cut them (the warts), and I found that one weighed about X and VIII ounces, and the other about VI ounces. The procedure for cutting them is as follows: consider if the patient is weak or sick, and the color of the wart is white, moist, with a subtle root: then cut it with a broad spatula, and have cautery in your presence.
For often much blood is expelled at the cutting (of the wart), so be careful if blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
If you see a weak, fearful, and timid person from the cutting with iron, then take a well-made lead thread, and tie it with that (the wart), using the method we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then add some lead (to the stitch). Therefore, do not stop tying the lead, when it is pressed into the wart, until it separates itself and falls off without effort.
If the wart is thick-rooted, then there is some fear and trembling in cutting it, especially if it is in the belly.
It is possible to cut it in half. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then heal it, until the wound is healed.
And beware not to cut the testicle that is dark in color, has few senses and a foul appearance; for it is a cancerous boil; and I shall come again with the reminder of Cancer after this.
Chapter LII.
Chapter on the treatment of umbilical hernia.
A protrusion of the umbilicus occurs for many reasons. It may be due to hernias of the scrotum, which is above the abdomen; and it goes out from there either the althub or the intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or it may be due to blood flowing from a vein, or an artery, as was mentioned earlier. Or it may be due to obstruction of wind in that place.
If it is due to a hernia of the scrotum and a protrusion of the testis; then its color is similar to that of an abscess and it is soft, without pain; and its position appears different. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position is, with what has been said, more pronouncedly different. When you press it with your fingers, it is concealed; then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound; and it becomes greatly enlarged at the entrance of the bath, and causes great pain.
But if it is due to moisture, it is soft; then it does not become concealed when pressed with the hand, nor does it contract, nor does it increase in size.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs an abscess appears dark red on the side of the back.
But if it is due to flesh grown; then the abscess is heavy, large, hard, and fixed to a certain extent according to its quantity.
If it is due to wind; then when touched, it is soft.
And the treatment in that case is to consider then whether the protrusion of the umbilicus is due to blood from an artery or vein, or wind; then it is necessary to forbid treatment of it. For in that case there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I said abscesses due to an artery and vein.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia: then it is necessary that you command the patient, so that he holds his breath and stands extended and still. Then mark with the hot iron around the entire navel. Afterwards, order him to lie down on his back upon your hands. Then, with a broad spatula, circle around the navel in the area you have marked with the hot iron. Afterwards, stretch the middle part of the wound with a large hook. Then bind him around in a tight knot with thread or with a strong silk cord: and let the knot of the ligature be called an alexandrine.
Afterwards, open the extended middle part of the wound above the ligature. If you then find the hernia already captured by the ligature: then draw out the alexandrine, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine back towards the abdomen; and if you find a hernia, then take it with a hook and cut off its excess.
But if it is an artery or vein against you: then circle it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles and insert strong threads into them; and insert the two needles into the circle you have made around the wound in the shape of a cross, causing them to pierce it.
Then tie the wound in four places with the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles and let the rotten flesh extend: and let it fall off by itself; or cut it when it becomes soft and rots.
Then care for him with what is necessary from ointments, until he is healed.
If the protrusion of the navel is from a hernia in him or from moisture: then sink the wound as we have said. And draw out blood, or moisture, which you find in it.
Then take care of the place with it that it heals.
Chapter LIII.
Chapter on the treatment of CANCER.
We have already said in the division of the species of cancer, and how to treat it with medications; and we must beware of treating it with iron, lest it be ulcerated; and we have said that cancer is generated in the matrix, and we have given a warning about its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it can be eradicated; such as when cancer is in the breast, hip, or similar members, to extract all of it; especially when it is beginning small.
But if it has grown old and is large, do not approach it.
For I could not heal from it anyone; nor have I seen anyone before me who reached that.
And the operation on it, when it is placed as we have said, is to precede and dissolve a weak person from black choler several times. Then make phlebotomy of it if you find it with a clear swelling.
Then prepare the weak person with a preparation in which he is placed during the operation.
Then thrust the hook-like instruments into the cancer that suit it. Then hollow out the cancer from all sides with the skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots; and let the blood flow, but do not cut it quickly, rather squeeze the places, and remove the clotted blood completely with your hand, or as possible there with what instruments are available.
If however a flow of thick blood from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you; then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then care for yourself with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
On the treatment of Hydropisis.
Chapter LIV. We now describe the division of types of Hydropisis, and how water accumulates: and signs of each type, and its treatment with medications.
And that which is treated with iron, it is only the type of ascites alone: and it does not approach with iron the type of tympánitis: nor deeply the type of hypoascaris: for it is deadly.
If you have been treated for this type of hydropisis tympánitis with medications, and the treatment did not succeed: then consider. For if weakness has already come upon the sick person, or there is another illness in addition to hydropisis, such as cough or loose bowels, and similar ones: then beware of treating him with iron, for it is dangerous.
If you see the sick person exuding strength, and there is no illness other than hydropisis alone, and he is not a child nor an old man: then there is a way of operating on him, that you lift the sick man standing between your hands, and the attendant follows him and expresses his abdomen with his hand by pushing water to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a pointed sponge (spatiumile). It should have two pointed parts, long and having sharp tips like a spatiumile. However, it should contain something of shortness to prevent you from piercing through it into the intestine during the operation and damaging it.
Then observe. For if the hydropisis is generated from the intestines, then it is necessary that you extend with a section of about three fingers from the navel downwards along its upper part above the breastbone.
If, however, the generation of hydropisis is due to liver disease: then make your incision on the left side from the navel with three fingers.
And if its generation is due to the spleen, then let the incision be on the right side: and it is not necessary that there should also be an incision on the side towards which the sick person will lie, so that superfluities do not flow towards the weak place.
Then perforate the whole skin with an instrument. Then introduce yourself into that incision, and with the Spatula, slide your hand under the skin, as if you are scraping it: let the quantity that is scraped off be the size of a nail or about that.
Then perforate the Spatula until it reaches the empty place: and it is the place for water. Then remove it (the spleen), and introduce an instrument into the opening, which has this shape. And it is like a cannula: it is made of silver, copper or brass, smooth and polished; on its lower part there is a small hole, and on both sides there are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other: and the end of it is cut, in the manner of a reed incision, as you see; at the upper end of it is a loop.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then she immediately descends onto the instrument, therefore evacuate from the water a quantity of an hour.
Because if you evacuate more than is necessary from it, perhaps the sick person may die from the resolution of his animal spirit; or he may suffer a syncope that approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to its power, and according to what the dispositions of the sick person indicate to you from the power of his pulse, and from the goodness of it.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
This is because it is retained immediately on account of the skin which retains the hole that is on the spleen; about which I have told you to perforate it in this way.
Then on the second day, if you see that the patient can bear it, remove the instrument again and extract a small amount of fluid from water.
Keep it for several days without fear, and beware of error until there remains only a small amount in the water.
If you fear for the patient and let out much water, then care for him with warm sand, steam baths, sun and expect thirst, and care for him with the strongest medicines until he is cured. Then cauterize his stomach, spleen, and liver after removing the water, as I have described in what went before.
Chapter on the care of infants who are born where their bladders have not been pierced.
Chapter fifty.
When a child is born from the womb of his mother and the head of the afterbirth is not pierced or the opening is narrow or misplaced.
Therefore, it is necessary to pierce it immediately at the time of birth with a very sharp spatula in this manner.
Then place a fine nail made of lead into the opening and bind it; hold it for three or four days.
When he wishes to urinate, remove it (the nail) and mix it (with something). Then return it (the child) (to its mother's womb).
And if you do not put lead there, it is now possible that the urine that flows over the area will prevent the wound from closing.
The one whose opening is narrow, is treated with lead as we have said, for many days until it becomes wider.
Those in whom the opening is in a wrong place are injured. Because the opening is at the end of the tailbone of those who are born; therefore, it cannot urinate towards the front until it raises the tailbone with his hand to the higher parts. The generation is not in him, therefore, because the seed cannot reach the womb in a straight manner; and it is a very foul disease.
And the method of operation in that case is to make the sick one lie on his back. Then stretch out the head of the instrument with your left hand and make an incision at the place of the priapium, with a sharp or pointed tip, similar to cutting a reed or like rooting something, so that the middle part comes out like the head of the instrument; and let it fall through the hole in the middle as required.
And be careful during your operation to avoid bleeding. For this often occurs. Therefore oppose it with what causes the bleeding and take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter on Albather (swelling) that occurs in the foreskin and head of the penis, rotting, blackening, and sticking.
Chapter 65.
These Albathers often occur in the penis, and it is a swelling of foul flesh.
And from this one kind is malignant, and another is not malignant.
Therefore, the non-malignant one should be suspended with a fine hook and cut off, until it is thoroughly cleaned. Then place a warm cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment on it. Then take care of it with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.
If the Albather is malignant and of a foul color, then administer cautery after its incision and removal.
If the Albather is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and a part of the Albather is inside the foreskin and a part outside, then remove the Albather that is inside first, until it consolidates, and then take care of the outside; because when you treat it at the same time, the foreskin will not heal before it protrudes.
And it also happens in the testicles, and blackening and corruption of the prepuce. Therefore, it is necessary that you hollow out everything that has already blackened, and what is about to be corrupted or already is corrupted.
Then apply a linen cloth soaked with the pounded mixture of honey that has been beaten and wheat flour, as well as sieved grater-crumbs and crushed plants on top of it.
Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
If there should be bleeding, then apply a cautery with a lunar cautery according to this shape:
A cautery is useful for two situations simultaneously, namely for bleeding and wounds when they are damaged.
If the head of the probe is corroded and destroyed completely within an hour, then it is necessary that you insert a long, lead cannula into the urinary duct and let the sick person mix with it.
However, if the prepuce adheres to the head of the probe and this kind of adhesion does not occur except in someone whose prepuce is healthy and circumcision is not required: sometimes it occurs due to a wound or an abscess. Therefore, it is necessary to remove the adhesion with a blunt spatula (Spatumili) until the ligament dissolves and the head of the probe is released from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them exactly, then it is necessary to remove something from the head of the probe and the prepuce. This is because when the prepuce is thin, it may be pierced quickly due to its thinness.
Then separate the prepuce from the head of the probe with a fine linen cloth that has been soaked in cold water to prevent them from sticking again.
Then it shall be treated with wine of pitch, until it is consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
On the cleansing of infants, and their cure due to mistake happening to them.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity, like other wounds; however, since it comes from our operation, with our will, and its use is particularly in boys, it is necessary that we mark the operation as better in it, and guide the way to health more easily.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books; because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I have found that most craftsmen and phlebotomists use cleansing by cutting with a nail and forceps; they use alfecated, ligatured, and incised with the nail.
And indeed I have already tested all these methods, and have not found a better cleansing with forceps or ligature with thread.
Because in the cleansing with a nail, the skin often escapes. Because the foreskin has two layers of skin; therefore, perhaps the upper layer is cut, and the lower layer is torn; it is forced to incise again, and pain will occur. And when the cleansing that is made with alfecated, that is, with the finger, as shoemakers use, it is not cut off at the end of the male member; because perhaps it enters into its opening.
But in cleansing with the nail, perhaps iron enters, and ruins your operation; and indeed the skin of a boy is short by nature, and often such things occur that do not require cleansing; and I have seen this myself.
The experiment with forceps and ligature using thread was good to me, because the sharpness above is like the sharpness below, since the sharpness that is above is in proportion to the sharpness that is below. When you press your hand, the two sharpnesses correspond and cut according to one operation at once: and a compression is made in a similar shape, enclosing the skin of the branches from every side, so that no error occurs altogether.
The method of operation is that you make a guess, especially if it is from those who understand slightly, but you do not do it unless you tie the thread on the branch alone: and leave it until another day.
Then let him rejoice and be happy in every way as possible for you, because he receives his understanding from it. Then let him stand between your prepared hands of the appropriate size and let him not be sitting: and conceal the forceps in your hand or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his branch and blow on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the branch comes out. Then clean it yourself from that which adheres to it with dirt.
Then tie the marked place with double thread. Then bind below it a little bit more ligature. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligature well, and cut between two ligatures. Then peel off the skin quickly upward, and extract the head of the branch. Then let the blood run out gradually (it is better), and put powder on top of it: and place a cloth on top of it in which a lamb's wool that has been boiled in rose water, crushed with fresh good olive oil has been spread; and leave him on top of it until another day: and take care of him with the rest of the treatment, until he is healed.
The form of the forceps for excision is as follows.
The tips of the two ends should be concave, and they should meet: let no branch of the nail protrude into them; and let the length of the two points be equal to the length of the two handles evenly.
However, an error occurs during excision, because perhaps the entire inner skin escapes, or a part of it at the incision site.
Therefore, one should stretch it out from your hour with your nail before the excision of the place and cut it evenly.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with a tweezers and cut it.
If it passes three days and what is below the inflamed area remains swollen, then let that go until the swelling subsides and the abscess becomes soft; peel off the scab with ease, and cut it according to how it is prepared for you: and beware of the tip of the probe. For it will not harm him thus.
Therefore take care of it with that which consolidates the wound with the powders, which we mentioned in the treatment of powders; and if it is cut beyond the measure from the skin and goes to the top, it will not harm him even thus.
Therefore take care of it until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
Section on the extraction of a retained bladder in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder, comes from a blockage made of stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or born flesh, and similar things from what we said in the mode of treatment division.
And if the urine does not resolve and you see that its retention is due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary that he who is sick be laid flat on his knees. Then his feet should be placed on top of his back, and he should stretch out his abdomen from the upper part of his back, and he should tighten his breath as much as possible for him. So when the neck of the bladder is pressed toward the backside to expel the stone, urine will be released.
If it does not resolve as we said and the patient is very strong over the sick person: then it is necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called syringe, which has this form (S-shape). It should be made of silver, and be thin, soft, concave like a feather pen reed in fineness, long like the palm of one hand and half: the tip should have a fine cannula.
And the method of urine outlet through this is that you take a doubled thread, tie it at its end with wool or cotton, good ligature: and introduce the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut with scissors if there is any excess from the wool, but introduce forcefully into the cannula as one squeezes.
Then grease the syringe with oil or butter and white egg: and have the sick person sit on a chair, and warm the bladder, and his penis with moist oils and olive oil and warm water.
Then introduce the syringe into the penis gently until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then double it from above the part of the navel.
Then push the syringe into it until it reaches the bladder and feels weakened already approaching an empty place: this is not done according to this order, unless because the channel through which it goes has a twist in it.
Then stretch out thread with wool slowly. Wool follows flax.
Then pull it out and let the linen run through the urine way: then repeat the syringe, and do not stop doing that until the bladder is emptied, and a weakened alleviation is found.
§ On the quality of clysterization of the bladder with syringe.
Chapter LIX.
When there is an ulcer in the bladder or blood congeals in it or pus collects in it and it is necessary to distill water and medicines into it: then let it be done with the instrument called Clepshydra, and this is its form.
It is indeed mute, that is, closed. And in it there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other, as you can see.
The concave place where the thing that pushes is should be according to the quantity required for it without addition, until when something is pulled with it, it is attracted from humidities: and when it is pushed, with it it is expelled far away: this is how the clepshydra works, which shoots naphta, that is, Greek fire in the battles of Mars.
When it is desired to shoot humidities into the bladder, insert the end of the clepshydra into the humidity and pull with it what pushes upwards: because humidity is attracted into the concavity of the clepshydra.
Then insert its end into a rod, as we have said in a syringe. Then push moisture with it, for indeed the moisture immediately reaches the bladder and makes a weak person feel it.
Make a fine clyster for cleansing the bladder.
Make it from silver or gold; its head should resemble a syringe slightly, and below it there should be a cavity in which a cord can fall.
Then take the bladder of a sheep and place moisture within it for cleansing the bladder. Then tie it between two cavities with a strong thread, and heat the moisture slightly over fire.
Then insert the end of the clyster into a rod, then press your hand upon the bladder with moisture and pressure appropriate for cleansing until a weak person feels it, because the moisture has already reached the bladder.
If, however, the bladder is not present to you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it from every roundness. Then insert a strong thread into those holes, as they are rolled up. Then join the circle like glue; place on it what you wish from moisturizers, oils and waters.
Then tie it in the instrument; use it like you did with the bladder by squeezing with your hand until moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Chapter on Stone Extraction.
We have already said about the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys or bladder and its signs; we have also discussed surgery on stone with hand and section; this is a stone that is specifically generated in the bladder, it is held in a rod and I am explaining it with clear exposition and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that a stone formed in the bladder happens most often to children.
And among its symptoms is that the urine comes out from the bladder like water in its subtlety: and there appears in it white sand, and the sick person rubs his staff, and labors with it, and it hangs down often. Then the anus rises up and comes out together with it in many of them.
And the healing of children is easy until they reach fourteen years of age. It is difficult in old people. But in young men it is in the middle, because it is between that and its cure: and the healing is easier if the stone is larger; and if it is small, the cure is reversed for it.
When we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the sick person with an enema, which extracts all the feces that are in his intestines; for it sometimes prevents the detection of the stone during examination.
Then the sick person is to be received with his feet, shaken and moved towards the lower parts; so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder or jumps out from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands, and his hands should be under his buttocks, so that the bladder is completely lowered towards the lower parts.
Then inquire about him and touch him from outside.
If you feel a stone within the space, then approach immediately with cutting upon it.
If it does not fall down when touched completely, then you must push the index finger with oil from the left hand if the sick person is a child; or the middle finger if the young man is full; and insert it into his anus, and inquire about the stone, until it is under your finger; and turn it gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it towards the outside at the place where you wish to make the incision; and command the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and command another servant to extend the testicles with his right hand upwards; and with one hand, remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the part from the place where the incision is.
Then insert a spatula cutting (it), whose shape is as follows: And find (it) where it is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, towards the left side of the natives' (left); and make the incision over the stone (the kidney stone), and place your finger in the anus; and make the incision crosswise, so that the incision on the outside is broad, and the incision inside is narrow, according to the quantity, so that the outgoing of the Stone from this incision is not too large.
Perhaps the finger, which is in the anus, presses the stone at the incision, and comes out without difficulty.
And know that from the Stone are its angles and edges, why its outgoing is difficult on account of this.
And it is smooth, like a gland, and round; and the outgoing of it becomes easy.
To him who has angles and edges, add (the stone) to the crack (or fracture).
If it does not come out in this way, then you must fumigate (or cauterize) on top of it; or tie a ligature tightly around it, whose end is like the moon, which will squeeze the stone and not escape from it; or insert a subtle instrument beneath it with curved tips.
If you cannot do this (fumigate/cauterize) on top of it, then enlarge the opening slightly. If something stops you from doing so with blood, cut it off with a scissors.
If however the stone is greater than one, then press primarily on the large stone towards the bladder. Then cut above it. Afterwards, press a small one behind it; and similarly do if there are more than two.
If very large, then ignorance is that it separates from above by making a large cut. Since it happens that a patient dies from one of two things, either by dying or from frequent urine discharge; for this reason, the place does not heal completely.
But administer its expulsion until it comes out; or insert tools into the fracture with forceps until you extract it piece by piece.
When you have finished the operation, then fill the wound with turpentine, aloe, and dragon's blood; tie it up, and put over it a cloth soaked in olive oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water; to let the abscess settle warmly.
Then turn the patient onto his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. When you undress him, anoint the place with water and oil.
Then treat him with dymphneun ointment and basilicon ointment until he is healed.
If a hot abscess or one that corrodes occurs in the wound, and similar things happen; just as if blood congeals in the bladder and urine is prevented from coming out of it; and this is recognized by the expulsion of blood with urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood. For if it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder and its rotting.
Then clean the wound with vinegar, water and salt; and apply everything that agrees with its healing until it heals completely.
And it is necessary during the whole treatment that you tie together both thighs and gather them, because of the medicines that are placed on the place.
If the stone is small and it is in the penis sheath and it obstructs the urine flow, then cure it with what I mentioned before, before you reach incision. For many times you are exempted from incision by this treatment, now I have proved that.
And take a perforating iron from an anvil, whose shape is like this: triangular at the end and sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread, tie it with the penis under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the penis with ease, until the perforating reaches the stone; and turn the perforating by your hand slowly in the same stone; and press the perforation until you make it penetrate from the other side.
Therefore urine is discharged immediately.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outside part of the penis. It breaks and comes out with urine, and heals the sick one.
If this treatment is not prepared for you for some reason that prevents it; then tie a thread under the stone and another above the stone. Then cut above the stone on the same penis between the two ties. Then remove it. After that, loosen the ligament and wash off the congealed blood that forms on the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread under the stone unless to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and another thread above, unless when the thread is loosened after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place, covers the wound; and for this reason it is necessary that you do this when you tie the thread above, so that you lift the skin to the higher part, so that it returns at your convenience, and covers the wound, as we said.
De Lapide in Matrice: Si aliquis femina labitur
On the extraction of a woman's stone.
Videtur tamen ut quam plerumque sit hoc pervagare in venae matricis,
Sicut et in canibus, cum Lapis adveniat, hoc faciant. Fistulam faciant in vulva, et si invenerint Lapis, eicitur per fistulam, et fistula ferriatur, donec sanet. Si autem non invenerit, utrumque evacuab
Et si sic fuerit, bene est. Alius vero: quod mulier potest aliquando mori per laborem parturientis. Hoc autem non
Si etiam inuenieris aliquam mulierem qui fuerit partus et postea labuerit, et invenerit lapidem, curate eam: et si non potueris, utrumque evacuabis.
Et sic est curatio: Fistulam facies in vulva mulieris. Si invenerit lapidem, eicitur per fistulam, et fistula ferriatur donec sanet. Sin non invenerit, utrumque evacuabis.
Si autem acciderit alicui mulieri lapis advenire, postea difficilis est extrahere.
Et si aliquam inveneris, cura eam. Si quidem labuerit post partus, tunc curare debes.
Et si ista non potueris inuenire, inuenies ut medicum castus subtilis fuerit presentis: et faciet fistulam in vulua mulieris: et postea si invenerit lapidem, eicitur per fistulam, et eicitur aliquid in illud locum, ut lapis non retrocedat, et fistula ferriatur donec sanet. Si autem non invenerit, utrumque evacuabis.
Et si non invenerit, sicut diximus, curabis illam. Si uero labuerit postea partus, tunc curare debes, quod ex quo labuit postea partus fuerat, probabiliter est lapis, quia priusquam parueret, non poterat accidere lapis in matrice: unde necesse habet curari.
If therefore he finds it [the stone], seize it with his finger and then command the midwife to insert her finger into the weak vulva of the woman, and search for the stone, after she has placed her left hand on the bladder and compresses it with a good pressure.
If therefore he finds the stone, then he must carefully move it from the opening of the bladder towards lower parts with all his strength until it reaches the root of the hip bone.
Then it is to be cut at the opposite side of the midline of the vulva near the root of the hip bone, from whichever part it may be prepared for him and he feels the stone in that place; his finger should not be removed from the stone, but seizing it firmly; and the incision shall be small initially. Then introduce the ray upon that incision.
Then introduce the ray upon that incision. If he feels the stone, then let him add to the incision according to its proportional size which the stone exits from that place.
And know that there are many types of stones. For among these there is a small one, and large one, smooth and rough, long and round having branches.
Know its kind so that it may be indicated to you regarding what you desire about it.
If therefore the blood overcomes you, then add at that place a cauterizing agent and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your operation until the stone exits; and make sure that you prepare yourself with the instruments which I have mentioned for the removal of a stone in males, so that you can assist in your operation with them.
If the flow of blood overcomes you and you know that the bleeding is from an artery which has been cut; then place powder on the spot and tie it with a string tight enough for ligature; do not move it; and let the stone remain, and do not extract it yourself. Perhaps a weak woman will die. Then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood has subsided after days and the place has become rotten, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter LXII.
[Chapter Title] On the Section of a Watery Hernia.
A watery swelling is not anything other than an accumulation of moisture in the albino scrotum, which contains the egg: and it is called a scrotum.
And sometimes it is within its own pouch prepared for it by nature in the part of the egg, until it is thought to be ripe: which is another kind of egg and is the skin of the scrotum that we mentioned: and such a thing does not happen often.
The generation of this [swelling] comes from the weakness that happens to testicles, for this material flows towards them. And sometimes it happens due to a blow on the testicles.
This moisture has many colors. Indeed, the color of this [swelling] is either becoming yellowish, or red like blood, or dirty, black, or watery white: and such a thing is worse.
The signs by which it is known where the accumulation of water is, are these. For if it is in the white scrotum that we mentioned, then the abscess is round and slightly longer than an egg shape: and the testicle does not appear because moisture contains it from all sides.
And if the moisture is within its own pouch, then the abscess is round with a part of an egg shape: and for this reason the man dies because it is another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, then it falls under touch.
When the vision perceives the color of the moisture, then test it for the color of the moisture in an abscess with a probe square, whose shape has been mentioned before. According to what goes out in the tracks of the probe, judge about that which is within it.
When we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you order the weak man to be bled if possible for him, and see his body full.
Then it lies on its back upon a low table, and many cloths are placed beneath it.
Then you sit to the left of it, and order the servant to sit on its right, who will stretch out its arm to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the belly button.
Then take a broad spatula, and cut the skin of the testicles in half along its length, until near the pubis; and make the incision according to the straight line dividing the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white albugine enclosing it; and peel it off, or beware lest you cut into it; and your peeling should be from the side that hangs more with the egg; and examine with subtlety according to the quantity as much as possible.
Then pierce the albugine full of water through a large hole, and drain out all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with scissors, and stretch the albugine to above; and do not touch the skin of the testicles enclosing it; and cut the albugine in any way possible for you to cut it, either entirely or piecemeal, especially the delicate side. For if you do not examine carefully, in the incision of it there is no security that water will not return.
If the egg protrudes from its skin at the hour of your operation; then when you complete the incision of the albugine, return it. Then gather together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a stitch.
Then take care of it as other wounds, until it is healed.
If you find the egg corrupted by blackness elsewhere, then it is necessary to tie vessels, which are suspending, fearing blood flow.
Then remove the testicle with its suspending ligament, and extract the egg; afterwards take care of it as I have said.
If water is gathered in two parts, then you know that there are two branches; cut the other part equally as you have done on the other one.
And if it is even so that the operation becomes one, then do this: afterwards remove blood. And insert wool immersed in oil or in rose oil; and place another wool outside which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles, and look inside the abdomen; and put double cloths on top of them, and they are pillows; and tie them above with a ligament having six sections.
Then take two cloths, let them be scented with carmin, according to this likeness; and make the ends that are pressed with something from cotton, or wet wool; and bind them together in the loins; one end shall go over the anus up to the back, and the second shall go to the part of the neck; and two ends on both hips below, and two other ends on both groins; and bind everything together in the loins.
And at times this branch is artificially treated with a cautery in the place of the section using iron; and it is so that you take a sharp knife-like cautery and cut the skin of the testicles; and it is lit, as I have said; until when the bladder filled with water appears; then take the cautery, according to this form.
The letters are similar to Greek.
Then perforate with it that bladder, and it is lit until all the moisture comes out.
Then stretch the bladder with hooks, and scrape it with a sharp cautery that is lit, and cut it as much as possible for you, until you have removed all of it.
Do not let fire touch the egg.
And know that this operation is safer, more remote from bleeding, and better than an operation with incision.
If it happens to you at the time of incision or cautery, abscess, bleeding or something else: then it is necessary that you treat what it causes from this with the cure that suits it, according to what was mentioned before.
If the patient is fearful and does not await this operation on account of its horror: then perform perforation as I tell you, and it exists.
When you are informed by what I said about the significations, that a branch is watery: then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then perform perforation on the abscess in the lower part of it with a broad spatula: and place the perforation along the length of the body, and let the opening be wide, until the water runs out completely.
Then place a heated object on the spot and tie it up, and let it heal the remaining water: then cure it until the wound heals.
If the obstacle is to the outflow of water at the time when you perforate it, and it is not for any other reason because a white thread obstructs the opening of the wound and prevents the outflow of water: then it is necessary that you insert feather or instrument with which water from hydropic ulcers is extracted, whose shape has been mentioned earlier: or add in the operation on the wound some absorbent material.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or approximately those. When it accumulates, then you should purge it in the same way, and the patient will pass his days.
De caunditate operis quod vocatur rinotomia
On the care of Fleshy Roots [or Root-like Growths]
You should know that during the operation called rhinotomy, there is a risk of serious consequences in many configurations [or situations]. For this reason, it seems advisable to me to avoid it [the operation].
And I remember the operation and the appearance of the excised growths [or lesions].
I say that many growths occur in the body, from which the testicles are formed; this happens due to various causes [or reasons].
Or it is due to an excess of something sharp or acidic that flows towards the testicles. Or from a blow [or impact].\]   Caput LXIV.
And the color of the growth is similar to that of the body and it does not cause pain; it is a severe growth.
Perhaps it is a stone-like growth whose color is dark and there is no sensation in it [or from it].
Sometimes it occurs due to a knotting of the arteries and swelling of them [or its], as I have already mentioned; or from swelling of the veins.
That which is caused by swelling of the arteries can be known through the position of the growth, as when you press it with your fingers. And it is not necessary to touch it completely [or directly].\]   Caput LXV.
That which is made from swelling of veins, does not disperse anything under pressure with fingers.
It is now possible that on this kind a section may be made and on the rest of the flesh: and it is to make an incision in the skin of the testicles. Then stretch the egg upward and remove it along with its white membrane: and release the suspension from the bladder, and tie the bladder: and cut the suspension after you have removed it from all parts of the egg.
If therefore the egg is consolidated with those born flesh, then you must draw out the egg and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion between something from the sifaket or in that which is between the bladders: then it is necessary to release all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
But if there is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to cut all of it and draw out the egg, as we have said.
When your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine: then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter LXIIII (62nd Chapter).
Chapter on the Care of Branches, which is with Vine.
A vine is an abscess enclosed by some enclosure resembling a bunch of grapes with the softening of testicles; and it is difficult to move and exercise or walk on a weak person.
And in the treatment of this illness there is fear because of what happened before its memory.
But it is necessary to say that the operation on it should be done according to what the first ones did.
Therefore I say that you must make the weak one sit on a raised seat. Then push down on the sack supporting the testicles. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with forceps close by the rod: and let another servant hold it, and stretch it with a strong extension.
Then make an incision with a broad, sharp, crosswise cut in the direction of the vessels, until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape away from all sides, as I told you in the removal of arteries in the temples.
Then insert a needle with a double thread into them and tie it at the first places where knots occur; and tie it again at the end of these. Then cut it in a straight middle section along the body length, and draw out what has accumulated from foul, corrupted moisture.
Then care for the wound with treatment of other wounds where pus is being generated, so that the vessels nourishing one of the testicles fall away. For it is not bad in this way.
If, however, knots occur in all the vessels, then they must be drawn out because of this for the testicles along with the vessels: lest the nourishment of the egg is deprived due to the incision, and it rots or burns and is not a help with them.
Chapter LXV.
§ On the treatment of intestinal branches.
The outcome of this branch is from an incision which happens on the extended sifach above the abdomen in the groin area from the side of the abdomen.
Why do the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles? And this rupture is either from the sifach, or its extension.
These two types occur due to many causes: either from a blow, or a jump, or a loud noise, or heavy lifting, and similar things.
And the sign is when it is from extension of a fistula. It happens gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly; it is an abscess equal in depth to the turning (meaning, it protrudes from the skin): because a fistula presses on the intestine.
And the sign of it (meaning the fistula) when it is from incision of a fistula, because it causes intense pain suddenly at its beginning; and it is an abscess different (meaning, it appears under the skin near the surface); and that is due to the exit of intestine, and its course towards the exterior through the fistula.
And sometimes it comes out with the intestine; and this is called Intestinal Ramie (Ramex intestinalis) or "Zirbia"; and sometimes it happens with flatulence.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine with feces and is retained there; and in this case it is a danger to the sick, because it causes severe pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in treating this disease with iron there is fear; therefore one must be careful to avoid accidents in it.
The method of operation is that you instruct the sick person to reduce his intestine with his own hand into the concavity of its own depth, if he obeys. Then he lies on his back on his neck between your hands and raises his legs.
Then you stretch the skin that follows the skin upwards and cut the whole skin of the scrotum along its length. Then fix the two lips of the incision with hooks according to what you need for opening the incision with them; and the incision should be in accordance with its size, so that it is possible for the egg to come out from it.
Then scrape the fistula (sifach), and everything under the skin of the scrotum until the white of the fistula becomes hard all around; then insert your little finger into what follows the testicle, into where there is the white of the fistula, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the fistula and follow it, without any adhesion that is in the back part of the egg.
Then move with the right hand to the inner skin of the testicles; and as this is done, extend the white linen cloth upward with the left hand; and lift out the egg with the linen cloth to the part of the incision; and instruct the attendant to spread the egg upward; and you solve the adherence which is behind the complete solution.
And ask your fingers if there is nothing there from the intestine rolled up in the hard white linen cloth. If you find anything from it, then push it downward to the lower abdomen.
Then take the hook, in which there is a thick thread, made of linen from ten threads; and insert it at the end of the white linen cloth, that is to say, at the tunica, which follows the incision: on the skin of the testicles; then cut the ends that project from the thread until there are four threads. Then bind together some of them with a figure in the form of a cross; and tie it with the silk mentioned earlier, which is beneath the ligament of the testicles: so that no pus from those things that nourish them may pass to them: lest there be a hot abscess. And place the ligament again outside the first ligament, at a distance of more than two fingers from it. And after these two ligaments, let a piece of the silk, which is beneath the skin of the testicles, remain of the size of a finger; and cut the rest entirely in round form, and remove the egg from it.
Then cut at the lower part of the skin of the testicles with the incision from which blood and pus run, as we have said in that which has been mentioned before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and administer the ligament as we have said. And sometimes the white sifach is cauterized as we have said, after its incision, fearing blood flow. This sentence translates to: It often happens that... (The rest of the sentence is missing in your quote.) And release the ligament until it falls by itself.
If however the case persists, then it should be scorched with hot water: and place upon it what we have said until it falls.
Then take care of the wound with the treatment of wounds, until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Chapter on windy nose (or nasal congestion).
In this windy nose, I have not seen anyone who dared to treat it with iron.
And first they said that it happens as we have said in the windy nose which is with the grape vine. That is, to tie vessels after the section on it below with ease: then cut in the middle, and treat afterwards with what opens it up until the vessels fall out: and take care of the wound as we have said until it heals.
Chapter 67.
Chapter on rupture that happens in the groins.
When rupture occurs in the groins as we have said, and a place comes out, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, that is not enough, and it returns in all hours: but if it continues with this condition, a fissure is added in the sifach until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And it happens from the extension of the sifach, which is in the groins as we have said. That is, because the sifach extends: then it is softened, and the place is opened and comes out.
Its treatment is with cautery, as its narrative has preceded.
And sometimes it is cured with iron, according to this method: and there is, that the sick one lies on his back upon your hands. Then cut the place of the rupture of abscesses and prominences, with a cut along its width, according to the size of three fingers.
Then tie the algus (a kind of bandage) and, which are under the skin, until when it appears album (white matter) that is below the skin following it.
Then take the lancet and place it upon the prominent part from the album, and press it to the depth of the abdomen.
Then make two incisions upon the extremity of the radius (arm) from the album, and sew one of them with the other; then extract the extremity of the radius.
And do not cut the algus (bandage) at all, nor stretch it, nor anything else, as I told you in the treatment of intestinal branches (hernia).
Then treat that with the treatment for wounds. When therefore you cut the threads, clean it and restore the wound, until it is consolidated (healed).
For the sifach (another kind of bandage) contracts and no additional prominence of rupture is added.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
Chapter on the softening of scrotum skin (hydrocele).
The skin of the scrotum is often softened in some men, because meat that is between it becomes soft and its appearance is spoiled.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who asks for its treatment to make the sick man lie on his back and cut all the skin that has been softened over the natural skin.
Then gather the two flaps with stitches: and if you wish, remove three or four times the excess of softened skin with stitches, or a firm one.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then care for the healing of the remaining wounds until the thread falls out.
Head LXIX.
[Title: On Castration.]
You should know that castration is forbidden under our law; therefore, it would be permissible for me not to mention it in this book of mine. Its mention is only necessary for the sake of two methods.
One reason is that it should be known by the physician when he is asked about it; and so that he may know its treatment when it occurs.
The other reason is that we often need the castration of certain animals, for the sake of our benefits from it, such as sheep, hogs, cats, and similar animals.
I therefore say that castration is performed in two ways. Or by rubbing (attrition).\]   Aut per subtractionem Or by cutting and separating (fissure and section).
In the first (attrition), the method of operation is that we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and become limp and hang down. Then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
In the castration by cutting and separating (fissure and section), it is necessary that you hold the animal and press its scrotum with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligament and cut over all the egg (ovum) with one incision, until two eggs are revealed: then cut each of them after you have peeled off the skin and do not leave anything on it except a thin piece of membrane that is above the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one by rubbing (attrition), because rubbing may leave something from the testicles, for which reason the animal desires copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Head 70.
Chapter on the care of Hermaphrodites: two methods.
Hermaphroditus is from men according to two modes. One of them is because there appears in him what follows the space or in the skin of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles, the figure resembling a female vulva, in which hairs are present; and sometimes urine flows from it what is in the skin of the testicles.
In women there is a single kind, and it is the female's nipple on the forehead like a small man's testicle protruding to the exterior; of which one is like a man's Priapus, and two are like two male testicles.
The treatment of the three kinds, two from men, and one from women, is: because it is necessary to cut the added flesh until the impression of them escapes. Then treat these wounds by the treatment of other wounds.
However, in the second kind of men's, from which urine emerges, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment at all.
Chapter LXXI.
Chapter on Incising Tentiginis and Protruding Flesh in Women's Wounds.
A Tentigo may be added to what is natural, until it becomes obscene and unsightly; and sometimes it swells so much in some women that it expands like in men, and reaches intercourse.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold the excess of Tentigo with the hand, or with a hook, and cut it; and not to make deep cuts, especially at the root, so that bleeding does not occur.
Then treat this itself by the treatment of wounds, until it heals.
Flesh that arises is the flesh that is born in the opening of the matrix, until it fills it; and perhaps it emerges to the exterior like a tail; and because of this some call the illness tailed. Therefore, it is necessary to cut it as we cut Tentigo and heal it until it heals.
Chapter on the Alratic treatment, which is the female's nipple not pierced.
Chapter LXXII.
The artery (or vein) of a woman should be unbroken, or the opening should be small. It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to the preceding illness; and it itself occurs either from tissue born naturally added or subtle or thick; and it forms either in the depth of the womb or in its sides or above or below it; and it prevents coitus, impregnation, childbirth, and perhaps menstruation.
And the knowledge of this (condition) is obtained by the examination of an obstetrician, if the protrusion is visible nearby.
But if it is not visible, then search for it with your fingers or a probe.
If the protrusion is from subtle thick tissue and it is near two lips; then approach it and tear it off.
It is (also) to place small beads on top of two lips.
Then place the tips of both your hands simultaneously, and the woman should be on her back with extended legs. Then spread the two lips forcefully until the subtle thick tissue is torn and the protrusion is opened.
Then take thread and wet it with oil, place it on the site; and let the woman sit on it daily, so that the area does not harden from another cause.
If the thick tissue is large and thick; then it should be cut with a broad, flat instrument like a myrtle leaf.
If the protrusion is from tissue born naturally; then hang it with tweezers and cut it; and have medicines with you that stop blood flow without causing bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and pitch mixed with egg white.
Then administer a wide cannula made of lead to prevent the wound from hardening quickly, hold it for several days; and apply flax linen, then treat the rest with the usual treatment until it heals.
And when sometimes the birth in the womb occurs of flesh of other things: therefore it is necessary that they are to be cut according to this manner: while it is not a Cancerous aposteme, for a Cancerous aposteme, which is in the womb, there should be no opposition at all with iron.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athehelil and Bothor for red ones in women's ulcers.
Hemorrhoids indeed are the opening of the vein's orifices, until much blood constantly flows out of them.
When therefore hemorrhoids become chronic, they become piles: and I have already said regarding their division of their kinds and the signs of them; and here I will say what receives treatment from them, and what does not.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb and do not appear to the sense: then there is no treatment with iron for them.
But those which are on the opening of the womb above where the sensation falls upon them, are those which can be treated.
Therefore, it is necessary to introduce a woman into a cold house. Then extend Athehelil with forceps, or with rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then powder over them on the flow of blood from one incision without crushing: such as ashes of incense, and dragon's blood, and pitch, and similar to them.
Then push his feet against the wall at the hour of one. Then lay her down in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and pomegranate rind, and unripe lemons, and similar to them.
Then take barley flour, and knead it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on his back.
If therefore blood is cut with it, good; and if not, make to adhere winds (blow) on the back, and nipples, without incision.
Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of thistle, or the juice of argol, or the juice of wild olive leaves, that is, agalantha, Pontic wine, and make to adhere leech.
When therefore the abscess has ceased, then care for the place with ointments until it heals.
Albath, however, is red and resembles the heads of onions, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore it is necessary that you cut what appears from it, according to what I said in the onion, equally; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter LXXXIV.
§ On Perforation of a Dead Fetus in the Womb.
In the womb various species of abscesses occur, such as cancer, stone-like abscess, ulcers, adubelas, alekilas, that is, herpes, fistulae, hemorrhoids, ragadiae, thistle and hot abscess.
And I myself have already said all these diseases and their species, and the signs of them, and their cures, in division; it is necessary that I say in this treatise about hot abscess that occurs in the womb, which is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and you wish to know how its opening with iron is done.
Therefore consider it. Then if the pain of the abscess in its onset is sharp with striking and burning, and fever: and you see it redden; if it falls upon sensation, then do not hasten with its perforation; and care for it with what helps for maturation until when the sharpness of the symptoms subsides.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a bench which has two arms, and she should recline or lean upon her back, and gather her feet towards the lower part of her belly: and her hips should be expanded, and she should place her arms below her knees, and tie each one with a bandage suitable for that.
The midwife should then sit on the right side, and administer the tool for opening the matrix. (The matrix is another name for the womb.)
And it is necessary that when you are going to administer this tool, that you feel with a deep rod the depth of the woman's matrix: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the matrix, and does not harm the weak (woman).
If the instrument is too deep, then it is necessary that you place pillows on top of the depth of the woman's matrix: so that the entrance of the instrument is not all the way into the depth of the matrix: and it is necessary that you place a rebozo (a long narrow piece of cloth used as a shawl, or in this case probably referring to a twisting motion) on the upper side of the instrument: and that you hold the instrument and turn the rebozo around until the depth of the matrix opens.
When it appears that there is an imminent delivery, and it is touched with the hand, and it is soft and smooth: then it is necessary that she (the mother) moves herself towards her head with a broad spatula (a large flat tool).
When the pus comes out (from the birth canal), then it is necessary that you place a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, in which there is some styptic (a substance used to stop bleeding) on the wound: and place the linen cloth, and make an incision in the depth of the matrix.
And place outside on the matrix (the birth canal), and on the comb (a tool used to separate the birth passage) a clean wool cloth soaked in water in which wormwood has been boiled.
Then it should be treated with an appropriate ointment two days later, until it heals.
The matrix and the wound are sometimes cleansed, so that they are cleaned with water and honey; then, with water in which the root of the lily or long aristolochia has been boiled; then, it should return to an ointment.
If the wound is hidden within the matrix internally, then it is necessary to prohibit its treatment with iron; rather, it should be treated as previously said for division.
Chapter 70.
Doctrine of obstetrics, how to treat living embryos that have come out in an unnatural manner (in the form of a monster).
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first the shape of a normal birth.
Therefore, the signs of this [normal birth] are as follows: when you see a woman pressed toward the lower parts, and she desires to smell the air, and there is a fetal head felt above her [womb], and she quickly gives birth; then you will know that this delivery is in the natural form, and its exit is over the top of the head, and the posterior part with it; either suspended, or hanging from the navel.
If you see these signs, then it is necessary to press the womb so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends over its head, it will also descend the posterior part with it; and it should be cleaned from these excess fluids using good cleanliness.
But if it is other than this delivery, it is unnatural, inadmissible.
Because sometimes a fetus comes out with its feet first, and its body comes out before its head, and one of its feet or hands; or the head and one hand come out; or the navel comes out; and perhaps it turns over to its neck, and similar unnatural forms.
It is necessary therefore for the Obstetrician that he should be wise, skilled in all these matters, and let him beware of error and deception; and I am showing every figure from them, and how there is understanding in it, and it shall be signified by that, and it shall stand upon it.
When the fetus comes out upon its own head in its natural delivery, and it becomes strong upon the woman, and labor is difficult for her, and you see the power of hers already weakened: then make her sit on a chair, or women hold her; and warm up her belly with fennel decoction, and with moist oils.
Then the midwife introduces a small spatula between her fingers and finds the second finger, and cuts it with it, using her own nail, until what is within her due to moisture runs out; and press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be cleansed with fennel mucilage, with sesame oil.
Then order her after the cleansing, that she be pressed; and make her sneeze with a snuffbox, and hold her nose and her own for an hour. The fetus will come out immediately.
If two hands of the fetus come out first, it is necessary to reduce them gently little by little. If it does not obey in the entrance, then place the woman on a chair and lift up her feet; then strike the chair on the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall due to the blow.
If the hands do not come out and the fetus dies; then cut them and extract the remaining fetus; and tie her hand with cloth, and extract it equally; for he will come out himself.
Outcome of the embryo above its feet. When the fetus comes out above its feet, then it must be pushed up; afterwards, turn the fetus gradually; finally, lay him flat.
Then take one of its feet and stretch it gradually.
When they have come out up to the hips, then order him to be pressed and let him sneeze with his mouth open; for he will be born if God wills it.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then gradually withdraw the fetus until you place him in a natural position. For he will be born then with an easy delivery.
If it is forbidden as we have said: then take from the mastic tree resin and sesame oil, and soluble gum; crush all well in a mortar with good pounding; then anoint with it the woman's womb and below her belly. Then let her sit in warm water until she feels the afterpains.
When you see that the lower parts are now warmed, then give her a fumigation of myrrh and apply it. When one hour has passed, then let her sit on a chair. Then let her sneeze; and pinch her nose and mouth; and press the lower part of the belly with gentle pressure. For the child will be born immediately.
Outcome of the fetus above knees and hands. When it comes out in this manner, then order him to introduce his hands gradually. Then the woman lies on her back and let her feet hang down; and she herself lies on the bed and clasps her hands together. Then press gently on the abdomen of the woman. Then remove what is beneath his feet from the puluinaribus until it is prepared below. If the fetus does not come out, then grasp his feet and move them forcefully. Then press what is above the hypocondria gradually until the fetus ascends to higher places. Then insert your hands and feel the fetus gradually; and order the woman to press herself until the fetus comes out.
The fetus exits with a broad hanging from the hands. It must be reduced by means of the hand. If it cannot be reduced (by the hand), then lift the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then lay her on a bed and strike her legs forcefully.
Then apply the ointment you have prepared from mucilages.
If she receives the birth, then make her sit on a seat. Then strive for the reduction of the hand and feel the fetus according to its natural shape; and make the woman sneeze and order her to press herself until it comes out.
The fetus exits above its neck with spread hands, and its face is turned towards the back of its mother. The midwife must hold the hand of the fetus, then turn it gradually and feel it easily.
When it is felt, then place it on the oil and mucilages that I have mentioned.
Then order her to move it gently. When you have done this, then make her sit on a seat and order her to lean towards the right side. Then order her to press herself; and make her sneeze with force.
The outcome (of the surgery) is a preterm baby on the side. When the fetus descends to the opening of the womb in this manner with the presenting part (i.e., second twin or breech), then you should cut the presenting part with your nail until it is evacuated due to moisture.
If the fetus hangs with its face and neck, then you should make an incision from the navel to prevent it from being retained and dying.
Then push the fetus to the interior (to deliver it) until you place it in the correct position. And tell the woman to compress herself several times: for it will come out with an easy delivery.
Delivery of twins or multiple babies. Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three, and even four. However, this is unusual and rare.
But five is indeed beyond nature, and they do not live fully: it contains them, even though the second one binds them together with the cord connected to each of their navels. And they can be separated by cutting through the sifach, which distinguishes between them and connects them with a bond at their navels.
Sometimes they come out as a single fetus does in a natural delivery, easily. And sometimes they come out with an unnatural exit, as we have mentioned.
If some of them are difficult in childbirth and reach the conditions we have described as unnatural, then care for them as we have mentioned: let a skilled midwife be present, who performs with ease and slowness and takes every measure to help according to all possible shapes so that what is prepared may lead to their salvation.
Remembering that which forms in the womb from embryos and miscarries.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more than ten are formed in the womb and miscarry: I have already witnessed a woman who miscarried seven, and another fifteen, all fully formed.
What was done was measurement by the glorious wise one.
This whole matter should be in the science of obstetrics. Perhaps it will reach a similar one, therefore oppose it with what is needed.
Chapter LXXVI.
Chapter on the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus with what I said in the division from the medicine, and it does not come out, and you must perform an operation with your hand, then you should consider.
If the woman is of sound virtue and not with any accident from which her loss is feared: then she should be laid on her back on the bed, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised; and a servant should hold her from two sides, or tie her to the bed, so that her body is not pulled out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then the mouth of the womb should be moistened with oils, albumen of egg and linseed meal.
Then the obstetrician should anoint his hand with these oils and mucilages; then he should introduce it into the womb gently. Then he should ask her where a place is to be found for the hooks in the fetus, and places corresponding to it.
Therefore consider then if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its head; then fasten hooks in its eyes, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or under its beard, or in its armpits, or near the ribs, and under the breastplates.
If the descent is onto its feet, then on the chest and middle ribs.
And it is necessary that the hook be held with the right hand; and make a wound at the place between the fingers of the left hand; and introduce it gently with the hand, and fasten the hook in one of those places which we said, until it reaches an empty spot.
Then fix another hook or third one, if needed: so that the constriction is equal and it does not slip to one side.
Then extend the extension equally and not let it be just along a straight line but move it towards every direction in order to relieve its opening: as it is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And it must be softened that which is between [the hooks]. If a part remains stuck, then the midwife should bind certain fingers with oil and insert them from that side in order to turn it with them.
If a part of the fetus comes out then the hooks should be moved to another higher place: do this until the whole fetus comes out.
If a hand comes out before the others and cannot be retracted due to its swelling: then a cloth should be wound around it. Then remove [the hand] until when the whole one comes out, cut it at the junction of the foot or elbow: and thus you must do with the other hand and both feet.
If the fetal head is large, or if there is swelling in its delivery or water has gathered in its head: then a pointed spatula (Spatumile) should be inserted between the fingers and the head should be crushed and water extracted; or it should be broken with the instrument called Almisdac, whose shape comes with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
Similarly do so if the fetus is of large-headed nature: then it should be separated with an algengatum; or extract it with a misdach, as we said. Then pull out the bones with forceps.
If the head comes out and swells at the neck: then it is squeezed, until the moisture within the chest is released.
If it does not become complicated and does not obey towards the exit: then cut off the head piecemeal, as far as possible for you.
If it is below the abdomen [location of the wound] and is an abscess or contains hydrops: then it should be perforated, until the moisture runs out from it.
But if the fetus is above its feet, then its pulling is easy, and its direction towards the bone of the matrix is light.
But if it gets twisted in the abdomen or chest: then you should extract it along with the cloth that you have wrapped over your hand; and open the abdomen or chest, until what is inside runs out.
But if other limbs are removed and the head returns: then let the midwife insert her left hand. If the mouth of the matrix is open, then insert your hand deep into the matrix and search for the head with it and pull it towards you with your fingers up to the mouth of the matrix; then insert a hook or hooks and pull it along with them.
If the mouth of the matrix is twisted due to a hot abscess that has occurred to it: then it should not be pressed on it, but rather warm liquids and ointments should be administered; and apply plasters; and sit in water that softens and moistens.
If the fetus is on its side, it can be turned over; then administer what I have said for a live fetus.
If that cannot be done, then cut it piecemeal and extract it.
And you must not leave anything of the placenta inside at all.
When you complete your surgery, then administer what I have said for hot abscesses that occur in the matrix.
If bleeding occurs, then it should be let down into cold water, and administer the remaining treatment.
I myself have seen a woman, in whose womb a child had died; then she became pregnant again on top of that one, and another child also died. After a long time, a boil occurred on his navel, which became swollen until it was opened; and it began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called for his treatment, and he was treated for a long time; but the wound did not heal.
Therefore, I applied to him some strong adhesive plasters; and bone came out from the place. Then a few days passed, and another piece of bone came out. I was therefore amazed when there was no bone in the womb.
Therefore, you thought because the children who had died were of bones.
I therefore asked for the wound and extracted many bones from a woman who was in good condition; and she lived like this for a long time, and hardly discharged pus from the place.
I did not fix this foreign object here unless there was knowledge about it and assistance from the physician-artist in treatment.
Chapter LXXVII.
Chapter on the shapes of necessary instruments for extracting a child.
The form of the Spindle which opens the uterus.
Here below is the form of the Stricture Device, by which books are equalized, having equally two spindles at both ends of two pieces of wood. However, this Spindle should be more delicate than the Stricture Device: and it should be made either of Ebony or of Boxwood.
And the width of all the pieces should be like two fingers: and the edge of each one is like a single finger, and the length of each is a palm (hand) and half, or slightly less: and in the middle of two pieces there are two additional parts made of the same kind of wood, which have already been fixed to both ends, whose length is half a palm and a little more: and the width of either one is like two fingers or a little less.
And these two additional parts are inserted into the cavity of the matrix (womb), so that it opens when you rotate the two spindles.
Another form resembling this one, but more delicate and lighter.
It should be made of Ebony or Boxwood, similar to the form of forceps (tweezers). However, at its end there should be two additional parts as you see here above: and the length of each of the additional parts is like a palm: and the width of either one is like two fingers.
When you wish to open the uterus with it, then make the woman sit on the bed with her feet hanging down, with what is between her thighs opened. Then insert these two connected additional parts into the uterus: and you are holding the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument in the same way as you do with forceps, equally according to the amount that you wish from the opening of the mouth of the uterus, until the midwife does whatever she wants.
Form of Dizziness other than what the ancients called Form of Forced Delivery, by which is delivered the fetus.
Forma of Misdelivery, by which a large head is crushed: and it resembles a pair of forceps, having teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it occurs in the shape of a long forceps as you see, having teeth like those of a saw, by which it is cut and crushed.
Form of a Shears having one spine.
Form of a Shears having two spines.
Form of Spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
Form of two wider Spatulas.
These instruments are used in all cases, and the more their number and types multiply, the quicker they are for use by an artist, and the higher among men, because of their quantity.
Therefore do not neglect that an instrument is prepared by you. For it is indeed essential for their use.
Chapter LXXVIII:
Chapter on the Second Extraction (Cesarean section).
When the Afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary to instruct the weak woman to retain her breath. Then make her sneeze with powder and press your hand over her mouth and her nose. If it comes out through this way, it is good.
If not: then take a pot, and make a hole in the cover; place within it herbs opening the womb, such as camomile, rue, anise, fennel, hartshorn, wood-sorrel, centaury; take all these herbs, or some of them, and immerse them in water, and put them over fire.
Then place a plug of reeds over the hole of the pot's cover and another end into the womb; hold it until the vapor reaches the cavity of the womb.
Then make her sneeze again, as I have said. The afterbirth will come out easily.
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then order the midwife to immerse her hand in sesame oil or althea mucilage. Then she will insert her finger and seek for the afterbirth. When she finds it, then take it and gradually pull it out.
If it is attached deeply in the womb, then insert the hand as I have said, until when she finds the afterbirth and pulls it out gradually along with its right and left side; this must be done without falling from the strong pull: indeed, it should be rotated easily to the right and left sides; afterwards, add more to the force of the pull. It will then obey and be preserved, and come out from the attachment.
If the bone of the matrix is dislocated, as we have already narrated: treat it with stimulation (or shaking) and with a remedy from an earthenware pot with herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have mentioned, then be careful not to tire yourself by repeatedly attempting extraction.
However, whatever comes out from the matrix bone towards the woman's hip, tie it up (or bind it). Then cleanse her with a four-drug ointment (a mixture of olive oil, castoreum, rose oil and galbanum). For in a few days it will rot her, dissolve, and come out.
However, when it begins to rot, let it be raised from her towards the stomach and head, and it will harm the already weakened part. Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be administered for this purpose.
Some of the ancients have already tried fumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used for fumigation during retention (or delayed delivery) of a second child or menstruation.
Make it similar to an alca, or from a jar; place the broad end over the fire; position the fumigation on plums; hold it there until the fumigation is consumed; then repeat another one.
Chapter LXXIX.
Chapter on the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born with unperforated anuses, which have been cauterized by a sharp scalpel (a surgical tool used for circumcision). The obstetrician must therefore pierce it with his finger; and if not, he should pierce it with a sharp spatula; and let him be careful not to touch the muscle.
Then place warm linen soaked in wine and oil upon it. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
If one fears it may close up again, then place a leaden tube in the opening and remove it when the child wants to be born.
And now it happens that anus closes, even from consolidation of the wound or abscess. Therefore, one must remove that consolidation, and then treat it as we have said with lead.
Chapter 80.
Chapter on the treatment of fistulas occurring in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are nodation and swelling that occur near the external anus; or in the space of one part; and it is a single fistula or multiple fistulas.
When that nodation has matured, it opens and watery white fluid or thin pus flows out of it.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate. Therefore, penetrating fistulas are recognized by what comes out through defecation and wind when the sick person uses the toilet; and possibly a worm may come out of them.
And there are fistulas when they penetrate into the space as far as the bladder and as far as the root of the penis. And there are fistulas that penetrate to the junction of the hips and to the sacral node.
From this it is recognized that the penetrating fistula reaches the anus; and even if it does not penetrate, it is to introduce your index finger into the anus; and insert a probe made of copper or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
If there is a curvature in it, then insert into it a fine probe made of lead, or a hair from horse's mane, until you feel the probe, or a hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it fully nor does anything come out of the incision nor pus nor worms as I said, then you will know that it is non-penetrating; therefore approach for treatment.
And when a fistula is penetrating to the bladder or the urinary meatus, its signification is the discharge of urine from it; and the prevention of this is by the consolidation of the place with medicines.
But if it penetrates to the juncture of the hip or the hip bone, its sign is that the probe reaches there if there is no curvature up to the bone; and the finding of pain around the part, and that pus always discharges from it; and that medication does not work in it nor does the place consolidate with ointment.
And in all penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all; and the cure for them is labor and futility to one who is foolish about it.
But in the one that is non-penetrating and not old, healing is hoped for with a knife; according to what I tell you, and I have already proven it; and it is, as lying weak on your hands upon its back, and its legs lifted up above the hips of itself, and the hips are inclined towards the belly of itself. Then insert a probe made of lead or copper if there is curvature in the fistula, until you know where the probe has reached.
But if a sick person feels it around the anus, then you should insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel that a thing has already begun to penetrate your finger by itself, which you perceive to be between your finger and the flesh, then certainly you will know it is penetrating; do not then labor on it, because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
They say that the flesh heals in some people and that the remedy expected for it is to heat a thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been mentioned before, and then to introduce the heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches the anus. Then repeat this twice or thrice until you know that all the added flesh near the fistula, which is similar to a bird's feather pen, has been burnt away.
Then cover the burned flesh with linen strips soaked in butter until the burnt flesh comes out; then cover it with ointments that promote healing and consolidate the flesh.
If it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
If it comes out and does not reach your finger that is in the anus, and there is a thick membrane of flesh or sifac between it and the fistula; and you see that the fistula follows the skin surface which follows after; then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and while cutting with the fistula, you go cutting as far as the tip of the fistula until the cutting reaches where the tip of the fistula ends, and the fistula is released and falls off.
Then clean the burnt flesh that is similar to a bird's feather pen, so that nothing remains from it.
If blood overwhelms you and it dissolves between you and your operation, so that the flesh separates; then it is better to cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Since the cautery with fire brings good habits to it, burning of those added tissues, and the removal of blood and draining of moistness are added to it.
Then, for treatment, the linens are rolled up in butter or boiled cabbages until the place releases pus, and the burnt tissues emerge in the pus.
Then, for wound treatment with hardening ointments that cause firm flesh; there are medications consisting of styptic and drying agents.
For when it is healed, then it is cured; do not fear repetition.
If the fistula has already reached deep into the anus and it is extended from the body; then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
If you feel a thickening between you and her, and there is a membrane from the sheep's bladder or flesh, and it is close to penetration; then there is no operation on this unless through faith and hope.
This is because a single method is administered in it: either to cauterize her as we said; or to excise it until you reach its hollow, so that it is possible for you to insert linens and cure it from the inside. And do not proceed much with the excision, so as not to cut the muscles holding the anus, and there may be an unfortunate outcome of defecation without will. Then, for treatment, do as we said.
Perhaps it will heal; or you remove the membrane itself, and clean it after cutting it up to near the anus, as we said, either with a thickening or with another sharp tool. Then, clean those tissues filtered during the excision as much as you can with examination.
Then attempt the restoration of the entire wound with a section, and at the superior part where it solidifies; and a fistula remains open in the interior part of the anus, and it will be easier on the weak.
And sometimes a fistula is drained in this manner; and it occurs when you insert a probe into the fistula, which is on the side of the anus near the body surface with skin and anus margin; then take a probe with a perforated end, which resembles an awl (aleskef), prepared from calfskin, in this shape. And insert into it a thread wound from five strands, and around that. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its hollowed part.
If the thread penetrates the internal anus margin, then pull out the thread from that hole; so that you insert your finger into the anus and pull out the end of the thread, and gather both ends together; tie each one separately and let it be for one or two days; and as much as the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well until the tissues between the two ends of the thread fall off and drop; then care for the wound until it solidifies and heals.
But if the fistula opening is not penetrating; then make it penetrate however you prepare it, except if it goes too deep. For you do not have the skill to do that without cutting it (the fistula).
Then do as I said until it heals.
The shape of the spatulate needle used for draining a fistula whose sharpness is very acute on one side and the other side is not acute, so as not to cut what is unnecessary, as you can see.
Head, LXXXI (81st entry)
§ On the suture of hemorrhoids from which blood flows upon their incision; and care for fissures (cracks in anus).
Piles are of two kinds. Either they are inside the anus, like bladder stones or cherries; or they are themselves like the seeds of a pomegranate. Some are small and others large; blood comes out from them always, some are single, and there are many. They are outside the anus and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are mostly dry, from which citrus juice or a little blood runs continuously; and they are in color like the body.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to advise the sick man to take a laxative; and they are squeezed out, until the anus appears, and they appear to you. Therefore, hang them with hooks; or hold them with your nail. Then cut them off at their roots.
If they cannot be held in place with hooks due to their moisture and softness, then take them with rough cloth or a glove made of double wool, and remove them with your fingers. Then cut them, and sprinkle warm powders on the cuts to help stop the bleeding. Or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization. Then care for them with the remaining treatment until they heal.
If the anus does not respond to emptying, then give the sick man a mild enema with which to cleanse what is in the anus, so that it will quickly obey emptying when he is squeezed.
If the piles are outside the anus, then their condition is light and easy; it is to take them with your nail or with a hook, and cut them off. Then care for them as I said, until they are healed.
And if it is necessary to avoid incision with iron, then suture them in this manner. Take a thread wrapped around, and introduce it into the point. Then bring out the hernia upwards, and make it penetrate with the point into the root on the other side: wrap two ends of the thread around the point of the needle, and let them be wide: and tie the hernia tightly with a strong stitch. Then tie the thread, and draw out the needle.
Do this with all hernias, and let one of them go free; do not sew it up, so as to avoid an excess of bleeding.
Then place a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch over the anus, and put it on the anus: and tell the patient to rest. Then let him go until he faints.
When hernias fall down, care for them with ointments and the rest of the treatment, until they are healed.
Chapter on treating fissures. For they often occur due to the drying out of feces and constriction by nature.
When they become old and medicine is of no use for them: then it is necessary to shave them with a spatula or with your nail, until they become moist and the upper skin which prevents their healing is removed. Then care for them until they heal as required.
If they do not heal: then shave them more vigorously than the first time, until they bleed a lot, and after that care for them until they are healed.
Chapter on the treatment of hemorrhoids, both internal and external, and hernias and worms.
Head, LXXXII.
Know that Almirmar is not other than a round knot similar to the head of a nail: and it forms throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers, and it happens that pain occurs during walking.
Therefore, it must be cut off which is around the nail head, and it should be held with forceps or with a hook, and it should be pulled out from its root.
Then care for that [area] and if you wish, cauterize it according to what was mentioned in the previous chapter.
An excrescence, however, one is a small eminence that is rough, filtered, rounded above the surface of the body. And it frequently occurs in children's hands.
Its treatment is to stretch the excrescence and cut it; or tie it with silk thread; or with hair until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or a sharp medicine as mentioned before; and now the excrescences that grow inward and not outward can be removed with an instrument I will mention later.
Formica is also a small, rough excrescence that is thick and projecting above the surface of the body, penetrating deeply: and when cold is found in it, it feels like a bite by an ant, and it occurs throughout the body; and it most frequently occurs in hands.
Its treatment is to take a reed from the goose's feather or strong vulture's feather; and place the reed on the Formica until it forms a circle around its parts. Then rotate your hand with the reed until it cuts what is around the Formica; and place it deep into the flesh, and remove the Formica from its root.
And if you wish, do it with an air or iron cannula in this shape.
The upper part of the cannula should be pulled up to its limit, wrapping around the deaf ear so that it may be held onto and turned (the cannula).
And if you wish to cauterize a scabies, do it as described for the cauterizing of Athil's ear in the chapter on cauteries.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Chapter on the shapes of instruments used for enemas in diseases of the anus, and for the solution of the stomach, and for colic.
When an enema is made of silver, or of gold, or of molten copper, or of beaten copper.
And sometimes it is made small, and large, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore that which is administered for the cure of small children should be small; and for those with weak or painful anuses, so also their enemas.
Large enema.
The upper part of the cannula, that is, where it is tied to the uterus, should be wide according to this method; and there should be a distinction so that it may be tied to the uterus as you see, and the lower end which enters into the anus, should be deaf, that is, not open, soft, very fine, pulling to fineness; and in one side of its there should be two holes, and in the other side one hole.
And the size of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays, and not too thick, and the uterus in which medicines are placed should be from an animal's bladder; or from a sheep's skin, which should be small like an ass's foot; whose root should be one palm.
And it should be perforated with many holes as it is turned, and the space between each hole should be the thickness of a finger. Then introduce into those holes a thread, preferably from a raw cord, which should be one of ten cords or about the same, and tie it up with it like an asafetida bag. When this is placed within the uterus, a clyster (enema) is to be tied off at the top with strong constriction between two distinct points. Then perform a clysterization with it.
And this is the circle shape (diagram) depicted here, and of the holes.
The quality of performing a clyster with it is: to fill the uterus or bladder with a medicine that has been heated according to the capacity of the patient's tolerance, and be careful that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then the patient lies on his back, and lifts his legs towards the top; and place beneath him a blanket, that is, leather or cloth upon which people lie.
Then anoint the end of the clyster with oil, or with white goose fat, or with slippery elm gum, or similar substances. Then introduce it (the clyster) into the anus with ease. Then let the servant take hold of the uterus with both hands and squeeze it forcefully until all that is in the clyster passes into the intestines.
Then remove the clyster and the patient lifts his legs towards the side of the bed.
If the medicine forces him to evacuate, then hold it as much as possible. And if he sleeps with it throughout the night, it is more effective in healing.
If you perform a clyster on him for diseases of the bowels and his evacuation is hastened, then repeat the clyster until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or raw ulcers in the anus, then make the clyster very fine and gentle, like those used to clysterize children.
And this should be the form of a subtle suppository that is applied on tight skin.
Chapter LXXXIIII.
I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds that it was fitting for a book, and here I will say their treatment with hand, and with medicines according to completion.
Therefore, wounds are distinguished according to the kind of injury they are and according to the place where the wound falls.
Therefore, as for the kinds of wounds, they are like the blow of a stone: either a cut by a sword or knife: or a strike with a lance, wood, or arrow: and similar to these things from many other objects.
Wounds that are made according to the parts of the body are like a wound that falls on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, or back; and similar to these members.
And I am telling the treatments of some wounds, so that I may place this reasoning and rule for the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the reminder of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore. When a simple head wound occurs and there is no bone fracture, consider then if it was from a blow of a stone or similar, and only the skin has been broken, and the wound is large, and you fear impending abscess from hot suppuration: then hurry, and immediately apply a phlebotomy of the head: do not delay this: and extract as much of it as its virtue allows, if nothing prevents phlebotomy, especially if the blood that flows from the wound is scant. And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the sick person avoid filling himself with food and drink, and heavy meals.
But if something prevents reduction, then let him reduce from food, and avoid meat and wine.
Place hot poultice made of cooked linseed soaked in rose oil alone, or with wine containing resin (mastic), upon the ulna if it happens to have a hot abscess.
If you are free from the hot abscess, then place upon the ulna if it is fresh with its own blood and has not changed air, later I will tell you about the powder; and if already the air has changed for it, then place some unguents on it until it heals.
If the ulna is large or from a sword cut and similar ones: and if its edges are not gathered together by blisters, then gather it with suture, as I will tell you about suturing of wounds in the abdomen.
If the ulna has already been exposed from bone and hangs without retention except for a small suspension, then cut it. Then care for the ulna with medicines and restore firm flesh to its place instead of skin, and instruct the sick man to eat foods with thickness such as heads (of animals) and cooked wheat until it is soft; and similar things.
If you find putrefaction on the skin that is not adhering to the bone, then cut out the entire putrefied part and throw it away; then care for that.
If, however, in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and it does not separate with the medications, then seek above the artery. If you find it not cut, then cut it with a spatula or tie it. If necessity requires it and the remedies we have mentioned do not work, then cauterize (it) until the blood separates.
If these wounds are small and simple, their outcome is easy and light; therefore, apply this powder to them, as it solidifies them before the air changes.
Method for the cauterization of a tumor. Recipe one part of olibanum, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburnt lime: grind it all very well, and sieve it: fill the wound with it and apply a good pressure until it adheres well to the top, and let it coagulate with blood.
Then tie it on top with small cords, and leave it untouched until it does not separate. For the medicine will not be uprooted from him until he is healed.
And sometimes lime alone does this when there is no olibanum and dragon's blood available to you in the present. The same operation also works with many large wounds when it should be placed on them and tied, and the wounds are fresh with their own blood which has not been altered by air.
If the air has altered it in some way, especially when it is in summertime, then there is no purpose to this powder: cure it with what we have said, so that you place some digestive ointments on it or place over it poultices made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until it emits pus. Then cure the rest in the usual manner until they are healed.
If a fracture occurs with the wound in bone and it is small, then extract it with trephine (Gesti): and I will now speak about the treatment of skull fractures in the future.
On neck wounds.
If a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple skull wound.
If the nerve or artery in the neck has been cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no artificice except to suspend its treatment until it recovers strength, like in case of zygias and zeges, and similar ones. Because they harm nerves, and they contract them.
And do not place anything cold directly on the wound at all: because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is above the limbs; let it be remedied with soft medicines such as lime mixed with sweet water several times infused with oil, or with rose oil, or with pitch, when it is washed even with sweet water; and other mineral stones, and unguents in this manner, and ointments that are moist.
If the wound is large, then administer suture; or the edges of it with threads and fibers. Then take care of it until it heals.
If the wound has depth or if a cavity occurs in its lower part, where already pus gathers, then pierce it more deeply at a lower location in it.
If an artery has already been cut in the wound and its blood flow is flowing out: then separate or sever it, and tie it; or cauterize it if there is a need for that.
If the trachea has already been pierced, either completely or partially, and the lungs have been saved: then gather the skin flaps with suture over the neck of the trachea, and do not touch the trachea, but sew it up, and reduce it to its natural shape. Then sew it up tightly with a suitable stitch, and let it heal for several days. Then take care of it with ointments containing styptic and astringent properties, until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then probe it; if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of them or as many as you can; and what cannot be prepared, leave it alone until the wound rots, separates, and purges its discharge.
If a wound is recent, then sprinkle powder upon it, as I have told. If it appears that bone is visible in the wound, and a fistula forms: then treat it with the method described in its respective chapter.
Chapter on Wounds Treated with Spatulas.
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and its depth can be seen, then examine it. If a windy discharge comes from the wound when someone who is sick is breathing heavily, then you know that the wound is fatal.
If the depth is not apparent, and it is a recent wound with its own blood, then do not apply powder to it from the first hour, nor press it so that the blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart and kill the sick person: instead, put on it an attracting ointment, and dissolve it twice a day.
If the ointment is not available to you, then put in the opening of the wound an old piece of cotton, so that it absorbs what comes out from it due to moistness: and make the sick person sleep on the wound, so that it heals as it accumulates in it.
If already three days or more have passed since the wound occurred, and no spasm occurs in the sick person, nor a bad heart tremor, nor a narrowing of breathing, and you see good indications of recovery: then know that the wound is well. Treat it with linen cloths, and the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
If healing does not occur, and it always opens up, then know that a fistula has formed. Treat it from its respective chapter.
If the wound is from an incision by a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with that which came before in stitching, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
If however he has already made an impression on the bone and cut off fragments from it: then examine the wound, and hasten to extract those fragments, if they are separate. If however they are not separated, then leave them alone until the wound rots, for the extraction of them will be easier when it has rotted.
As for other wounds on other members, the judgement in their cure is the same as we said.
Chapter on Wounds of the Abdomen, and the Exit of the Intestines, and Their Removal.
Rupture which happens in the abdomen is great, middle, or small.
Therefore from a great rupture sometimes the intestine or number of intestines comes out.
Thus it requires insertion [of them], and their suture is more violent and difficult.
And a small rupture also occurs in another way [difficultly]. Therefore it will be more difficult to reduce [them] if you do not hurry in inserting them to their place immediately: because it swells, opens, and becomes enlarged; therefore the entrance is made difficult.
For this reason it is better to make a middle rupture because the reduction of the intestine is not difficult with it, as it is in these two cases [great and small ruptures].
Know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four modes.
Two common sutures come together in the suture of the abdomen and in the suture of other wounds of the body; and two other sutures communicate with the remaining wounds. However, they are more proper to the suture of the abdomen; and I tell you one by one with their explanation and declaration.
Therefore I say that if the wound is small and something from the intestine comes out of it and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is according to one of two modes. Because of the smallness of the rupture, as we said; Or because there is an inflation in the intestine due to the cold of air.
When therefore that is so, then it is necessary that you heat it, so that you immerse a sponge or wet cloth in warm water alone. Or boil in water squill, cyperus, cumin, and wormwood with it, until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes it does that wine in which there is stipulation; and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflation.
When therefore you see that the inflation is already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which artemisia has been boiled, or with wormwood. For by this it is healed the entrance of it with a small opening.
If however there is an extrusion of it after this treatment, then sew up the rupture with a little, with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared, than cutting; and it is not forced to cut after necessity and lack of instruments.
Let one part of it be twisted, sharp, and another part not sharp; and the end should not be subtle with the subtlety of a needle, but rather slightly blunt; and that resembles a sheath, as you see.
When therefore the wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it is necessary that the return of it should be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible above it; because it is better.
When however the rupture is large in the lower part of the abdomen; then it is necessary that you make the sick person lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen; then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly, if there is a rupture in one of two parts of the stomach, then place your intention and always consider this: that the part containing the wound should be higher than the other part.
And it must be done for large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
For small wounds, do that which is prepared for you.
Then make it so that a faithful servant, who will hold the rupture with his whole hand, is present among your hands. And gather his lips. Then take something for the one who follows to sew with, a little after a little. And this is the common method of suturing one.
It is that you should take a needle or a number of needles according to the size of the wound. Then release from the end of the rupture the width of a finger ring, that is, of the doctor. And sew the needle one over what you insert the thread into it at both ends of the skin, as well as both ends of the sifac which is beneath the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from the other side. And you have already gathered the two ends of the skin, and the two ends of the sifac. And there are four rows.
Then sew with double thread around the needle several times from both parts at once, until the two lips of the wound are gathered together with proper closure.
Then release the thickness of a finger and sew another needle into it. Afterwards draw it straight with thread, as you did with the first needle. Therefore do not cease to do that with the one you need from the needles until you complete the closure of the entire wound.
And let the needles be of medium thickness between coarseness and fineness because fine needles deeply cut the flesh, and coarse ones are difficult to enter the skin. Therefore it is necessary for them to be of medium thickness in both fineness and coarseness.
It is not proper that the needle be fashioned in two extremities of the skin closely joined: so that the flesh is not cut quickly, and the wound is opened before its consolidation, and even when sutured, they should not be stretched out, so that the wound is prevented from consolidating.
Then cut the end of the needle, so that it does not harm the weak person during sleep; and place threads from cloth all around, which hold the ends of the needle; and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of sewing with needles in this manner is more appropriate for small wounds. Because one or two needles, or about that number, are sufficient for their sewing (i.e., the stitches).
The second common sewing is when you gather with the stitching the edges of four: the edges of two skins and the edges of two sifac in place of one, with the needle containing the thread wound evenly in fineness and coarseness.
Then, when you penetrate with the needle these four edges, pull back the needle from the side where you started, so that the thread fixed above the wound falls out: so that the stitching is like the sewing of cloth where the cloth is sewn together, and place between every stitch a quantity equal to the thickness of a little finger.
This kind of stitching is known by men.
And with this stitching I sewed my own wound that happened to me in the belly of a man who had been wounded with a knife, and the wound was larger than one palm; and about two palms had come out from the intestines from the middle intestine, and the tear was in the middle of the belly.
I therefore brought it back after his intestines had remained outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound has been consolidated about fifteen days hence: and I healed it, and it became healthy: and he lived for many years afterwards, having returned to his accustomed ways.
And the physicians had judged that it would not heal.
And it was a miracle that I did not heal it with ointment. Because I was in a place where no ointment could be found nor any medicine. Therefore I placed hot mustard on the wound twice a day, and attended to its cleaning with water and honey until it healed.
I shall now describe two types of stitches according to the story's account.
And it begins with a sharp stitch: and you insert the needle from outside to inside.
When the needle penetrates the skin and follows the length and breadth of the entire body: release the tip at the side where you inserted the needle, and let it pierce another end from the inside to outside at the opposite extreme.
And when you have made it penetrate, then let it pierce again in the same side from outside to inside: and release the tip where you released it before, and let the needle pierce another end from the inside to outside at the opposite extreme: and let it pierce together with your previous penetration, until it reaches the entire thing.
Then begin again from this same side, and take out the stitch with its opposite end, which is on the other side of the skin that it penetrated.
Then bring it back into the skin and take out its opposite end with this end: and take out from the skin the end that was on the other side of it, and do so alternately until you have extracted the entire stitch according to this example.
The final stitch of this suture is to sew together the skin layers in such a way that one side of one end of the skin is sewn with one stitch; and to leave the other side with the other end, until it is complete.
The second type of suture mentioned by Galen.
This discourse was narrated to be similar to the way some physicians perform it, as they gather all parts that are naturally connected and bring together their corresponding ends; and apply one end to the other's corresponding end, and the edge (mirach) of one to the other's edge. And this is done as I told you.
You should make an incision at the edge (mirach) near you from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the interior only; and leave the two ends of the skin. Then turn the incision, and make it penetrate from the outer part to the interior through both ends of the skin, on either side.
Then turn both and make both penetrate from the inner part to the outer through two edges on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common easy one, and it is the suture of which the previous mention has been made.
Therefore, this is also a discourse by Galen.
And some have said. The abdominal suture is repaired with two incisions (acubus). To insert one thread into each of them: and begin with the incision of the needle, from what is near you, and make it penetrate to the other side, following the suture of those who are equal in thickness (coria).
And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of this place is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of medication for a wound is the judgment of other wounds.
When you have a new wound with its blood, before it changes due to air: and you reduce the intestine, and clean it, and prepare it: then place it on a powder of meat.
If the air has already changed the wound: then place on it certain ointments that you have present, so that it produces pus: and let them fall off, and be bound up with lint and myrrh. Then care for it as the care for other wounds, until it heals.
If there are no medications present for you, then immediately place on it a hot, old cloth that begins to emit pus: and change it twice a day as I have taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need other medications when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound may communicate with the principal members in injury, then it is necessary that you immerse a soft wool in oil of moderate heat or rose oil: and place it in the surrounding areas which are between the groin and under the armpits.
If it feels pain or punctures or putrefaction in the intestines (for this often occurs): then cleansing of the bowels with wine of soap, black and warm: especially if putrefaction has already reached the intestine and become a discharge penetrating to its hollow.
And know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal: and what is from the small ones, harder to heal.
The intestine called Jejunum does not accept healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its large number, which is from veins, and the size of them, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of the proximity of its nature to nerves.
If however what proceeds from the wound is a bone splinter, and you grasp it freshly, reduce it according to your reduction method of equalizing intestines.
If it has passed beyond (the wound), and has become green or black, then you must tie it with a thread above the site where it has become darkened, to prevent bleeding. For there are veins and arteries in bonesplinters.
Then cut the ligament beyond it, and place two ends of the thread hanging from below the wound on its outer side: to facilitate the pulling away from you of its attraction, and extraction of the bonesplinter at the site of the splintered bone, and draining of pus from the wound.
Memory of a wound that occurs in the Intestine.
When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, it can be restored in some people: therefore, because I have seen someone who was wounded in his abdomen by a lance strike, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old, and it became a fistula, and pus and gas escaped from it.
I therefore administered treatment until I was not confident in his healing; neither did I cease to refine it until he was healed and the site consolidated.
After I saw the site already consolidated, I feared for the sick man that an accidental evil might occur in his abdomen; and no accidental evil occurred to him from it. And he remained in better conditions for himself, eating and drinking, and defecating, and entering the bath, and exercising in his own diets.
And some of the experiencers said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it must be tied according to this method. And it is, to receive ants with large heads. Then gather two lips of the wound and place one ant with an open mouth upon the two lips of the wound. When its head is on them, and it closes its mouth, cut off its head; for it clings and cannot be detached.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease until the ant, after the second, is equal to the entire size of the wound.
Then reduce it and let the wound heal. For these heads remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is fed, and it heals, so that no harm comes to the sick person completely.
And now it is possible that the intestine may be tied even with a fine thread: what has been removed from the animal's intestine remains attached to it after it is introduced into the point.
And it is, to receive the end of this thread from the intestine and let much flesh be cut away. Then tie a fine thread at its end. Then introduce the thread into the point and let the intestine come out with it. Then reduce it to separation.
This method of sewing with ants and the intestine is not excepted except by way of trust and hope.
Know that a large wound, wide, especially if it is on one of the thin intestines: then there is no artifice except subtlety, and there is no healing at all.
Chapter on Wounds and Fistulas.
Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes old and decayed, and turns into an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and always emits pus, and cannot be cut off: then it is called universally in whatever member it may be a Fistula, and we call it a Zuchimen.
A fistula, in truth, is a hard, white knot; one without pain, having the hollow shape of a bird's feather; and on account of this some call it Risatus, that is, feather.
In some hours it [the fistula] becomes wet, emitting pus. Perhaps moisture is divided at some hours. And at times this moisture is much and at times little; and it is thick and at times thin.
I have already stated in the division [that] every ulcer that does not heal nor is born from it flesh, is not this but due to one of nine causes.
One of these [causes] is when the amount of blood in the body is too little or it is malicious; or because there is hard flesh between it and its lips preventing the growth of flesh; or because there are many sores and putrefaction; or because the ulcer itself is rotten, and the matter that is emitted from it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for healing it; or because corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence, as happens in Caesaraugusta, where digestion of illnesses becomes difficult, and recovery from boils by nature is slow; or because there is one bone, or a number of bones [present].
And I have shown all these causes and their signs, as well as the treatments of them with medicines in the division; now here it is necessary that I tell you the cure for a fistula and a boil, which is performed by the way of an operation using hand.
Therefore, know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body. For there are fistulas that reach to large veins and arteries, nerves or tendons; or intestines, bladder, or one of the ribs; or spinal bones, or some of the joints composed in composition, such as hands and feet; and there are those that approach the proximity of a principal member or similar.
This fistula, according to this method, is one of difficult healing, and it does not admit treatment, and attending to it is labor and ignorance.
If any fistula has a depth that does not reach the places I mentioned and you hope for its cure, trust in it, and wish to attain knowledge of it, then take a probe made of copper or iron, if the fistula follows a straight course, and examine it along with itself.
If there is a twist in the fistula, then investigate it with a slender lead probe. Since lead, because of its softness and curvature, adheres to twists.
If the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to sign it with a probe. Seal therefore the opening from among its openings.
Because moisture, which you seal it with, flows towards other openings and runs out of them.
Then examine and investigate carefully according to the method that is possible for you: so that you may know whether there is a bone or nerve there, and whether the fistula has a deep depression or a shallow one; or whether it is a single fistula with many openings, and stands over the whole thing, with all your strength, through questioning the sick person, by inquiring about pain when pressure is applied to the place, and similar signs and causes of bleeding.
When you have therefore firmly stood over all these matters, then go to treatment according to confidence; and it is necessary for you to consider at this time whether the fistula is near, appearing in a safe place far from a joint, a nerve, an artery, or vein, or in one of the places I mentioned to you; then cut the fistula as stated before in my narration, remove what is in it from filtering and decayed flesh that arises in its opening from flesh or ulcer, and similar things, and treat it until it heals.
If a Fistula is of great depth and straight, then it is necessary to cut it deeply as much as possible for you. Then clean it thoroughly from all the corrupted flesh of it.
Then administer a linen cloth wrapped in sharp medicines and insert it into the concavity of the fistula as far as you have grasped with iron, do this repeatedly until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the concavity of the fistula due to decay.
Then restore it with ointments that produce healthy flesh until it heals.
If it does not heal through this, then cauterize it as we have said before.
If the cause of the fistula is a bone, and you are certain about this, then investigate it and cut it out as I have told you; if it does not forbid you anything from the vein or nerve or principal member, as we have said.
If a bone is discovered and there is some decay and blackness within it, then scrape it until all the decay is removed. Then treat it with that which causes it to heal, until it heals.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as it did; then you will know that you have not reached the complete removal of the decay.
Investigate it again above and find out its reason and thoroughly clean it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, that is good; if not, then you will know that the decay is in a deep and distant part of the body which you have not reached. You are therefore not skilled enough for it except to let nature take its course.
If the bone is small and decayed and if it is possible for you, pull it out with fine forceps suitable for that.
If there are many bones, then carefully make an attempt to draw them all out, without leaving anything within them with your strength.
If something from the moistures opposes you, and there is no fear or mistake in the incision: then cut those moistures and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If there is no preparation to remove the bones from your time, then place something above the wound that decomposes it; and leave it until it decomposes, what is within the circumference of those bones from the flesh and moistures.
And keep the wound so that it does not harden. Tie the incision that you made during your operation. Or place on it, if you are afraid, a piece of cotton soaked in ground sulfur mixed with oil; or a piece of cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some green ointments.
For when those moistures have decomposed, and the bones separate from them, clean away their removal, and their drawing out.
If there is a large bone, such as the thigh bone, hip bone, and similar ones, and what has been corrupted from it is a large part: then grind it with a fine rasp, until that blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
If what is in it has become a large part and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and cut it completely until the place where the corruption has reached; then take care of it until it hardens.
And I tell you of a case that happened to a man in his leg; so that you place it as an example and assistance for your operation.
There was a young man about 30 years old, who had pain in his leg, caused by something that moved upon him inside the body, that is, from within; until matter reached the calf, and there was an abscess made: and it was not an external cause.
The incision was made at the same time as the error of the physicians, until the abscess was opened, and many substances converged with it. The treatment was delayed until the leg had become fistulous, and many openings were made therein: all of which discharged pus, and bodily moisture.
Therefore, a multitude of physicians treated him for approximately two years, and there was no skilled surgeon's hand present until I was summoned, and I saw his leg, and the substances that were flowing from those openings with a great course: even the whole body of the man was already stiffened, and his color had become yellow.
I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and it reached the bone.
Then I examined all the openings: and found that they were flowing into each other from all parts of the leg.
I approached and cut through one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone: and I found it decayed: which was already rotten, blackened, putrefied, and pierced through until it had reached the marrow.
Then I sawed what was exposed to me, and prepared it from the rotten bone.
And assigned that there was no bone other than that decay which I cut off and sawed away. And now I had removed it.
Then I placed a dressing on the wound with strengthening medications for a considerable distance. It is not healed.
Then I probed and exposed the bone a second time above the first exposure, and found continuous decay with the bone: and I sawed away that which appeared to me from this decay as well.
And then I attempted a dressing for it. It is not restored.
I therefore examined it again, and did not cease to cut the bone piece by piece, and attempted its restoration; it was not restored, until I cut a bone about the size of a palm and extracted that with its marrow.
Then I healed it with medicines and it was quickly consolidated and cured; this repetition in the operation and section of it was not necessary, except due to the disposition of the patient's weakness, his small tolerance, and my fear for him concerning death; since he suffered in all hours from mal-syncopes due to excessive evacuation.
Therefore it was cured completely with healing; and new flesh hard was born at the place of the bone, and a good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned; and he turned back to his dispositions; and he did not suffer any harm at all from walking contrary to it.
If the protruding bone at a place of the body is already broken: then it is necessary that you tie it in this way: and it is as follows: take a ligament, and tighten it at the end of the protruding bone; and command someone to stretch it upward; and place another thicker ligament on the first one. Then tie it over the flesh that is next to the bone; and extend its end so that you draw the flesh downward; and you loosen the flesh above the place which you want to cut, so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
Place a stick or board underneath the bone below properly; because when you do this, it is not forbidden to cut the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that there be a saw above the corrupted place somewhat, so that the corruption is not in the hollow of the bone; and it does not appear to the sense in its appearance, and force another to saw on its behalf.
If the bone is corrupted and is not projecting, but rather it is continuous with a part of it: and the corruption is in the middle of it, or in one of its parts: then excise all the flesh from every part. Place the splint beneath.
Cut the affected part with a saw from that side where there is corruption, until the other saw-cut meets it. And make the saw-cuts according to our earlier instructions in length slightly beyond the corruption.
If the corruption is at a joint, cut through the affected joint and saw the bone where it joins from another side.
But if the corruption is at a place of two joints' connection, then it is not a fracture, but rather an abrasion.
If the corruption is at the tip of the hand or foot: then there is a very difficult matter in it. It is necessary to investigate how the corruption appears to you. And abrade it, and clean it as much as possible for you, and rectify it with whatever skill is available to you: when it does not contradict the Vein or Nerve.
And know that these saws and cutting knives for cutting the bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their coarseness or fineness, their size, and their thickness, and their hardness or softness, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare every type of surgical instrument suitable for that particular operation.
And know that these operations require from you a type of instrument that suits the case when you have long-term interest. And knowledge of the methods of this art is a sign of the nature of the diseases: then you will find for yourself what suits it among the instruments for every disease.
And I confirm to you at the end of this chapter's number of instruments, which you shall place examples upon that you cut into, and a proof by which you test on other things.
Other Straight Sickle.
Shape of the Scissors. The head of this scissors should be shaped like the head of a star-shaped nail; and its points should be shaped like the points of a pincers.
And it is not appropriate unless they rub against the heads of the scissors when they are broken, or a large and wide bone.
Larger Scissors' Shape.
Wide Scissors' Shape.
Scissors' shape with a concavity.
Other Fine-tipped Scissors' Shape.
Other Curved-tipped Scissors' Shape.
Small Fine-tipped Scissors' Shape.
This resembles a Saw, and its tip is like a Sickle; it is used in many places according to the reason for bone removal.
Scissors' shape suitable for removing that which has been perforated from bones.
Its tip is triangular and sharp.
It is made of Ivory. And similarly, everything that I have said should be made from Scissors, and Cutters, and Sickles.
On making incisions in limbs, and the suturing of bones.
Limbs rot due to either external or internal causes.
If the corruption has been treated with medicines and the treatment does not help, and you see that corruption has spread to a limb without affecting anything else, then it is necessary to make an incision in that limb as far as where the corruption stops, so that the weak one may pass away through that or escape from the greater evil which is the loss of a member.
The sign that occurs is what becomes blackened until it is considered denigrated: what fire has burnt it or what rots after the blackness; until that rottenness reaches to that which follows the affected member and spreads throughout the entire body.
Approach therefore with the incision of that [affected part], and similarly if the cause of corruption is due to the strike of certain venomous creatures such as the marine scorpion, viper, weasel, and similar ones.
If therefore the corruption or strike occurs at the end of the finger, then cut off the finger, and leave no space for the corruption to spread, so that it does not extend to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it occurs in the hand, then cut it off from the root of the wrist, and leave no space for the corruption to spread, until it reaches the arm.
And if it penetrates into him [the patient], then cut off the arm at the elbow joint.
If the corruption passes through and you see him about the elbow: then death is present for the sick man. And beyond that in treatment, it is a question of quantity, not quality [of the medicine].
And similarly do so with the foot, when corruption penetrates into a toe; then cut it off at one of the joints; and if it reaches to the ball of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. If it rises to the knee, then cut off the leg at the knee joint.
If the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no cure for it except to release [the limb] and leave the sick man to death.
And the method of cutting a limb or sewing it is to tighten the lower ligament that you wish to cut and tighten another ligament above the place [of the wound]. And extend one of the ministers [assistants] to below; and extend the other minister upwards towards the top [of the limb]. Separate the flesh that is between two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until all the flesh is exposed. Then it should be cut or tied up.
It is necessary to place a linen cloth on all parts and not touch the healthy area with the knife; and harm the weak by adding injury and apply a hot poultice (to the wound).
If there is internal bleeding while you work, then quickly cauterize the place or put some powders that absorb blood on top of it. Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded member with a suitable ligament and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man on his foot, the same thing happening as I told you.
It is that a blackening occurs on his foot, similar to charring from fire, and the corruption first affects his toe, until it begins to affect the entire foot.
Therefore the man went away from himself, when he saw the corruption spreading in his limb with such intensity, which he discovered by pain and charring; and he cut it off at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred in the index finger of his other hand.
Therefore he came to me and I tried to recover the missing tissue by placing medicines on his hand after cleansing his body; but the tissue was not restored, and it began to affect another finger; until corruption started in his entire hand.
He therefore called for me to cut off his hand; but I refused, hoping that the tissue would be restored by me; and I was also afraid of death at the cutting of his hand. A man's virtue was above his misfortune.
When he had given up hope on me, he returned to his own land; and he came to me concerning him, because he hastened, and fell all over his hand: and he was healed.
I have brought this account not except for the help on that which falls under this kind of sickness; and to signify what it indicates, and according to how it is treated.
Treatise on the cure of the nose, and the quality of cleansing with medications.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members, and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus: then it bursts or perforates, and what is in the pus comes out and leaves a place vacant as if it were a vessel; and the skin that is above it becomes like a cloth that has been worn thin; and it does not reach its ultimate corruption, nor does it press on bone, nerve, or ligament: it deserves to be called a Sinus; and it is not called a Fistula; however, if the space of it is prolonged until corruption presses on one of these members, then it is called a Fistula, or a zuken.
And the care of it is, that you cut that skin all over, as it is rolled up; and especially when it has become thin, and made like a cloth; and trust that it will not adhere to the place, due to its own corruption.
If you hope that the skin will adhere, and it does not follow from this that the ultimate corruption occurs; and if there is thickening of the skin from flesh, then treat it with Clisterium; and it is to be considered as a Sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that comes from it has a foul smell; then clisterize it with an Egyptian medication, which is vinegar, oil, and zeniar, taking equal parts, put together in a vessel: and cook it over fire, until the medicine turns red; and let it come to the thickness of honey.
Then take from it what you need and dissolve it with water and honey, and cleanse the sinus with it, and close its opening, and leave the medicine within it for two hours quantity.
Then squeeze it out with pressure: make this for days until the sinus is cleansed and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not at hand for you: and there is, to receive the ash from vinewood, or ash from holly trees, and pour water over it. Then boil it, and cleanse with it until you are confident that the sinus is now cleansed.
If the sick person cannot bear the Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then cleanse it with water and honey, which is already mixed with something from crushed pomegranate rind. Or cleanse it with honey and wine mixed together, because by the nature of honey it cleanses and washes, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of dryness and thirst in the wine.
When you have done this many times and are confident that the corruption of the sinus is now removed, then cleanse it with what causes flesh to grow within it.
And there is to receive dyafinicon from a plaster, and dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic wine, or cleanse it with certain medicines and other unguents whose properties I have written in the treatise on unguents.
If the opening of the sinus is narrow and a cannula cannot enter for cleansing, then dilate it slightly with iron, or place linen wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment within it until it expands.
And similarly, if there is also a wide opening, then gather its lips with suture: and release from it the quantity to which the clyster may enter without addition.
And similarly, if there is an opening from which pus flows, it should be elevated to the upper part: then cut it in a lower place that is within it, so that pus may run out from below; because when pus is constricted in depth, it prevents flesh from generating in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus around below as you wish, then try to prepare the member with a preparation by which pus may run out from it easily according to how it is prepared for you. Try not to retain anything from the pus at all; and take healing medicines which are placed on the mark, suitable for what you wish. And spread them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such size that the entire sinus may communicate through it. Then cut with scissors directly in the opening of the sinus a hole wider than the opening of the sinus itself. Then spread from soft ointments over another cloth according to the size of the hole; and place it on top with a distant position from the opening of the sinus, so that the flow of pus may be relieved; and do not remove the large cloth except after some days as if once.
He who is on the opening of the sinus, is he whom you remove at any hour, so that what accumulates in it from pus may come out; and know that, whether what flows from it is much or little, or digested, or undigested.
And with this again consider the place of the sinus itself, whether its owner feels pain there, or not there is pain there, and if there is an abscess there, or not an abscess there.
When therefore your medication is thus extended, and you see the material that comes out of the sinus opening, then you know that the sinus has already adhered or is approaching adhesion: then, therefore, dissolve it in the morning or on the third day; and when you cut the wound, then change the bandage and renew the ointment.
If for a long time there comes out from the sinus subtle pus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, since among men there are those who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds and there are those who act contrary to this.
If for many days there comes out from the sinus undigested pus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere.
If, therefore, the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then in its treatment add drying medicaments; but let the physicians do so that the medicines are moist in their substance and dry in their virtue, such as unguentum dyafinicon, when added to it, superfluous addition from zeugion.
And from the most remote one that is treated, it is that you receive unguentum dyafinicon, and let it be dissolved with rose oil, and let it be sprinkled on top of it ancient wine equal in substance.
Then mix it with this and use it.
And now perform an action similar to this when you do not have unguentum dyafinicon on hand, honey, when you boil it until it thickens and use it. Or take myrrh, aloe, and olibanum; grind everything together and powderize it on top of honey while it is over the fire. Then lay a linen cloth over it and stitch it over the sinus; and line with honey that you have boiled until it thickens, powderize the species on top of it and put it over the linen cloth, and stitch it up.
And sometimes it is administered to him (the patient) long aconite (Aristolochia), and the roots of celestial lily (Lilium candrum), and there is linum (flax); and wheat flour, and chicory. Use these simple remedies, or compound them, grind them well and sift the powder; and sprinkle over the honey as I have said, and use it.
If the condition of the sinus continues and is not cured by this treatment, then you should know that there is corruption deep within it; or it has already affected the bones, or other hard parts of the body, or ligaments; then treat it with fistula treatment, as mentioned before.
Chapter on the cure for corns (calluses), scraping the nails, and cutting the finger; and incision.
Corn (callus) is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb or big toe; and perhaps it arises in other fingers.
When the condition persists without treatment and it becomes an abscess, it is heated with a hot abscess; or it is corrupted and emits pus until it corrodes the root of the nail; and perhaps it corrodes it completely, and perhaps corruption reaches the bone, so that there is a foul odor; and the end of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
When you treat it with the method mentioned, and your treatment does not help; then you should make an incision with a knife of the entire excess that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For cautionery is very helpful.
If the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy, and empty additions under the nail are pressing the flesh towards the inside, and begin to pierce it, and hurt it; then you should place refined radium at the corner of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it up; and cut the flesh with ease, and put on top of it what remains of the flesh from medicines for burning, corrosive, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If however a corruption has already pressed into the bone, then it is necessary to cut that bone and remove it; for a corrupted bone never heals while it remains in it.
If you see a corruption and a decay advancing on the finger, then cut it off at one joint, according to what has been previously remembered about it. Then treat it, until it heals.
If however the nail is rubbed or hit and there is a very strong pain, then it is necessary to bleed the weak first with leeches. Then cut off the nail with a sharp Spathamel scissors from top to bottom according to sight.
And take care that the cutting does not reach the flesh which is under the nail, for by this you will cause a very strong pain to arise over the weak place, and it will be the cause of a new growth of flesh at that location.
Then treat the place with it in order to alleviate the pains.
A finger that is added to some human hands may perhaps be completely fleshy; and it may perhaps have bones in some of them, and there may perhaps be a nail on it; and sometimes it arises from the root of the joint, or its origin is at some nodes of the finger. Therefore that which arises at some nodes of the finger does not move; and that which arises near the joint of the finger perhaps moves.
Therefore the cutting of that which is fleshy from them is easy. The purpose is to cut it near its root with a broad Spathamel.
But the treatment of that which has its origin at the root of the joint is difficult. Therefore refrain from cutting it.
In that case where a person is born on a digit at the end of the joints, then it is necessary to cut his flesh first with round incision until the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws suitable for that purpose. Then care for it until it heals.
Consolidations that happen to the fingers often occur either by birth, that is, born with it, or from consolidation of wounds, burns from fire, and similar conditions.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut off that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place linen or cloth soaked in pink oil between them to prevent consolidation quickly and separate them; or place thin lead sheets between them until the area is healed as required.
Similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers with the palm, then cut off that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the limb's shape.
[Paragraph on Incision Error]
Worms are involved veins that are coiled, thick, filled with excessive melancholic substances which often occur in various parts of the body; and most frequently they occur in the legs, especially in those walking or laboring and carrying loads.
Therefore, it is necessary to administer purges for black bile often by strong purging.
Then let the patient's vein be punctured in the basilic vein.
The treatment for them with iron is according to two methods. One of these methods is to cut and draw out black blood. The other method is to open the vein and draw out everything entirely.
The cutting (operation) of it is according to this method. Bruise the leg first with much warm water until thick and foul blood is resolved. Then bind the ill leg from its upper thigh to its lower leg with plaster. Then cut one, or two, or three wide veins.
Then draw blood from the lower part of the leg up to the top and it is necessary that the leech should be used on the patient first. Then cut a nail if it is necessary; take out as much blood from the blood as you see sufficient and as strong as the patient can tolerate.
Then tie it up (the wound); and command him to abstain from foods that produce black bile; and repeat the evacuation and leeching when the veins are full, and this harms the patient.
The method of leeching is as follows. Shave the ill leg if there are many hairs on it. Then immerse it (the leg) in a bath; or apply warm water to the limb with a linen cloth until it turns red and the veins swell; or exercise it vigorously if no bath is present for him, until the limb becomes warm.
Then make a straight cut along the vein: or at the end of it near the knee, or at the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with a knife, and scrape the vein from all sides until it appears to sensation; and at the appearance of this, you see it turn from redness to blackness. When it has reached the flesh (vein), you see it as white like a cord.
Then insert a probe under it (the white vein) until it is drained and comes out of the flesh; hold it with a blunt probe.
Then cut another incision near that incision with three fingers. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then remove it with tweezers as you did before, and hang it up with another hook, as you did at first.
Then make another cut, or several cuts if necessary. Then remove, and cut the last part of the incision near the heel.
Then draw out that part which is above it [the incised piece].
And do that until you draw it out from the higher incision or all incisions, until it comes out completely; then cut it.
If it does not obey you when drawing and removing: then introduce a pointed needle with a strong thread and tie it, and draw it out; or insert a rod under it; and turn your hand over all parts until it comes out. And be careful not to cut [the vein]. For if it is cut, it will be very difficult for you to remove it, and harm may come upon the patient from it.
When you have drawn it out entirely: then put linen soaked in wine and rose oil, or olive oil, over the wound; and care for it until it heals.
If the vein is twisted and contracted with a coil-like turn, not as we have said in straightness: then you must cut it open over all parts of its twisting, and the points of its coiling.
Then hang it up with hooks until you remove it entirely; and be careful at your cut not to cut the vein or wound; for it will be difficult for you to remove or extract it. Therefore, exercise caution.
Method for treating a Wound.
Method for treating a Blind Pouch (or Cyst).
There is no inflammation in this Blind Pouch (or Cyst) as there is in other ones, nor is it pointed, so as not to wound the vein; and it is of a thick, wavy nature, soft: for if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein with its subtlety; indeed, excess thickness should be present, as we have said.
On the Extraction of the Vein in the Leg.
This Vein is generated in the legs in hot lands, as Alizegi says, and in Arabian lands, and in dry, hot lands of little softness, that is, where no herb or tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
Indeed, its generation is due to corruption that occurs beneath the skin, such as occurs inside the bodies of snakes and roundworms (ascarids) and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this Vein is that which occurs when there is a violent inflammation in the leg. Then the area is opened (or incised). Then the Vein begins to come out from that incision, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When its end appears from there, then it is necessary to wind around it a piece of lead weighing one keil dram (273.3 grams), up to two drams and a knot; and let the lead hang down from the leg.
Every time something comes out of it to the exterior, wind that up in lead and knot it. If it becomes very long, then cut off a part of it, and wind the rest. Do not cut it rootwise before it comes out completely. If you cut [the tooth], it contracts, and enters the flesh; and it causes an abscess to occur, and corruption in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be treated gently, and drawn out gradually, until it comes out entirely, and nothing remains of it in the body; and from this vein there comes forth in some men what is in its length five fingers and ten. And now it has come to me, because a man came out of twenty palms.
If it is cut [the tooth] to you at the hour of your treatment; then insert a rod into its hole, and pierce it through with a long hole, together with the body, until all that is in it from matter is evacuated out; and administer the corruption of the place with medicines for several days. Then care for it with treatment for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself; and it occurs with many openings, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Care for it, therefore, as we have said in the division, and with what was mentioned before.
Chapter on the section of worms generated under the skin, and it is called Bouina sickness.
This sickness is called Bouina among us; because it often occurs to cows, and there is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
It travels throughout the body, going up and down; it is detected by sense during its movement from limb to limb, until it bursts wherever it bursts on the skin, and comes out.
And its generation is from corruption of certain humors. As worms and snakes, that is, earthworms and roundworms occur in the abdomen.
And it is feared from its mischief. Because when it is present in the body and raised to the head and reaches that place; then perhaps it opens there, and comes out, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Since it is to cure him and extract it, this can be done only during his wandering and its appearance to the sense.
Therefore, one must tie that which is above it, and that which is below it with a strong ligature. Then cut on top of him, and extract it.
If it sinks into the flesh, and you do not find it; then place a cautery on top of the spot with fire, until it dies.
And greater is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If however you see it has reached the head near the eye; then tie under it with a good suture. Then cut on top of him, and extract it.
And the sick person must use purification of his body with medicines dissolving corrupting foul humors.
And let him beware of food causing corruption.
Chapter on the operation for Nakir's illness.
This illness is named in our land Nakir; and it is a pain that occurs in some members; then it changes from member to member.
And I myself have seen it, as I told you. I was summoned to a sick woman in certain villages. She extended her arm, and I saw a swelling smaller than a vein of the arm.
And when an hour had passed, I saw a swelling moving with a probe, like a worm crawls, ascending more quickly than possible to the arm, as if it were live silver running from one place to another.
The pain therefore receded from that place and was fixed in the arm.
Then after an hour had passed, it ran through the remaining body until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that it was revolving throughout his entire body, as I had seen.
I therefore marveled at the swiftness of its transformation from limb to limb. And indeed, before that, I had not seen this sickness appear in my eyes in such a manner. Nevertheless, I have seen many who find pain transforming from limb to limb; and I did not see it myself as I saw it in a woman.
And I do not think that it was anything other than because the woman was one of those who are from dry bodies with visible veins; from this therefore it appears that the swoon (ventosity) was transformed.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and bodies with hidden veins.
When therefore you wish to cure it and the patient feels that pain; then if it appears to you as we have said, then press upon it quickly and below it; and cut above it until the swoon (ventosity) is expelled contracted; and cauterize the place.
If however you do not see it with your eyes; then cure it with the shock of the body and with what drives out swoons and crushes them with stinking pills and pills from soporifics and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are distinguished according to their types and the places within the body where they fall.
However, their diversity consists of the following: some have large points, small ones; concave or blunt. And there are those with three angles. And among them are those with tongues (points projecting from the shaft). And among them are those with stars (multiple points or projections on the shaft).
However, those which fall upon limbs, are of two types according to two modes. For limbs are either hollow, like the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder and similar organs. When it falls into any of these limbs and you perceive signs of death (which I shall tell you afterwards), then it is necessary to extract that arrow from it, for death will follow in the one who has it, in many positions. And if you do not perceive these bad signs and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then extract it and take care of the wound.
For the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the bone and exits through the siphac (which is above the brain) are: as sudden fainting, blindness, dizziness, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, convulsions, confusion of intellect, cholera vomiting. And perhaps blood may flow from the nostrils, or ears. And perhaps speech may be cut off, and voice may be destroyed. And moisture white like plaster flows out from the wound place. And it comes out of that like liquefied flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and withdraw the arrow if it does not flow out.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left breast; and it feels as if it were fixed in a hard object, not in an empty one. And perhaps the arrow has movement like the pulse: and blood runs from the wound black. And that follows coldness of the limbs, and cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore you know that death is approaching without doubt.
And the sign of the arrow when it wounds the lung is the emission of frothy blood from the wound; and vessels that follow the neck should be stopped, and the patient's color should be changed. And it breathes out a great, deep breath: and it seeks cold air.
If the arrow falls into the liver, which is in the chest: then it is near small ribs; and there is great panting with very strong pain, with sighing; and all the arms are moved.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach: then perhaps something undigested flows out from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the abdomen, and is fixed there: something like feces flows out from the wound, or pus, or an already ruptured intestine. Therefore there is no hope for his cure, nor in withdrawing the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine flows out; and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger than usual on the patient: then you know that it is fatal.
The remaining limbs, as the face, neck, throat, spatula, assistant, dorsal vertebrae, collarbone, thigh, shin and similar members are saved according to several compositions when an arrow does not find the artery or nerve: and there is no venomous arrow.
And I tell you what I saw about these arrows, to indicate by that concerning your cure.
That is, because a man fell with an arrow into his tear duct in the root of his nose. So I removed it from the other side, under the cheek of his ear; and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I removed another arrow from a Jew, which fell upon him in the fat of his eye beneath the lower eyelid; and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not obtain all of it from it except a small part attached to its wood; and it was a large arrow from Turkish arrows, with soft iron, on which there were no wings.
The Jew was healed, and no evil happened to his eye.
And I removed another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and it has wings. I therefore cut across it between two gullets; and it was already submerged in his throat. I sharpened myself with it until I removed it; and the Christian was healed.
And I removed another arrow from a man who fell upon it in his abdomen; and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed without anything being changed in his condition, I cut across it (the arrow); and I opened it up; and I removed it; and he was healed, and no evil happened to him.
I saw a man to whom an arrow fell on his back, and the wound healed over it. After seven years had passed, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
I saw a woman to whom an arrow fell into her abdomen, and the wound healed over it; and the arrow remained within her; and no change was made in her constitution, nor did she find any harm from her own natural operations.
I saw another man to whom an arrow fell on his face; and the wound healed over it; and it remained, not causing him much pain; and many similar cases there were.
I extracted an arrow from a prince of the king which had fallen on his nose, and it had already begun to turn toward the right a little; and the arrow was hidden completely.
Therefore I was called to treat him after the loss of the arrow for three days. I found the arrow wound contracted very tightly.
Therefore, I examined it with fine tweezers and did not feel it; and he himself found the prick and pain under his right ear. I hoped that this was the prick from the tip of the arrow.
Therefore I plastered the place with an ointment containing attracting and digestive properties, believing that the spot would open up and show me a sign of the arrow so that I might cut it; but this did not happen at the spot where it had happened, showing that the arrow had passed by.
I therefore persisted with the ointment over him for many days; but it did not happen at the spot where it had happened, and the wound healed up in the meantime; and he remained weak from the extraction of it until one day he felt the arrow within his nose. And he told me this.
And he told me this. I therefore placed sharp and corrosive medicine on that wound for many days until it opened; and when I probed it, I felt a delicate tip of the arrow which was sticking in the wood.
Then I added that sharp medicine into the wound opening until we could clearly see the tip of the arrow; and it passed through me with a space of about four months.
Then, when the wound was swollen and I could insert forceps into it, and move it, it did not obey to come out; then I did not stop trying and devising ways over it with various ingenious means until on one day I began properly to extract it with well-made forceps according to the form given at the end of the chapter, until I pulled it out. Then, I restored the wound.
And indeed physicians judge that cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I therefore restored it, and the wound healed and became healthy without blemish; nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you the quality of extracting some arrows; so that you may put this rule and meaning on what I have not said.
Because the parts of this art and their definitions are not understood in narration; neither does the book contain it, and a wise artisan compares with little about much; and with what is present, over what is absent; and he discovers a new operation and a new instrument for descents of foreign bodies of this art when they happen.
Therefore I say that arrows do not exit from the members in which they are fixed except by two modes. Or through attraction from the place where it entered. Opposite parts of another.
And that which goes out where it came in, is either an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and drawn out, and comes out.
If it does not obey to come out at the hour when it fell: then it is necessary that you let it alone for some days, until the flesh around it becomes putrid; and its attraction will be lessened, and its coming out will take place.
And likewise if it has fixed itself into a bone, and does not obey to come out, then let it alone also for some days; and press it daily with attraction and motion until it comes out.
If it does not come out after several days, then it is necessary to bore around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the shaft enlarges. Then draw it and extract it (the object).
If the arrow has already been concealed in the body's place and is hidden from sensation; then search for it with a probe. If however you feel it (the part), then draw it out with certain instruments that are suitable for its drawing out.
If you cannot place it (the instrument) above it (the arrow), due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead: and there is no bone, nerve or vein there: then pierce it (the instrument) into it, until the wound expands so that it can be possible to extract the arrow.
If there are ears attached to it (the arrow), then free the fixed flesh from them on all sides, with all means possible and means, if you cannot lift the flesh above the breakage of the ears and their twisting, until it exits.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place, then use the twisting of your hand with forceps to all parts, until it exits: and with the utmost subtlety, so that the arrow is not broken, and its drawing out and extraction become difficult for you.
If you cannot place it (the instrument) above it (the arrow), then leave it for several days until what is around it rots. Then repeat it (the procedure): the skin will relax. But if it opposes you with a flow of blood, then administer what was said in its treatment in its chapter: and be careful about damaging the vein, nerve or tendon.
And administer means for the extraction of the arrow in every way possible to you: and it should be with ease, calmness, slowness or firmness, as I told you.
It is necessary that when you draw the arrow, it should be weakened in the shape in which it was when it happened (the accident) there. Because it is more beneficial. If that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible from the shapes (diagrams).
An arrow that emerges from the opposite part goes out to something exterior or it already protrudes from there; or it makes a hump on the tip of the arrow by sensation near the upper skin, and you see it projecting: therefore, cut above it, and let the section be according to the quantity that forceps can grasp in it.
Then pull it out, for it becomes easy to come out.
If it is held in the bone, then turn your hand according to its roundness until the arrow presses into the bone and makes a swelling for itself; then pull it out.
And if not: leave it for several days; then try again until it comes out.
If the arrow is made of wood, then push it with the wood.
If the arrow breaks into pieces of wood, and you wish to apply force: then insert a concave tool into it, so that its concavity enters the shaft of the arrow; then push it with the same.
If the arrow is hollow, then push it with the tool entering into it. The arrow is anointed by this (liquid).
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you scrape out all the flesh, in which the poison is; if this is possible for you. Then treat it with what is suitable for that (to counteract the poison).
If the arrow falls into the chest, the abdomen, the bladder, or the side: and it is close to that which you touch with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, but beware not to cut any vein or nerve, and pull it out.
Then cauterize the wound, if you see one, and care for it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are pulled out.
Extremities are like the beak of a bird, which have been made like iron: when they grasp onto an arrowhead, they do not let it go.
They become various, great, small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, its sharpness, and the depth and narrowness of the wound.
The shape of the projectile is concave.
And the shape of the projectile is blunt (or dull).
This is a blunt extremity like a radius to enlarge its entrance into the concave arrowhead and be driven with it.
Chapter on phlebotomy (or venesection).
Veins to be bled, whose course is customary in the body, are thirty.
Among them are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins that are behind the ears, called the two Herbs; and two arteries that are visible in the two temples; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called the Watchers; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein that is at the end of the nose. And two jugular veins, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. These veins are called Algecherich (or alceciri). And two veins that are under the tongue.
But the veins to be bled in the arms have five veins in each arm.
One of them is Cephalic, and it is from the forest side; and the common people call it vein of the head. And Black [one]. And it is the Middle vein, and it is made from a branch of the Basilica, and a branch of the Cephalic; and the common people call it vein of the body. And Basilica, and it is placed on the domestic side; and it is also called Titillicaris. And the common people call it vein of the abdomen. And the string of the arm, and it is placed on the elbow; and that is where phlebotomy is done, and that is which appears above the thumb by clear manifestation.
And Salvatella: and it is a vein that is between the annular and the minimum; and there are two branches to it.
And in the leg and in the foot, there are three veins. One of them is that which is below the thumb's curvature from the forest side. And the second one is the Saphenous: and its place is at the heel from the domestic side. And vein of Ankle: and its place is at the heel from the forest side.
And in another leg, there are three veins similar to those.
Chapter on Phlebotomy of the two veins after the Ears.
But the phlebotomy of the two veins which are after the Ears is beneficial for old catarrhs, and hemigranias, and sores of the head old and chronic.
And the quality of phlebotomy [is] as I have said. And it is [to be done] when the head of the sick person is shaved; and the back of his head is rubbed in the place of two veins with a rough cloth rubbing well. Then the sick person should bind his neck with a bandage until the two veins appear. The places [of the ears] are behind the ears in two depressed locations on the head. Therefore, search for them with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark [them] with a hot iron.
Then take the lancet, which is called the "Incisor". Then insert it [the incisor] beneath the vein into the flesh until the lancet reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the vein and flesh towards above, and cut the vein and flesh with a shallow cut. And let the length of the incision be the size of two joined fingers, or about that much, and let as much blood flow out as you want.
Then tie it [the cut vein] with threads, and let it heal.
And now the incision of them has been completed at the beginning of the book, and their cauterization [follows].
The phlebotomy of the two arteries which are in the two times [periods] is beneficial for the old hemigraine, and the sodium pressing, and the obtalmia continuous: and for the course of discharges sharp to the eyes.
And the manner of performing the phlebotomy [on them] is as I have told you. Let the sick man tighten his neck much until two veins appear to the sensation with a clear manifestation: and let their pulse be shown under your finger. Then mark them with hot iron [or a cautery].
Then raise the skin above the vein towards above with your finger as an index, and insert the lancet from below, and raise the vein towards above. And cut it [the vein] as you did with the two other veins: and let as much blood flow out according to your need.
Then unclog the obstruction of the sick [person], and place your finger on the vein at the hour one. Then place over it [the wound] and small linen cloths, and bind it from above with strong constraint; and let it be until it heals.
And now the remembrance of them [the wounds], and their cutting, and their removal, has passed; and at the beginning of the book is the incision of the hernia.
However, the remedy for venesection of the forehead vein is after the venesection of the head, for the old diseases of the face; and for the hemicrania, and redness; and for foul ulcers.
And the quality of this venesection is as I have told you. The sick man binds his neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "Fossorium".
Place the sharp point that is at the head of the Fossorium on the vein, and strike upon it with a pick or another similar tool in this manner; and let the blood run out according to the amount you wish. Then unclog the perforation of the sick [person], and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide venesection. Nevertheless, it should not be a sharp venesection, as the other venesections, rather it should be wide. And the venesection is transverse, because the bone is near; and perhaps the venesection will be broken when it is sharp.
However, the remedy for the two veins which are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes is for the eye from scabies and redness; and for inflammation in the eye, and diseases of the face.
The quality of bloodletting for them is to tighten the sick man's neck with a lint bandage. Then, do the bloodletting and you stand above his head.
Make the bloodletting oblique, not long, with a small lancet, wide slightly, for there is no flesh at that place. If the bloodletter is subtle at the end, it may break.
Then let it run out from his blood as much as is necessary for you. Place a pot beneath them and tighten them at night, and loosen them.
The veins of the nose, when bloodletting, are for acute fever and violent sickness of the face, such as hemigraine and redness that occurs on the face; especially when it is old.
The quality of bloodletting in this case is to tighten the sick man's neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand and take a sharp, long lancet; and prick it in the middle of the septum, between that which separates the nose in its straightness. Because the vein is not visible there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you hold the end of your hand slightly with the lancet; and let blood flow according to your need. Then tie it up at night. It heals quickly by itself.
The bloodletting of the two veins of the cheek is beneficial for constricting cough, and the beginning of leprosy, and melancholic afflictions, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and corrosive, that is, herpes or skin sores.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that it binds the sick person under both his neck with a bandage: and the craftsman stands over the head of the sick, and the sick one sits on a chair over a seat.
Then the phlebotomy vein is taken to the length of the vein, somewhat narrowly. Then take out a measured quantity of blood, or according to what you see due to necessity that is for it. Then do the same with another vein.
Then untie the bandage, and bind two veins tightly together: so that the sick person does not bleed to death. And let it be until morning. A wound heals.
On the phlebotomy of veins, Alzahraki. Veins, according to Alzahraki, are useful for phlebotomy because they help with alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of teeth: and sores, bad ulcers, fissures of lips, ulcers themselves, even those that are on the nose and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you make the sick person sit in front of you: and bind his neck with a bandage. Then roll back his lip, and look at the two veins: one of which is on the right side of the lip, and the second on its left; and the demonstration of both is shown by their blackness. And that is true because there are small, black veins around them. Cut therefore both with an incision.
If there is doubt on you and you do not know which of them it is: then turn to the larger incision, and it will be more evident.
And do the same with the two veins that are in the upper lip: and most of all, the custom is to do so: and cut the two veins that are in the lower lip.
On phlebotomy: The vein under the tongue after cephalic phlebotomy. From two veins which are under the tongue, phlebotomy is beneficial: one, because phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is for afflictions that are in the throat, and for throat pain, and for mouth pain.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is that the sick person should sit in front of you by the sun, and clean his mouth, and look under his tongue from one side, and from the other side a vein, and from the other side another vein: and the color of both declines to blackness.
So, phlebotomize both (veins): and be careful, not to wound your hand while phlebotomizing them. Because under his are arteries, and perhaps there will be a flow of blood from these arteries.
The three veins which are phlebotomized at the elbow, are those whose phlebotomy has run into custom among all men.
And phlebotomy of them is done according to two modes. Or piercing with a broad-bladed phlebotome (myrtine), or oiling to the point of disappearing (oliuari), or cutting with a sharp phlebotome (cultellare) and it is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from them there are broad and narrow forms according to the width of the veins and their constriction. The form of a phlebotome (myrtine) should be broad, as you see. And it is appropriate to open curved, full, proceeding, visible, thick veins and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
This phlebotomist is of lesser width and more subtle in cuts.
It suits phlebotomy of delicate veins that contain subtle, lemon-colored blood.
The phlebotomy of the Basilica, which is one of these three veins, is beneficial. Because it draws blood from ailments that are below the neck and follow the chest and abdomen; therefore, the phlebotomist should be careful about this one, for beneath it is an artery. If [the phlebotomist] should err and add to the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist not cut that [vein] while the phlebotomist punctures; rather, it should be cut by Alnesil.
If the Basilica does not appear in a clear manifestation, then it is necessary that you change it yourself or look for another [vein] or one of its branches; or use the arm as a substitute for the phlebotomy. It is clear itself, and Alnesil cuts it with the phlebotomist, as we said.
If you wish to perform the phlebotomy of that [vein], then it is necessary before tightening the arm to touch the place, until you recognize the place pulsed. Then mark the place with hot iron, then tighten the arm, and cut the vein with the concave incision with Alnesil the phlebotomist, as we said. And be careful that the puncture does not fall into the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligament, inflation in the place that you marked with hot iron, then that inflation is the inflation of an artery; therefore, avoid it.
If you see blood rising at venesection, like the urine of a boy, and it is subtle, red: then you know, it is from the blood of an artery. Therefore, hurry up, and place your finger over it at a long distance, then withdraw your finger. If the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off), then tie the arm and let it be: and beware that the weak do not move it: and be afraid of it.
And do not move it for several days until it heals.
If the blood is not cut off, and it overwhelms you, and there is no medicine present with you in the moment, then cut the artery if it appears to you. For its ends contract, and the blood is cut off.
Or take the bark of a fig-tree, and fold it: take one half, and tie it over the place where the vein is constricted, with a ligature and powder until another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then treat it with the memory of the place from which the dust removes the flow of blood: and the cutting off of the blood of this one is not difficult in several dispositions, because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of a ligature from the arm.
The vein of the arm is beneficial for venesection because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; therefore, since it is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we said.
And it is convenient for the venesectionist that it be above fear from venesection of it, because a nerve is under it. If therefore a nerve is struck during phlebotomy (bloodletting), and it causes a fainting spell, its healing becomes difficult, and it may not heal completely.
And this nerve often appears to sensation. If, however, it is concealed in some people and is subtle and not visible: then you must place your bloodletting instrument where it can reach the nerve, and make an incision with the Alnesil (an instrument used for bloodletting), avoiding the nerve with all your strength.
If a vein is between two nerves, then you should make an incision along its length.
Chapter on the Cephalic Vein. The bloodletting of the Cephalic Vein is beneficial, because it draws blood from the head and contributes to eye problems.
And it is appropriate to do bloodletting in this vein with a lancet coated with olive oil or myrtle oil, because it is the safest of all veins, as it is neither an artery nor a nerve.
Nevertheless, it is advisable for you during bloodletting to avoid the head and shoulder area entirely, and to find a more gentle spot: and it will not harm if the initial strike does not hit the vein, provided that you return to the same spot with bloodletting on several occasions.
Nevertheless, it may be necessary to strike the vein again in some people when it is not struck during the initial bloodletting, but such a swelling will not harm them.
Chapter on the usefulness of Bloodletting and Cautions to be Observed. The nature and accidents of bloodletting, and the remedy for them, which you should consider when practicing it.
First, you should know that bloodletting is not administered except in the preservation of health and its continuation, and as a precaution against the onset of illness.
And it shall be done venesection on one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely, the Cephalic, the Flexor Tendon (Fusca), and the Basilic. And it shall be done venesection at the beginning of Spring after a fast, and in truth (Summer), and autumn, and winter after food consumption, when signs of congestion appear.
Venesection shall be done on the first or third day, after three hours have passed since the previous day.
Venesection which is given for illness, has no specific hour; but when it is convenient and necessary for that purpose, at night or day, and in any hour, and at any time.
It is not appropriate to venesection of children until they have reached fourteen years of age. Women who are pregnant shall not be subjected to venesection from the fourth month until the seventh. Elderly people, who have already passed sixty years, shall not be subjected to venesection.
When someone wishes to be subjected to venesection for any reason, it is necessary that they clean their bowels before the venesection with a soft enema, if there is much retained fecal matter in them; so as not to attract veins during the venesection from intestinal superfluidities harmful to the main organs.
Patients who are affected by indigestion (toctina), that is, the satiety of nausea; nor those who are hungover (crapulatus), nor those who are coming down from drunkenness, until that has been removed from them. A patient with dropsy shall not be subjected to venesection.
Venesection shall be done with caution after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, multiplying coitus (sexual intercourse), labor, exercise, insomnia, fasting, and everything that dissolves the virtue of the body or an animal.
Then consider, in the subtlety of humors before that, if blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines; if it can be done to him.
Enter the bath, if it does not forbid him something: or exercise with some exercise, so that the blood becomes subtle.
And place phlebotomy on his chest, about the third day, as we said; and strive to evacuate his chest that same day with all kinds of bad events: such as anxiety, anger, fear; and with all kinds of bodily afflictions, such as labor, punishment, excess, and similar things.
And let him sit with those things present that are used in the custom of humans from their aromaticity, and from their smell, and from their joy and similar things according to the possibility of quantity.
Then let the phlebotomist sit on the stool that is higher than the stool for phlebotomy; then he will withdraw his arm and rub it twice or thrice with his hand. Then he ties a ligature with a cord and wraps it around twice.
And let the ligature be moderated, because if the ligature is unequal or excessive in tightening, then it prevents the flow of blood; or in loosening, it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then after tying, it is necessary that the one being bled rub his hands together until the veins swell and become noticeable to the senses.
Then the phlebotomist cleanses the place of bleeding with a little old oil, specifically.
Then he places his index finger of the left hand on that vein under the place where he wants to bleed, a little; so that the vein does not run away and the blow is struck accurately. Since it comes from the vein as you find it, like a fleeing cord during bloodletting; and from these [veins] is what is full of windiness; and when you place a lancet upon it, it contracts under the lancet, and the bloodletter is deceived, and the lancet does not open the vein; and if it opens it, it becomes strict; therefore, for this reason, the bloodletter should be firm, and careful in all these matters.
Draw out the bloodletter. (Incorrect translation due to incomplete sentence. Correct interpretation would be "Therefore, If it opens a vein from one side, then it is good. And if not, then do the same on the other side in that place again or above it with haste; if there is no response, try another location.
If there is no response or the person faints weakly, then let him go for a day or two; and do not tighten the bandage. Perhaps it attracts an abscess with heat. (The translation is somewhat conjectural based on the context of the text.) Do not enter the bath.
Then repeat bloodletting, if necessary.
If the opening is small or the blood flows finely and runs quickly, then fear lest an amount of blood does not come out as desired; then repeat the bloodletting in the same hole according to correctness, and add slightly more in the procedure.
And do this quickly before the location faints, for the fainted location is common among many people during a small procedure.
If therefore you see that it has already turned into an abscess, then do not repeat over it at all, for it does not excuse anything in front of you. Place something from the face of oil on it; because it soothes the flow of blood. And this place is better than oil itself and the rest of the olive oil.
And similarly administer oil poultice in every of your bloodlettings, where you bloodlet the veins against prohibition of blood flow: and they do it Tyrian alfarach, and sagzenea, when it is placed on one of them.
Blood is made subtle and dissolved when it is thick.
If it happens at the site of bloodletting a large abscess, which often occurs, especially to one who is not a bloodletter except in that case, or is a small opening of the vein, then hasten and place on the spot a sponge soaked in water and salt, warmed slightly: and press it for an hour: because it dissolves.
It is necessary that you make that [thing] after the exit of blood from the vein itself, when it is full, or from another vein.
If something remains in the place after several days of blackness or greenness, it does not harm it; and if you wish, put on top of it some aloes or myrrh dissolved, or something from the juice of mint, that is to say, camphor or similar.
And indeed, many times abscesses and protrusions occur near phlebotomy in the Basilica.
Therefore put your hand on it [the abscess or protrusion], then if you find softness under your compression on it, then that protrusion is bad. Be careful, so that you put something from what I said [camphor or mint juice] on it [the abscess or protrusion]. For perhaps blood will flow from it [the abscess or protrusion] of the artery.
But make an ointment for it with that [camphor or mint juice], so that the place hardens. Then take care of it [the abscess or protrusion] with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
It is necessary that you draw blood from every man according to the quantity of its virtue. And what appears as a clotting color on top of the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it come out until it turns red; and similarly if you see it clotted: then let it come out until it becomes thinned; and similarly if it is sharp, let it go out until its sharpness is removed.
It is necessary for the one who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting once with force, to have a vein enlargement [vena amplificetur] and be a bloodletter on that side; and for the one who is weak, it should be otherwise.
It is necessary that [he] draws it out in the veins and that there is a narrow opening: and better is what is administered in venesection, that it is a cross-section, not a puncture.
This mode of venesection is safe from bleeding and from injury to the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection by width and length.
To the one who usually faints during venesection, it is necessary that he be given a small piece of bread soaked in water and honey before venesection; or if he is heated, let him be bled with leeches on three or four veins.
If he is of a cold temperament, then let him take before venesection bread soaked in honey-syrup, or honey-syrup flavored with spices, or aromatic scented syrup.
If fainting occurs during venesection and the cause is excessive blood loss, then it is necessary that he drink meat broth and subtle aromatic syrup; and use aromatics with alum and line his chest with it; and use the rest as mentioned in the division on fainting due to evacuation in the chapter on fainting.
He who wishes to lose his arm and let go of his blood by the second method: it is necessary for him whose venesection is due to excessive evacuation, and whose strength is weak, that he lets out his blood slowly according to the amount of his strength on consecutive days.
But he who wishes to lose his arm and let go of his blood by the second method, and his body is robust: then let him do that seven or nine hours after his first venesection.
But he who wishes to draw blood from his body towards the opposite side from which it is flowing: then let him do that on the second or third day.
In whose body there is already much heated blood, which becomes sharp and causes fever: it is necessary that the blood exits from it once, and a large amount is drawn out of it; and the incision should be enlarged until syncope occurs; after you have observed all the conditions of phlebotomy; and to place your hand on his pulse at the flow of blood, so that death does not occur in place of syncope. Much happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and it falls due to negligence.
It is not necessary when you wish to solve the arm and draw blood in the second, if the opening of the vein is already closed, and the exit of blood becomes difficult, that pressure be applied with haste on it, and it should be quickly extended. This is very bad indeed, rather let it be, until it can be bled in the second.
Either remove with sharpness the coagulated part of blood in the vein's opening, and place something dissolved salt in water upon it. And place upon it some from terebinth or aloe, or sage, and put pressure on it gently until the blood exits.
If, however, the vein is already cut, then let it be, and do not cover it until the abscess subsides.
If the necessity compels drawing blood in the second, and there is no excuse, then either bleed at that spot, or in another vein of the arm.
The string of the arm is bled at the place of Fuscus and Basilica, when they are not found and hidden because it is composed of them.
And the quality of bleeding him is that the weak hand should be inserted into warm water until it turns red and the vein becomes manifest.
Then bind over it with a slightly loose ligature. Then perform venesection across, not lengthwise, slowly and not widely; let the opening be large, and your venesection should be on the joint of the hand somewhat.
If the outflow of blood is forbidden, then immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you reach your need.
But if it is during the summer days, then you are exempted from immersing your hand in hot water. And it is highly recommended that the flow of blood into hot water takes place during wintertime.
And this vein's venesection is safer for all veins because it is not a pulsating vein and there is no nerve under it.
The venesection of the cephalic vein on the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of its venesection is that you bind the cephalic vein on the hand with a ligature or by hand after you insert it into hot water, until the vein becomes inflamed and is demonstrated strongly. Then perform venesection across (it). And if you cut it entirely, it will not harm her in any way.
Keep it, do not go to the end of your hand with the venesection. For under that are the exposed nerves of the fingers.
Then immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood run into it. For if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood clots in the vein opening and it is forbidden from flowing.
When you have extracted the amount of blood needed, then place oil and salt on the vein to prevent it from clotting quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary that you do with every tight branch.
The remedy for bleeding from this [area] is with the left hand. Because it is helpful for sickness of the spleen; and similarly do as you did in the second [case], equally.
The remedy for bleeding from the saphenous vein is helpful for sicknesses that are in the lower part of the body, such as illnesses of the womb, retention of menstruation, and weaknesses of kidneys, and ulcers of the hips and legs of old age, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of bleeding from this [vein] is that a weak foot is to be introduced into warm water; and make friction on it until veins appear; and tie above the joint of the foot with shoelaces. The vein's location is near the heel, visible towards the thumb; and it branches out from there into many branches on the face of the foot.
Therefore, bleeding should be done in a larger branch of it, or near the heel in its mass; because it is better and safer.
If bleeding is done on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are under it on the surface of the foot.
And place your bleeding instrument as if you want to cut it across, like a knife; and the name of the one who bleeds is Nesil.
If there is a prohibition of the outflow of blood, then immerse his foot in warm water; and let the blood flow into it until it has been released.
If the vein is missed by the one who bleeds in the first attempt, then let him repeat with bleeding to a slightly higher location, for it is safe, and do not fear harm from it when you are careful of the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the Sciatic nerve, as we have said, is at the calcaneum from the forest side.
And its remedy for phlebotomy is, for pain in the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of phlebotomy for it is that the sick should enter the bath and hurry: and tie the leg from the side of the ankle up to the calcaneum with four fingers, with long fine bandage; for it does not appear unless for that reason.
When it appears then, the vein should be punctured as your ability allows, either in a crossing manner or longitudinally; and it is better, either to cut it with an incision, or to sever it with a section. For its location is safer, and it is very hidden in many people.
For its location is safer, and it is very hidden in many people. If you do not find it and it does not appear to the senses at all; then phlebotomy another branch of it, and there is one that appears on the back of the foot, turned towards the ear; and beware of nerves, and let the amount of blood run as much as you wish.
Then dissolve the constriction, and place the skin over the location for phlebotomy, and tie the location. It is quickly cured.
On Windbagging, and the quality of its use.
Wounds are made from horns, and from copper, and from glass.
And ventilation is performed in two ways. With incision (scarification) and bloodletting; another way of ventilation is without incision.
And this ventilation that is without incision is also performed in two ways. Or else it is done with fire. Or else it is done without fire.
And the places for ventilation that are administered with incision and bloodletting number fourteen on the body. One of these places for ventilation is called Ventosatio Alnocrati, and it is the last on the head; and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; and ventosae Alhagdahim, which are two layers on the neck from both sides simultaneously; and ventosae menti, which is below the mandible in the lower jaw; and ventosae duarum spatularum; and ventosae Alachosos over the end of the tail; and ventosae duorum focilium, and they are in the middle of two arms; and ventosae duorum crurium; and ventosae duarum cauillarum.
And ventilation does not extract blood from small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore its effectiveness is not as with phlebotomy (bloodletting). It is not necessary to administer ventilation by fire or without fire for any illness that occurs from congestion, until the entire body has been evacuated.
If necessity requires ventilation due to illness or custom, we administer it at any hour, at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle, and whenever it is needed.
Because there are people who, when their blood multiplies, until it needs to be extracted through ventilation, find a headache and pain in their head.
And from these [conditions] is he who finds swelling and redness on his face, on his head, and on his neck. And from these [conditions] is he who finds itching on his face, forehead, and darkness, and dullness in his eyes.
And from these [conditions] is he who scratches the place of his wind-inflammation. And from these [conditions] is he whose laughter increases. And from these [conditions] is he who finds the taste of blood in his mouth: or the tongue is thrust out and cleansed the blood. And from these [conditions] is he whose sleep increases. And from these [conditions] is he who sees in his dream blood and redness, and the dead, and wounds, and similar things.
When we see something from these [conditions], and properly if it is in the third month: then we command wind-inflammation to be made, after two or three hours have passed.
But the remedy for wind-inflammation of the neck is: because it contributes to heaviness in the head, and what is exuded goes to the eyes. However, it must be that this [treatment] is after the evacuation of the entire body.
And indeed wind-inflammation is in the place of cephalic phlebotomy.
But it is not allowed to use this [treatment] for one who is of cold constitution, or in whom there is catarrh. For it causes great harm to him.
And for that reason, it is not proper to use this [treatment] by the elderly and in one whose head has cold diseases.
But he who becomes habitual over it generates forgetfulness upon him.
And for that reason, you should command the wind-inflator to lay down his hand with the wind-inflation briefly towards the lower parts, fearing from the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventosatio or Alkehel, is a place for phlebotomy of Fuscae, and phlebotomy of Basilicae, and it corresponds to suffocation, constriction of breath, fissure of instruments breath, cough, and repletion.
And it is necessary that the Alkehel Ventosatio is pushed a little, because if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the heart and the stomach.
Ventosatio alhagdahim corresponds to pain in the head, migraine, ophthalmia, perforation, and dental root pain; it is a place for phlebotomy of Basilicae.
And it is necessary that you advise the Ventosator not to press his hand during scarification; so as not to cut an artery and cause blood flow.
Ventosation below the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of gums, and similar illnesses in the mouth; it is a place for phlebotomy at another location which are on the two lips.
Ventosation of spatulas causes alchafacham, which is caused by repletion and heat.
But ventosation of the internal parts of two oval-shaped areas confers benefit to phlebotomy of three veins: Basilicae, Fuscae, and Cephalicae; because it draws blood from all the small veins that are in the flesh; and these small veins draw blood from larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary that you advise the Ventosator not to go too deep in scarification; because the place is bare of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
But ventosation that ventosates on the testicles confers hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
It is necessary that you instruct the Venti Sorber, it should be a large windbag and made of air, since the place requires strong suction and perhaps subtle winds break; it should be cut with deep incisions.
The winds of the legs diminish by obvious reduction, since they draw blood from the whole body and bring old pains to kidneys, womb, and bladder; they provoke menstruation, cause bile and phlegm; and they are located in place of venesection of two saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause fainting in many men.
And the remedy of Alhorcoben for winds is close to the remedy for winds of two legs.
The quality of the positioning for winds is that you place the windbag first in an empty place, and suck with moderate suction; do not prolong the positioning of winds, but place them quickly, and remove them quickly, so that humors come to the place with equal arrival; and do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place redden and swell, and the redness appears to be blood; then scarify, and repeat suction gradually. Then consider in positioning of bodies.
For if a man is of tender flesh and few pores, it is necessary that you scarify him once, not more; so that the place does not ulcerate.
And instruct the Venti Sorber, to expand the incision and make it shallow; and moderate the suction in ease, speed, and gentle movement.
If there is thickening in the blood, then it is necessary that you scarify him twice. In the first case, an opening is made for refining the blood and its watering; and in the second case, for a detailed examination of the extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is extremely impure, then make an incision in its place, to follow up on the last one.
And when we wish to draw blood gradually or slightly, a single incision is sufficient for us. If we wish to draw much blood, we make many incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make a deep incision, and the length of the incision equal in depth is the thickness of the skin.
What is that which should be administered from oils for the position of Ventosaries, and what should be avoided in venting them.
In the case where the skin is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are narrow, it is necessary to anoint the Ventosaries with open, softening, resolving oils: if it is in summer, for example, aloe oil, or olive oil, or oil of sweet almonds, or seed oil of pumpkin.
And if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or savory oil, and similar ones should be used.
If there is excessive thick and cold secretion, then bitter almond oil, balm oil, white oil or dittany oil should be used, and similar ones.
If the venting is from large pores and soft flesh, then oil should be prohibited, and the areas of Ventosaries should be washed with rose water, cold water, salt water, pumpkin water, or purslane water, and similar ones after venting.
The one whose blood is much moisture, should wash the ventosaries with vinegar or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar ones.
When the superfluities are gross, wash them with windy wine, or with rose water, or with anise decoction, or with chamomile: and similar things.
It is necessary to avoid windiness in the bath or near the bath, rather it should be administered after leaving the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not necessary that someone sleeps after windiness.
What is the thing that should be regulated for a Wind-sender or a Blood-letter before windiness.
And after that it is necessary to consider first: if the Wind-sender or the Blood-letter is choleric and bitterness and inflammation overcome his blood, then it is necessary for him to receive cooling things such as musk-grape, and also fig with vinegar and lettuce, and cucumber, and yoghurt: and similar things.
And place his food with young birds, and lean mutton meat, and seasoned foods with vinegar: and similar things.
And when his complexion is cold, let him drink syrup made from honey or almonds, or a sauce made from cucumber seeds: and he should drink moderately flavored wine which is between old and new wine: and it is recommended that he uses little food. And place his food with young birds, quails and small birds: and also pigeons for him to eat.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of windiness and blood-letting be more than food: and it should be given in drink to some people for hours of tarragon or alfaroch, or medicine from musk, that is muscat, or ale-selle before windiness and after: so as to strengthen the main limbs, and make the blood thin. And it is not appropriate for them to take [it] in a hot drink.
About Ventoses without incision. Ventoses which are without incision, are those placed on the liver, spleen, foot, and belly, navel, kidneys, and ankle: because these members cannot bear incision upon them.
And it is not sought through them, except attraction of blood from one member to another: such as placing the Ventose on the breasts in the sickness of nosebleed. And we use them to dissipate the cold humour of windiness unbearable in a member: such as placing the Ventose on the belly and navel. For it makes the member rarefied, and warms it up, and removes pain therefore, because it dissipates that windiness.
Also it is placed on the kidneys when there occurs an obstruction or a stone. By its virtue of attraction perhaps it opens up obstruction, or removes the stone from its place.
And likewise it does when placed on the liver and spleen for treading windiness in both of them.
These Ventoses are applied empty, with incision only. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in the sicknesses of pleurisy: and that is so that the Ventose is filled, and large, with only warm water, or water in which boiled herbs that agree have been steeped.
About the form of a Ventose administered with fire.
Its length should be about the size of a hand, and its width two fingers open, as we have formed it: and its depth should be half a palm: and on its side there should be a small hole, according to the quantity that is entered by the needle: made of brass or citrine, thick edges, smooth, equal, rubbed: so that it does not hurt the member upon which it is placed: and in the middle of it there should be a transverse rod of brass or iron, where the candle with fire is placed.
And now it becomes this swollen [thing], larger than we have mentioned earlier, and yet somewhat smaller than it was, according to the sickness and age of the one who is using it.
For boys' swellings, and those of thin bodies, are different from the swellings of men, and those with large bodies.
The quality of placing this swelling with fire on a limb is that you should kindle a linen cloth with fire properly, or a small candle from wax; and place it over the middle rung which is in the middle of the swelling; so that the fire may be ignited around the lower part of the swelling, but not burn the body of the sick person.
Then it is to be placed on the limb; and a finger is over the opening I mentioned, until we hold the swelling; when we need to, we remove the finger, and the vapor comes out through that opening, and the swelling is immediately resolved.
Then, kindle the linen cloth according to its manner, and repeat it if needed.
In the swelling which is applied to the sickness of pleurisy with water, there is no rung across, nor an opening; and it is not administered unless because it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb only.
And this is its form.
And this swelling, when it is larger, in order to hold more water, is better.
Chapter on the suspension of Sanguisugars.
Chapters XCIX. Sanguisugars are not administered in many places except in those parts of the body where it is impossible to position swellings due to their small size, such as lips, gums, and similar ones. Or on denuded parts of the body, such as fingers, nose, and similar ones.
The quality for their use is: as when coming from Leeches that are in sweet waters, cleaned of rottenness.
Then they (the leeches) should be let loose day and night in sweet water, until they are hungry, and nothing remains in their stomach. Then the body should be evacuated first with venesection (bloodletting), and with purges (emetics). Then cleanse the sick part until it turns red. Then they (the leeches) are placed upon it (the cleaned sick part).
When they are full and fall, and it is possible to suck the site with a purge, then it is more beneficial for healing; if not, then cleanse the place with vinegar. Then with much water, rub and press.
If the course of blood persists after the leeches have fallen off, and it is sweating, then immerse a linen cloth in cold water and place it upon it until the sweating stops.
If the blood increases, then sprinkle powdered zaffran (zegi) or gall nuts and similar substances from the poppy on it until the bleeding stops.
Or lay half-peeled beans on the place, and let them stay until the beans stick to the spot, for the blood will stop flowing.
And it is necessary to repeat the use of leeches when possible, if they are needed.
If leeches are forbidden from being suspended, then cleanse the place with fresh blood. Or make an incision in the places until something comes out of the blood. Then place them (the leeches), for they will stick immediately when they sense something from the blood.
When you wish for them to fall, sprinkle something from crushed aloes, salt or ashes upon them; they will fall immediately.
This Chapter is also often necessary in the art of Medicine; it is the restoration of a fracture and dislocation of bones.
Know ye, O Sons, that foolish doctors and the common people boast about this Chapter, and those who have never examined an ancient book or read a letter from it.
And therefore, because this method is lacking among the learned in our land. And I have never encountered it in a good way, and I have not attained that knowledge from it except for the length of reading ancient books and my diligence in understanding them until I extracted that knowledge from them.
Then I have applied the experiment and diligent study throughout my life.
Now I have described to you everything that my knowledge contains on this Chapter; and beyond what my experiment has failed, after I have abbreviated it for you, and released it from the prolongation of the explanation, and abbreviated it at the end of the abbreviation, and shown its conclusion; and I have formed many forms of instruments that are applied in it, since it is an addition of a decline, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter Two.
It is necessary that we say in the prologue of this Chapter the sums and Chapters, to whose understanding the craftsman must be directed first to his station regarding their truth; namely, so that you and those who are ready know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when anyone happens to have a fracture, or dislocation, or twisting, or fall: then it is necessary, firstly, to rush to let blood from him, and to solve it, or both at the same time: unless something forbids it, such as weakness of strength; or it happens to someone who is a child, or an old and decrepit person; or it is a time of intense heat, or intense cold.
Let him be content with his own food, cold vegetables, beans and hedgehogs; and let him abstain from wine, large meat portions, and filling himself up with any food or all food that fills the veins with blood. Until he is secure from a warm abscess, and does not fear the outflow of matter to a limb; then let the sick person return first to his own regime, with which his custom usually runs.
When the broken bone begins to heal, then it is necessary for the sick person to eat nourishing foods in abundance, thick, heavy, with viscosity; such as food made from boiled wheat and water, rice, heads of animals, hooves, entrails of cattle, eggs, fresh fish, thick wine, and similar things. With this regime, the healing of the fracture is made more quickly and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in men who are in early old age and decrepit, it is not possible for them to be held together and consolidated according to their nature always, due to the drying of their members; and they consolidate and hold together those which are from them at the end of softness, like the bones of small boys.
Nevertheless, nature connects something similar to glue around the broken bone from every part, in which there is thickness, so that it adheres and tightens it until they are consolidated on both sides, and bind together until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until something forbids it by its operations; and because of this reason it is necessary to put the nourishment of the sick person in foods which have thickness, viscosity, and heaviness, as we said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse, according to the differences of the limbs; for the fracture of the leg is different from the fracture of the head bone; and the fracture of the chest bone is different from the fracture of the back bone; and similarly all other members are diverse one from another; and I come with the reminder of all types of fractures explained in their respective chapters distinctly from each other. The species of bone fractures are also diverse within themselves.
As for the bow-shaped fracture, there occur stars (spicules) in it. Sometimes a fracture occurs along the length of the bone; and such fractures are called 'stars', that is spicules, or additions proceeding from them, as they are in a reed when it is cut with a knife for writing. Neither proceeding; and there is a fracture with wound and rupture in the head; and there is a small cleft fracture.
And every kind has its skill or specific tool for restoration, according to which its memory will come, distinguished in their respective places.
And from the fact that a bone fracture is known, its curvature and its prominence appear to the senses; and its appearance sounds when you compress it with your hand.
When therefore no curvature appears in its place nor does pain occur with your touch when you touch the bone with movement, nor does a weak great pain arise; then there is no fracture there, indeed it may be a curvature or a small cleft; therefore it is not necessary to move it with the hand and compression at all, but rather lay medicines upon it, whose memory comes after the appropriate time; then a ligature is tightened with subtle binding.
And know that when a place bows and splits into two, there occur stars (spicules) in it, yet all parts are separated from each other; then you must begin from your hour for its correction, by aligning it before abscess (pus) hot (comes).
If however a boil becomes hot, then let it be left for some days until the boil subsides. Then lance the abscess according to whatever method is possible with kindness and skill.
And know that the restoration of it (the abscess) and its equalization is easier than that of a bone, in which fractures occur.
Then tie it (the abscess) according to when you remember about it.
If however there are fractures in the bone, then extension of this fractured member from two parts is necessary, whether it is a hand or a foot; or with your own hand, if the member is small; or with two ropes, or with a rope and your hand.
And let your position be such when you place the member over an equal place according to its natural shape, until the parts of the fractured member extend; then strive to bring back those additions with all skill and in whatever way you can at their places: and beware according to your strength, lest pain occur in a weak person due to your operation, nor injury; and strive according to your strength to apply one of two bones with its partner, according to the best shapes.
And it is necessary that at that hour you try and touch it (the fractured member) with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your force.
And beware of violent extension and strong compression, as many foolish ones do. For many times they cause boils to appear due to their operation or a contraction in the member; as we have already seen from their operations many times.
Then attach after equalization, and a proper operation, and constriction of that member, and calmness, and peace; and warn the weak one about it. Make him be careful not to move himself during his hours of vigil, and during the turning of his sleep, and during his agitations, and during his digestions, and all his movements with utmost strength. Make him be careful that the position of a member will not follow pain. Because when he feels pain or injury in the disposition of a member's position, then it is necessary to change his position into another that does not cause him pain.
Be careful that his position is equal and straight so that it does not happen that there will be deformation in the member when it is restored.
And the quality of the tightening of a broken member, as I said.
Know that broken members are diversified according to their size, and the magnitude of their parts, and their form.
Therefore, those that are small, such as the arm, and finger, and tool, and similar to them, then it is necessary for there to be a soft, subtle wrapping of cloth around them. But those that are large, such as the thigh and leg, it is necessary for there to be a wide, firm wrapping around them.
Because a broad bandage connects a large member and tightly binds it from all sides with an equal tightness, so that no spot is left open.
Then after your evacuation, begin to apply a suitable liniment on it, on a soft woolen cloth over the place of the fracture. Then begin to wrap the bandage around the place of the fracture three or four times, according to what the member deserves, and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
Then go with him to the upper part from the place of the fracture, and tighten less than your previous tightening that you had at the fractured place. Then gradually extend yourself from the place of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction slowly, until you take out a large piece from a healthy place.
Then take another plaster and apply it again over the fractured place with folds. Then go downwards with folds towards the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be in the constriction of the fold and its softening, as we said in the first fold above.
Then put between the folds from soft wool or cloth that corresponds to the twisting of the fracture if it is twisted: and if not, do not place anything there.
Then fold again over the other plaster. Then place stars evenly on these folds immediately, if there is no swelling or hot abscess.
If there is a swelling or an abscess there: then place on it what sits on that abscess and remove the swelling; and leave it for some days. Then tie the stars over it.
And let the stars be from the middle parts of wide canes, shaved, well-formed: or let them be from wood where sieves are made, which are made from pine, fir, or palm branches, or boxwood: and let the width of each star be according to this form and this same shape.
However, the star that is placed over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the other stars: and the length of the star should be according to what fits the limb in size and smallness.
Then tie with another plaster over the stars according to the first constriction. Then tie above with cords evenly, as we said about the constriction: and let your constriction be over the fracture place more: and the more it is extended from the fracture, the less the constriction.
And it is necessary that the threads are medium-sized and fine, and they should be made from soft linen.
If the threads are thick, as I have seen stupid people using twisted threads of coarse linen in their operations, it is a great mistake: because the constriction falls out with them beyond its quality.
And fine threads again do not agree: because you will not achieve with them by constriction what you want.
It is not necessary that there be less than a finger's breadth between the astellae (metal needles or pins used in surgery).
If the sick person is hurt by the tips of the astellae after constriction in healthy places: then place beneath them with soft wool or camouflaged wool until nothing is hurt from it.
When there is a fracture with wound, and it happens that the break-up occurs on the skin, I shall come again with its reminder to the second chapter of singularity (specific cases).
And know that not every broken member must be bound with pins from the first day. That is, because when the member is large, it is not necessary to place needles above it, unless after five days or seven or more, according to your safety from the occurrence of an abscess from a hot wound.
This is the method of plasters which the ancients used to restore that are placed on a fracture and dislocation.
Common emplaster method abbreviated, restoring the fracture, suitable for multiple temperaments, especially women and children, because it is from that which heat does not conquer nor cold.
And it is that you should take from the flour mill dust, and it is the marrow of the wheat that hangs on the walls of the mill near the movement of the grinder; and prepare it in this way, except that you sieve it with egg white; and place its mixture not thick, nor thin. Then use it.
Another method of plastering (bandage), for setting a broken bone, and reducing a dislocation, and twisting. Take almess, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mugath: and steep all of them in ten parts of myrrh, and five parts of both aloes, and twenty parts of alethil: grind everything, sift it, and mix with the water of alethil; or with sheep's milk whey if the bandage is heated for a sick person. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, it quickly sets broken bones, and benefits many people.
Another method of plastering (bandage), which also benefits a fracture and twisting. Take mugath, mess, white alteae, all in ten parts of myrrh, and five parts of both aloes, six parts of Armenian pitch in twenty parts: grind everything well, sift it, and make with water or sheep's milk whey: and administer.
Another method of plastering (bandage) for joints and bones separated from their places: it relieves the pain that occurs to them, and stops the splitting of the bone, and the break. Take raw wool, immerse it in vinegar, and boil it in oil: place it over the site.
And indeed, there is no virtue of restoration in this plaster, but it is good for the treatment of a hot abscess: and it expels pains properly.
Another method of plastering (bandage), which restores a broken bone. Take leaves of the deaf fig, and leaves of wild papaver: grind everything, and make a plaster from both.
Another shortened method of plastering (bandage), used for the restoration of a broken bone: and when you wish for the resolution of the remaining abscess. Make a mixture of the root of althea, chamomile, marshmallow flowers, and barley flour, taking equal parts of each: grind all and make it with wine, unless the member is already heated.
If it is already heated, then use that mixture with coriander water or just water.
A stronger method of plaster for resolving a hard abscess during the restoration of a member. Make a mixture of the root of althea, linseed, beechwood, medick, samsuc, marshmallow flowers, chamomile, taking equal parts of each: grind all and make it with willow water, or sweet water, or wine. Apply the mixture to the member according to its warmth and the calmness of the heat.
However, Hippocrates did not say in his book that it should be placed on a broken member during its restoration, except for a plaster made from beeswax and oil: nothing else; and he said it should be of a medium consistency between thickness and subtlety.
Galen, however, seemed to think that something should be placed on a broken member during its restoration which has the ability to draw out heat, such as myrrh, aloe and frankincense, and similar substances from what we have mentioned.
A method of plaster for treating injuries and pain. Make a plaster from mugath, chickpeas, cut human hair or bird feathers, althea, and salt in equal parts: grind them all into powder, and make the plaster out of it.
The amount of plaster that should be used, so that the bandage remains in place, is as follows: you should then loosen it if there is no persistent pain, itching, or the bone moves from its place: then do not loosen it for several days. If it happens to him at the place that there is violent itching, or troubling pain, or swelling: then hurry and dissolve it in an hour himself, and remove the plaster from him: and take soft cloth, or sea sponge, moist: and submerge it in warm water, and wash with it the place until the itching subsides, and the pain sits still.
If it happens to him at the place that there is violent itching, or troubling pain, or swelling: then hurry and dissolve it in an hour himself, and remove the plaster from him: and take soft cloth, or sea sponge, moist: and submerge it in warm water, and wash with it the place until the itching subsides, and the pain sits still. Then allow the limb to rest for an hour. Then place upon him a piece of flax soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and bind over it at night until you are sure of the disappearance of the hot inflammation, and the swelling rests, and the pain is removed from it.
Then proceed with a subtle bind and a small plaster: do not bind it tightly at first with your tight bind, but gently with the thin one until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling, and all other symptoms have been completely removed, and you need a plaster and bind, then proceed with it as you did at first equally.
If nothing of what we mentioned happens to the limb, then do not dissolve it before three, four, five or seven days. And when it is discharged after twenty days, according to what appears to you from the dissolution of the limb, as we said, until when there remains a fracture and adherence of coagulated flesh on it: add also in the bind more than your first bind, and also in the thickening of food, according to what was mentioned before its remembrance.
But if you see the place of fracture already to dry out and become thinner than necessary: then know that nutrition is prevented from reaching it. Boil the ointment with warm water in every place where you dissolve it, and let it be for three days, and loosen slightly the stricture (or narrow passage).
By this procedure, nourishment flows to the limb, and it heals quickly.
What foolish restorers do instead of a limb fracture, when it is not restored as it should be at first, and it is restored according to its curvature, is an error due to their operation, and there is great fear: And if it were correct, the ancients would have said so in their books, and they would have operated with it.
And I have not seen anywhere the trace of such a thing, and it is more correct that it should not be done.
Chapter on making an incision in the head.
Types of fractures are diverse, and their shapes numerous; their causes are distinguished.
For from a fracture is that which occurs by striking with an edge: and striking removes the bone entirely to the extent it reaches the siphac (a soft tissue beneath the bone), just as an ax does in wood; and for this reason, this type of fracture is called Axial.
Or the edge of a sword cuts some bone and only cuts its surface, but does not penetrate through the incision to the end; and this type of fracture is called Calcani, that is, Absolute Lever.
And there are two types of wounds in fractures, either large or small.
And from a fracture is that which is crushing or grinding; and its cause is striking with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also penetrating, which already approaches the panniculus (a fatty tissue beneath the skin), which is under the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone: and the wound of these two types of fractures is also either small or large.
And from a fracture, which is hidden within the bone in subtlety like hair, is a small split, and because of this it is called this kind of fracture Capillary.
And from these (kinds of fractures) is a fracture that happens by accident or striking with a stone, and those like them that make the bone plate to penetrate into the inside, and it becomes concave at that place: just as it happens to the caldarii (metalworkers) of iron, when they are struck and part of them penetrates into the inside.
Most certainly, this happens in moist skull bones, such as those of children.
All these kinds of fractures are made with sawing and separation, and I will come back to the subject in its place.
We recognize all these kinds of fractures by examination over it, and investigation of them with tests, and removal of the corrupted flesh that is over them.
The Capillary kind is recognized by this, that it shows on the bone, is scraped off, and a thin layer is laid over it with pitch: for the fracture appears black.
In treating a fracture, first consider the condition of the sick person: if you see from the conditions that it indicates a clear sign of fear, such as cholera vomiting, extension, loss of intellect, absence of voice, fainting, acute fever, discharge of eyes, redness of them and similar things from other conditions in various dispositions, there is certainly no recovery: and if you see the conditions not frightening to you, and hope for health, then begin its treatment.
If someone comes to you wounded in the first place when he is wounded: and it is in winter days, then it is necessary that you study in the removal of the bone before the 14th day according to all dispositions.
If it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before it becomes corrupt beneath the bone from the fat, and such accidents happen as we have described.
If the fracture of the bone has already reached the fat touching the brain and is accompanied by fragments and traction: then it is necessary that you cut the broken and smoothed part, as I have told you.
And it is to be shaved the head of the wounded: and dig on top of the bone as much as possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light on what is weak.
If it happens to you during the digging of the bone, a flow of blood or a hot abscess: then oppose it with what is necessary. And it is to fill the place with rags soaked in wine and rose oil: and let the wound rest until the abscess settles down, and be safe from the flow of blood. Then begin in the treatment of the bone, and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two methods.
The first method is to cut the bone with a knife having a narrow blade: and this is its shape.
Then administer another knife, narrower still: and this is its shape.
Then administer yet another knife, wider still.
The second method is that there should be with you a number of different knives, some of which are wider than others, and some of which are shorter than others: and they should have their edges at the extremities sharpened, and made of steel or iron that has been hardened: and use them with ease in striking the knife, so as not to concuss the head and injure it.
If the bone is hard and firm: then it is necessary that you bore around its circumference before you administer Incisoria, with Terebris which are named Terebra not penetrating deeply; they are not called so because they do not pass beyond the bone's marrow to what is behind it, since the tip of the Terebra is rounded above what is under its head and sharp, like an edge, and a small circle prevents it from being submerged and passing through the bone's thickness.
It is necessary that you take a large number of Terebris from these, one for each thickness of the bone, until there is Terebra for every part of the skull; whose sharp tip's length and width should be according to the thickness of the said skull.
And this is the form of three kinds of Terebrums or Trepans.
The quality of boring around the broken bone is: that you place a Terebra on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know the bone has been penetrated. Then change the Terebra to another place, and place what is between every hole of a size corresponding to the thickness of the radius or approximately that.
Then cut with the Incisoria between every hole from the bone: and make it thinner than possible above that from the edge of softness, as we said, until you extract the bone, either with your hand or with some other tools which you have prepared for this purpose: such as tenaliae, and subtle forpices.
And it is necessary that you be careful to avoid with the greatest care that the Terebra or the Incisoria touch any part of the siphac [a type of horn used for surgical instruments].
When you are boring around the bone and separating it from the siphac [horn], if it is continuous with it and you extract it, it is necessary that you smooth and even its remaining part on the bone with another similar tool, like an Incisoria. It is necessary that it [the instrument] should be thin and subtle more than other cutting instruments.
If something remains of small bones or cartilage: then take it with ease, along with what you have at hand from your instruments. Then, care for the wound afterwards with lints and the ointments that I mentioned.
Another method of operation is easy, completely free from fear: which Galen said and praised greatly: and this is his saying. It is necessary for you first to begin by uncovering the bone fragment from the place where the fracture is more violent and visible: until when you have uncovered that part and placed under it the end of this curved cutter, which has this form.
The curved part of the cutter does not cut anything: and the sharp end of it on both sides going along its length, as you see: so that the curved part may be fixed to the handle, its sharp edge falling on the bone.
Then strike on the cutter from one side with a small hammer until you have cut through the whole bone easily, as it is turned: and be careful that the cloth does not slip off what happens accidentally, which you should fear completely.
And if the physician were not more foolish than men, and less ignorant of it, nor asleep, then if something remained attached to the bone from the cloth in certain places, he would cut it off with the end of the curved cutter and free it easily. It is freed from it without harm and without fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate to the cloth, and what is cut off from the bone is its face, and roughness and subtle cartilage remain in it: then it is necessary that you scrape away the roughness, and excavate the cartilages with sharp scissors of various quantities which you have prepared, so that it may be possible for you to apply them more appropriately in every place according to what the operation leads you, and the fractured bone, and its figure. It is necessary that you administer [the operation] according to your reason, firstly by sawing the bone, more widely with these retractors. Then use a finer instrument after that.
It is necessary that you administer [the operation] according to your reason, firstly by sawing the bone, more widely with these retractors. Then use a finer instrument after that. Do not cease to do it in continuity until you reach administering [it] thinner and finer of all of them.
In every small remaining crack or fine fracture, it is necessary that you apply care, according to what leads to its correction.
And there is a matter that is not hidden upon all [things], to which any study in this art stands, and it has stood over what we have written and shown in large fractures.
If a piece of flesh is detected and retained when you are removing bone: then it is necessary that you take linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another double or triple piece of linen cloth, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first one; do what you can easily over it, so as not to burden the wound.
Then administer a wide ligature over it; do not tie it, unless to the size that holds the wound only; and release it with this care for one day or two days until you are secure from warm inflammation. Then dissolve it [the ligation], and administer after that medications with which there is excessive dryness; such as the roots of garlic, and grain of herb, and frankincense powder, and aristolochia, and similar ones; and it is to make a powder from these medications, which will be applied to the wound like those [medications] that are dry.
And universally administer all medication in it of the property which is to purify and not corrode [the wound]. And be careful according to your virtue, that the wound in your treatment is clean: neither let there be dirt of ointment, nor dirtiness.
And be careful according to your virtue, that the wound in your treatment is clean: neither let there be dirt of ointment, nor dirtiness. Do not allow pus to accumulate on it at all: because when pus gathers upon the brain tissue, it corrupts it and makes it putrefy, and afterward great harm occurs to the sick person after that; and already it has happened on the scalp of the head, when the bone is cleansed by him, especially when the care for it is neglected, a blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore, if the accidents that I have mentioned occur to the sick person, know that it is certainly dangerous (or fatal).
And if the blackness does not occur except from the medicine placed on him and it is in the virtue of that medicine to make it black: then you should take one part from honey and three parts from rose oil, and anoint it with them. Then place it on the scalp; afterward take care of it with appropriate remedies for healing until it is healed.
Chapter on the restoration of the nose when broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except for two of its upper parts simultaneously, or one of them: because they are two bones; since below it is cartilaginous, it does not break, and harm such as attrition, twisting, or swelling does not occur to it unless there is attrition, twisting, or inflammation.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you should insert a small finger into the nostril and align the fracture with your index and thumb fingers from outside until the nose returns to its normal shape: and do this skillfully, easily. And be careful that no pain occurs to the sick person through your operation.
If a fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it cannot be reached by a finger: then, it should be adjusted at the end of the radius, where there is a small swelling.
If [the injury] happens to be in two parts, then make it similar [to the other side]: and advance with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, at a place quiet for cauteries of warm water.
Then insert a piece of flax from linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part: or insert two pieces if the fracture is in two parts: and there should be a bulge of such size on the flax that it fills the nostril opening.
And some of the ancients who were restorers said that flax should be soaked in butter and changed every day. But I do not see this [method] as good, rather it should be soaked in egg white made with flour mill powder. Then release the flax when the bone has hardened and the cartilage has become hard.
Sometimes a feather of a goose is inserted into the nose in place of the flax, after soft cloth has been placed over it: and this holds the nasal fracture more firmly, and prevents the weak from being prevented from breathing.
And this is not necessary. If you want, do it: if you don't want, do it with flax.
If the nose again develops a cautery while working on an abscess, pack the nose with linen soaked in tar, or with pitch infused in rose oil, or with a little turpentine.
But if it does not develop a hot cautery, then the nose should be packed with flour from sesame seeds and frankincense powder mixed with egg white. Then place a soft cloth on top of it (the wound), and do not tie the nose with anything at all.
If however the nose bones are broken in a small fracture or ground down, then it is necessary that you make an incision over them and extract them with instruments suitable for the purpose. Then either make an incision and take care of it with the one that coagulates and consolidates with plasters suitable for that purpose, or with ointments.
If it should happen that a wound occurs between the nose, then it is necessary to treat it with linen cloths, and to administer a lead cannula until healed.
Chapter on the restoration of the lower jaw when broken.
When the lower jaw is disrupted and the fracture is not with a wound: then observe whether its fracture is only outside and it does not break into two and bends towards the interior: then its recognition is easy.
If the fracture is on the right side of the bone, you must insert your left index finger into the diseased jaw: Similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert your right index finger: And push the swelling of the fracture gently towards the outside with your other hand properly from the inside part of the bone and with it, equalize it.
If the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to apply traction from both sides according to correctness until its alignment is possible.
But if already there is movement or disruption of the teeth, then bind those which you hope remain with a thread of gold, silver or silk. Then place on the broken jaw a piece of raw hide. Then place over it a double cloth and put on the large cross made well over it or an equal piece of shoe leather, in length of the jawbone.
Then bind it above as your binding for it is ready and its application is suitable until it does not break: And instruct the sick man to rest calmly and quietly: And put his food in mild broths.
If you estimate that something has changed in its shape in some way: Then hasten and cut it open on the third day. Then adjust what has changed from it, and cover it with plaster from milled flour mixed with egg white or wheat flour, after you have removed the raw hide: And put over the plaster a soft wool.
While that adhesive plaster remains on it, and the bone arrangement does not change, leave it be without removing it until it heals; or bind the fracture. This fracture is often bound for three weeks.
If a warm boil occurs in the meantime, then administer what I have said repeatedly for its reduction until that boil is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider it. If a piece of bone is already separated from the bone or from a tendon, then be subtle about it, to remove those pieces of tendon along with whatever suits you for their removal from the instruments.
If the wound opening is narrow, then enlarge it with a leech according to your need.
Then when you have removed the tendon pieces, and there remains nothing of them, or if the wound opening is wide: and if not, place on it ointments that suit for that, and let it heal until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of the Fork (when it breaks).
The fork is broken most frequently from the anterior part of the shoulder, and its breakage occurs in one of three modes.
Or it breaks into two parts, with tendons possibly involved: and this is easier for its restoration.
Or it happens so that there are pieces of bone involved: and this is more difficult to restore.
Or it is a break with a wound.
And the operation in this case when the break is without a wound is that you have two assistants present, one holds the limb with the broken fork, and the other extends the neck toward the opposite side.
Then you should align the broken part with your fingers until its shape is correct; and there should be neither a projection nor a hollow.
If you require more extension, then it is necessary that you place under the patient's wound sphere made of cloth or wool; and let its size be according to your need; stretch and elevate the lever, and compress the sphere with your hand until it equals the fracture, as needed.
If you cannot pull the extremity of the lever outside: because it has reached deep: then it is necessary that the patient lies on his neck; and place under his shoulder a saw medium in size, and press the minister of his shoulder towards the lower part, until the bone of the lever that is in the depth rises upwards: and then correct the fracture, and make it even with your fingers.
If however you feel a splinter from the lever and it moves: then it is necessary that you probe over it, and remove the splinter with ease.
If however it is retained in the bone, then apply an instrument of incision that you have prepared for this purpose, after you place under the lever a tool which saves silk: and the tool is made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It resembles a snail shell without a hollow.
And let its width be according to the bone you need it for and its size. The length of it also, as far as possible for your operation.
And have two ends, as you see: and one end should be broad, and the other narrow.
If however the wound which you have cut when you remove the splinter of bone is wide and gaping, and sews itself with hot cautery: then join together two lips of the wound with stitching.
And if the wound is small or you fear hot cautery: then fill the wound with cloths and wool according to the size of the wound cut.
If a hot abscess occurs, then soak a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on top of it.
However, if the bone is constricted without a wound and without incision, it should be covered with a plaster made from milled flour with egg white. And place soft wool on top of it. Then put a small ball under its pulsation, if needed. Then take a bloodletting instrument, that is the rotula which the Saracens hold, which should be very long; and its width should be one palm or approximately that. Then place a folded piece of wool over the soft wool and the plaster. Then take an awl from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then fold it into the cloth. Then fold the cloth with the awl into the place of the incision over the fracture and the site. Then apply the incision to the fracture as it is described, and fold it over the neck of the healthy side and the weak side, and under the pulsation of the healthy side and the sick side: and bring it over the entire part, so that it is clear to you how the constriction holds the fracture correctly: and this should not be hidden from you, and all of it, so that the awl does not remove the fractured bone. And for this reason, it is necessary to examine the sick side every day. When does the ligament soften and you see that the awl has already been removed? Then adjust it, and tighten the ligament.
Then place the sick person's sleep on his back, and put a small pillow under its pulsation near its sleep at night, so that when it rises, help comes to its side. Lift therefore the fracture of the clavicle by lifting the humerus.
Tie the arm to his neck; do not loosen the bandage unless it happens due to an incident caused by itching or abscess, for twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see his face towards that (the affected area). And add to the constriction, and let it be, until it is restored and hardened.
The fracture of the clavicle is bound and supported as much as possible for twenty-eight days; sometimes it heals more quickly in some people.
Chapter on the restoration of the fracture of the spatula (scapula).
The spatula is seldom broken, and at its wide end: and it is not broken from anything except its edges.
When it is broken from that place, and it is broken in the middle of it, and it is not recognized except by touch, then according to its figure prepare the treatment for it. And reduce it to its natural form by any means of your intellect that is possible for you.
Then place upon it powder of millstone with egg white, and soft starch, and place on top a small piece of double cloth. Then place upon it a broad awl from thin wood according to the quantity of the spatula or larger by little.
If however there is a depression under the awl at any part of the spatula, then fill that depression with soft starch until the awl descends according to its equal level.
Then bind on top with long alum thread in an appropriate constriction and the firmness of the awl until it is not moved from its place.
And consider the binding every day. Whenever therefore the binding becomes soft, bind it again, and if the awl is moved from its place, let it lie weak on its healthy side.
And the spatula certainly recovers in twenty days or forty days.
When this number is complete, then loosen the binding: and you will be secure. For it is made from bones whose breakage is not feared nor their solution.
If however a fragment of bone protrudes and pierces under the skin, then cut through it, and remove it. And do as we said in the fracture of a collarbone from cauterization by hot metal, if something happens from it.
§ On the restoration of a breast fracture.
Chest occasionally breaks in the middle of itself, and it happens rarely. Its extremities indeed break more often than the chest itself does, due to its accidents.
When the middle of it breaks down and tends towards the lower parts, it causes a very strong pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, perhaps vomiting blood, and a hollow appears in the fractured bone that is not concealed to the sense; The restoration of this is to lay the weak one on his back, and place between his shoulders a poultice.
Then press his shoulders, and apply the ribs from both sides or flanks with hands; Subtly cut in the equator of it, according to all possible ways that this can be done and fit, until the figure of the bone returns, as required.
Then place on it an emplaster and a plaster, and place above it a small star from a thin wood, such as willow or chalice, and others like them, after you fold it in a cloth. Then subtly tie it on the broken bone so that it is not removed; and go around with the bandage according to its roundness to the back several times, and bind it tightly with a suitable binding.
Then consider the bandage in every hour, and whenever it becomes soft, tighten it; And if necessity of its dissolution arises due to itching or corrosion that happens at the place, or pain, or abscess: then hurry, and dissolve it, remove the poultice, and correct what happened with the treatment.
Then return the poultice if you see it towards that face; And attach a binding to it until it is healed.
Chapter on Restoration of Ribs when they break.
You should know that the fracture of a costa does not occur except in thick places following the back, and from their extremities starting from the front side. And it does not happen to them by rubbing, unless for this reason: because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of such a thing is not hidden from sensation during examination with fingers.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the fracture is adjusted with fingers according to the possible method, until the shape is made even, as required. Then apply plasters, and bind the broken bone with a splint if it requires one.
If the fracture of a costa is towards the interior: then a severe pain occurs in the weak, and puncturing, just as puncturing that which happens to one who has pleurisy; because the bone pierces the membrane, and also difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood much: and this is difficult for treatment.
And the ancients were skilled in this with many devices; and among them are those who say that you should place food for the weak which generates inflammation and wind, so that the stomach is inflamed, extended, and pushed outwards to move the fracture towards the outside.
We rather avoid causing a quick cause for making a hot abscess if it does not occur. But if it has already occurred, then you can add it to that.
And some of them said: place a windy substance on the spot, then press it strongly, and it is more like reasoning. However, it is feared that a windy substance will attract excess to the spot due to the weakness of the arrangement.
And some of them said: the place should be covered with wool already soaked in hot oil; and lice should be placed between the ribs until it is filled up; so that the binding will be equal when you pull it off according to roundness.
Then the sick one is treated for pleurisy with food and medicine.
If the affliction presses hard upon the sick one and it cannot be borne, and if we prick the wound with a lancet, causing pain, and we fear for the sick one: then it is necessary that we make an incision above the affected place, and expose the broken rib. Then we shall place upon it an instrument which serves as a saw, whose recollection has been mentioned earlier: and we shall cut the bone easily, and we shall cut it itself.
Then we shall bring together two lips of the wound, if it is large with stitches: and we shall heal it with plasters until it heals.
If an abscess occurs in the meantime which is hot, then hurry, and pour powdered pig's bristles into sweet oil, and place it over the spot: and the sick one shall be treated with it as appropriate for an abscess.
In the meantime also let him lie upon his side on that side which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Chapter on the restoration of a fracture of the spine and neck.
Fracture sometimes occurs in the bones of the neck, and it rarely happens that they rub against each other; and similarly for the vertebrae of the back. If such a thing happens to anyone, and you wish to know if it will heal or not: then consider. For if you see his hands already softened, stunned, and dead; and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor contract them; and when you press them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, nor does he feel pain in them: then you will know that it will not heal, and in more than one condition it is mortal.
If he moves them and feels the pressure with his fingers and the prick: then you will know that the neck bone is safe, and that the broken one will heal with treatment.
If such a thing happens to the vertebrae of the back, and you wish to know if it will heal or not: then consider his feet; then if you see that they are softened and the same thing occurs in them as in the hands: and then when he lies on his back, wind comes out without will; and when he lies on his stomach, wind comes out without will; and when he lies on his back and wishes to urinate, but cannot: then you will know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not labor in the treatment of it.
But if nothing similar happens to him, it is less severe.
And the treatment for such a thing that happens to him is, you should apply hot oil to the rubbed vertebra; so that you place hot oil on the softened vertebra alone; or with sheep wool soaked in vinegar.
Place it on the same thing several times a day, until when the hot abscess is quieted: then place one of the strengthening and drying plasters on the location, and bind it tightly with a bandage; and tell the sick person to rest quietly and peacefully. He should not sleep over a part where he found pain, until it is healed.
If it happens by the fracture of the bone, or something that is separated from it: then it is necessary that you lay on the skin, and remove that. Then join together two lips of the wound, if it is large, with suture. Then take care of himself with some ointment, until healed.
If the last bone of the ulna is broken and it is the end of the shin: then it is necessary to insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus, and equal the fractured bone with the other hand, as much as possible, and by second adjustment.
Then place him on it, and remove it: and take care of the wound with the treatment that preceded, until healed.
Chapter on the repair of the anus.
Chapter XI.
Rarely do the bones of the ankles break. If they break, then the fracture of these bones is not anything other than a comminution at their ends; and they are cut through lengthwise, and they bend towards the inner parts; and there occurs pain in that place, and puncture; and the leg that breaks becomes numb.
And the repair of it is that you extend your hand over it until you are standing over the fracture in its figure.
If the fracture is only at their ends, then equalize that fracture, as much as possible, according to your preparation, until it becomes similar in its natural figure.
If the fracture is through length or already bending towards inner parts: then make the weak lay on his stomach until the preparation for repairing that fracture is ready. When you equalize it, place ointment on it; then place a splint of wood or hide over it; and tighten the bandage above it, so as not to fear movement of the fracture, nor removal of the splint.
And let the cavities [of the body] be equally concave with what they contain, until they are seized by a ligature in accordance with their equality; and command the sick person to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.
If, however, an abscess becomes hot: then cease from extending it and its healing until the hot abscess is seated; and place on him what sits upon it as previously, then return to its healing; and ligature it as needed.
If, however, it should happen that a fracture occurs in the bone, or if it is crushed, extract it.
Chapter on the healing of fractures. Aid is given.
The aid is that which is between the elbow and the head of the spatula [tool].
If it should break, then its healing is according to one of two methods.
One method is that you take a flat board of medium thickness, in the following shape:
And two ligaments shall be tied at both ends.
Then it is suspended from a raised place, and let the sick man sit on a seat. Then cast his broken arm upon a log until it reaches the notch of the same log, where the break of the log is attached.
Then place something heavy above him to stretch him towards below. Then the physician sets the break with his hands until it returns, as is required.
Another method is that the sick man lies down on his neck and suspends his hand from his neck with a rope. Then order two servants to hold one above the break with their hands and let another hold below him and stretch each of them in turn.
And if you wish for the extension to be stronger, then bind under the break with a rope and above it with another; let each of the servants stretch in turn towards their respective sides.
If the break is near the shoulder joint, then it should be bound under the notch and another above towards the elbow.
And similarly if the break is near the elbow joint: then it should be bound above that place and above the elbow itself.
Then set the break easily without exertion, until it is aligned as required and a good dressing is applied; then bind it if no hot abscess occurs.
If a hot abscess occurs, then refrain from binding until the seventh day. Place a linen cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil on him until the abscess subsides; then bind it and the method of binding is to place an ointment over the break.
Then lay a new cloth over the ointment. Then gather the arm upon the same support, and place his open hand upon his own shoulder.
Place the cloth and bind the arm to the support, so that the arm remains in place like a star; if it does not prevent you from doing anything or if nothing alters on you due to a broken bone.
If you fear that something may change due to a broken bone, then use stars; and there is one which you place over the fracture itself, which is broader and stronger than other stars. And place the width of every star at the length of a finger; and let the length of stars, with an addition of three fingers, be from all sides regarding the fracture.
Then bind on the stars as I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is to be so that your binding is closer to the place of fracture. As the fracture extends more, the binding shall be less.
If you see the position of stars and binding, as we have said, at the hour when you restore a limb immediately, then do so; and if you fear a hot abscess, then release the binding and stars until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the binding in all three days, so that itchiness, swelling or food does not reach the limb due to the surplus of binding. Therefore correct this matter as we have said.
If however you are confident that nothing will happen from it; then do not release the binding, unless after three days or more.
And let the sick person lie on his back and place his hand on his stomach; and place under the support a wool blanket full of wool evenly.
And consider at all hours of the night or day that the shape of the broken limb does not loosen and that the binding is not softened. Correct this altogether with your power.
Place the food for the sick according to the order which we have prescribed, so that it is a subtle food first, until the bone begins to be bound; then it is necessary that you increase its size.
For the custom of assistance and the leg is that it should be bound for forty days; then it is necessary that it is loosened, a bath is given, and it is treated with ointments which correct this.
If the fracture is foul, scrape it; then do not loosen from it the bandage and pegs for fifty days, and up to two months.
On the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two forearm bones.
One of them is small; and that is the one which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is the one which is placed below the small one from the lower part.
Perhaps only the larger forearm bone is broken, or perhaps both are broken.
If the smaller forearm bone above is broken, then the restoration of this is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower forearm bone is broken, its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And this is worse when both bones are broken simultaneously.
If the bone that is broken is the smaller forearm bone above, then it is fitting for the doctor in its restoration, to place an extension smaller with ease until it is equal to it.
If however the larger forearm bone is the one that is broken: then it is necessary to place a strong extension.
And it is necessary to place the shape of the hand at its restoration, and its extension extended above the pulley. The thumb of the hand should be higher than all the fingers; and the inferior joint should be higher than all the fingers or remaining [parts]; and if the patient is weak and sitting, the cubit bone should be square with respect to itself, and the pulley should be in front of it or directly above it at an appropriate height so that the weak patient does not suffer labor.
Then let the attendant extend the arm from its lower part, either with his hand, or with a rope. And another attendant shall extend it likewise from above.
Then the physician shall equalize the bone until he can reduce it to its best possible shape.
If there are shards in a bone fracture, then try to reduce every fragment into its proper place with your strength.
If it appears that a shard is separated and pierces the skin, and there is no hope for its restoration: then fill it over with material as we have mentioned before.
If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have made a special chapter for that: therefore receive its treatment from there.
If a hot abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then prepare linen cloth with wax made from rose oil, and white beeswax, and its consistency should be between thickness and fineness; then wrap the linen cloth around it tightly with a thin string until the abscess subsides; then remove the wax, and apply an ointment prepared from flour mill powder and egg white. Then place a splint, and let the splint placed over the fracture be slightly wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in various arrangements; whether it is a fracture in one splint or two splints together.
Then place a stronger and firmer strap over the location of the fracture, and apply it somewhat more to the upper or lower part of the fracture; or place a softer strap slightly below the one mentioned earlier, according to what was remembered in the beginning of the chapter.
The fabric that is wrapped around a fracture should be soft, wet and not hard or rough. The thread with which it is stitched should be made from flax, neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have said.
Consider the limb and the ligament after days. If something happens requiring correction, such as an itch on the limb: then it is necessary that you apply warm embrocation to the limb with hot water until the itch subsides, and leave the limb unbound until it subsides, then repeat binding.
If the binding has already been softened and the bone already removed, and similar cases: then you should correct it with your power, and consider again.
If nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess binding, then it is necessary to soften it a little and leave it for some days until it goes towards nourishment, then bind it again.
But if nothing of those things that were mentioned occurs in the sick one, then it is not necessary to loosen it, unless after twenty days or about this much.
Then the hand of the sick man is suspended at his neck. And let his neck be kept straight and guarded with your power against violent movements. Make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored within thirty or thirty two days; it may perhaps be restored within twenty eight days. All this is according to the dispositions of the constitutions and the dispositions of virtue.
Chapter on the Restoration of Fractures: Hand.
Know that the break in the hand by combing and knots of fingers is rare. It does not happen to him except through excessive rubbing.
When a fracture or abrasion of the foot occurs, then it is necessary that the sick person sits on a level seat next to him. Then place his hand upon it extended (the injured part).
Then let the attendant spread out the broken bones, and let the physician align them, until they join together well.
Then it is necessary to place plaster and wool (linen), if no hot abscess occurs. Then place a splint on top according to the size of the location, and you have already wrapped it with linen cloth.
If the fracture is near the heel of the foot, then make something like a ball from cloth: and tell the sick person to tread on it with his injured foot: then tie it up with long linen cloth.
And let the splint be made of soft leather, with which to apply it to the skin of the foot: and tie it on as necessary.
If the fracture is at the outer side (of the foot), then it is necessary to place one splint on top and another one underneath the foot, and let the hand be open straight. Then place a support, as the hand is rolled (into a tube): and extend it between the fingers with a ligation.
If there should be a fracture in any of the knuckles (of the fingers), if it is the thumb, then let it be aligned as necessary. Then tie it to the sole of the foot (the injured hand): and if it is a finger, place a straight splint under it, smaller than usual, so that the fracture may be elevated and not moved.
If the fracture is in the remaining fingers (such as the middle finger, index, little finger or ring finger), then let it be aligned and tied to the healthy digit that follows it, or tie them all together following their order: this is better. Place a small pin over it (the wound), as we said on the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the arrangement of the incision of hot cautery: and oppose it with what is necessary, when something happens from that, according to its repetition of his narrative.
Chapter on the treatment of a broken hip.
The thighbone (Femur) often breaks and becomes noticeable to the senses because it turns towards the inner and posterior parts.
The restoration of it (the thighbone) is done in such a way that a ligament is tightened above the fracture and another ligament below it. And the weak one (patient) stretches himself over his face.
Then, stretch out every ligament that serves for its side according to equality; and this when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If, however, it is a fracture near the root of the hip (acetabulum), then let there be a ligament towards the side of the ilium, so that the extension falls upward; and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if it is a fracture near the knee, then let there be a ligament near the knee so that the extension falls towards the lower parts.
Then the physician straightens the bone with both his hands until he returns it to its natural shape; and joins the bone by a good union.
Then it is necessary that you place an ointment and a bandage, if no abscess appears on the limb. If an abscess occurs there (on the limb): then leave it for some days until the abscess becomes warm, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage of this should be in such a way. It is necessary that you wind a hard linen (or bandage) over the fracture; and fold it twice or thrice, so that there remains an excess of it. Then fold the leg (or thigh), until the heel reaches the root of the toes.
Insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee, and let the ends of the thread come out from the lower parts (of the two parts). Then roll up the leg and thigh what remains over from the bandage.
Then place a small star on the hip at the site of the break, and place another star on the bone of the leg.
Then fill the gaps between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that it is bound tightly.
Begin (the bandage) strongly from the middle of the break in three or four turns. And as you extend (the bandage) away from the site of the break with the rope, let your bandage be looser and softer, and more gentle.
Then direct (the ends of) the thread that you inserted between the hip and the leg, towards the two ends. Tie three stars on each end. Then go with the two ends of the thread to the lower parts, until you reach the ankle of the foot. And tighten (the bandage) also with the ends of the stars on both sides, so that the bandage is not moved from its place.
Then let the bandage remain there until the bone is healed, so that no rot is caused to the limb, no abscess, no swelling, and similar things happen. But if something happens from that (the bandage). Approach it (the problem) then with the solution of it, and correct everything that happens from there completely, as we have said many times.
But if there is a piece of bone sticking out from the broken bone: then it is necessary that you cut it off, if it is possible for you. And if not (you can remove the bone piece with a cut), then place a bandage on it, and take care of the one who preceded the reminder, until it heals.
And sometimes this hip fracture is tightened, even when additional studs are added, as we said in the aid and in the arm.
However, in the treatment of this broken hip, it does not occur that the lame limp. And if it is restored alone, except that another leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that the one whose it is always limps.
And know that the hip tightens within fifty days, or is increased too little, or decreased too little; all of this is according to the diversity of temperaments and other conditions.
Chapter on the restoration of a knee joint fracture.
Know that the knee joint rarely breaks, but it often wears down (or wears away).
But if it occurs that it is broken, then it is not other than a split or a hole in its parts. It is with a wound and without a wound. And it stands on top of the whole thing with feeling.
And the restoration of it is thus: It is made equal to what was broken from its parts with fingers until it is gathered together and joined according to what is possible through equality, ease, and skillful craftsmanship.
Then apply a plaster from wheat flour or milled wheat, with egg white; and place over it a round stud, if needed; and tie on top with a binding appropriate for that.
Then consider all the conditions that we have mentioned in other fractures; such as hot abscess and similar things; so that you are ready for any occurrence with what is appropriate for it until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of a leg fracture.
Know that there are two bones in the leg, of which one is large and called by the name Cruris; and the other is subtle, and called Focile.
It happens to both kinds of fractures that it happens to two bones in the arm: and because of this, restoration is made of it, just as the restoration of an arm equally, and the operation is one.
If two bones are broken simultaneously, the leg is converted to all parts.
And if a thin bone is broken, the leg is converted to the anterior part.
And if a thick bone is broken, you find it lower: and it is from those which are not hidden to you.
Then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the stars equally according to that.
However, if the fracture of the leg is a dirty one, having many seths: so that the extension is less, and the alluvialtion is milder on your part.
And in the leg there is something more than in the arm concerning the operation: and it is that when you equalize the stars, and complete your entire operation, then take two bands from pine wood, which is used in the making of solar panels placed under tables: and they are made from the blades of the palm: and choose among them those with a slight thickness, and neither be from the very small ones: and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee downwards.
Then fold over one cloth with two folds according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side, and the other part on the other side: and they should be from the knee down to the foot.
Then bind the two bands in three places at both ends and in the middle. For if tightening is forbidden, the leg bends to the right and left, and stands with a good position.
And now let the crib be made of wood according to the length of the leg, and place the leg in it to keep it still.
It is greatly necessary that you do it in a fracture when there is a wound properly.
Then consider the Leg (Crura) on every day, and study with the utmost diligence from purging, or swelling, or other similar conditions. If something happens from among those (conditions), then oppose it with the appropriate means, until it is healed, if God wills it.
On the fracture of the bones of the Foot and Fingers.
A fracture does not happen entirely in the calcaneum (heel bone).
Bones of the Foot sometimes suffer a fracture, and even less so do the bones of the fingers: and it does not happen to them unless there is friction in many positions.
If a fracture happens in the bones of the Foot and you see those bones elevate over each other, then let the sick person place his foot on the ground prepared as if he is walking.
Then stand you there, and place your foot upon that which is elevated from those bones: afterwards press, or trample it; and equalize it, until it returns to its places.
Then place a plaster, and a woolen cloth on top of it: and put under the arch of the foot a small board with two flat heads.
Then bind it with an appropriate fetter when you lower it with linen cloths and other things that are required.
When three or four days have passed, then loosen the binding. For you will find the bones equalized, whether they are fractured or displaced. The operation is therefore as you see it.
If some fingers are fractured, then restore them and equalize them as I told you about the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place your finger at the length of the digit, and let it be slightly wider; then place under the foot this board that I told you, and tie it with a suitable suture.
If what is broken is from the bones and it is two, or three, or more, then place a splint of suitable size over all the fingers, rolled in linen cloth; and tie the board below the foot; and let it stand above one corner of the board outside the abdomen of the foot to hold with good retention.
It is suitable for you that you not forget to consider all the things I told you in the other fractures which I mentioned; and apply each one of them as required.
Chapter on the Fracture of a Woman's Face, and the Bone of the Chest and Man's Vertebra.
When a woman's face is fractured, then make her sit square (or upright). Then lean her towards the back of the same slightly, and let her be held backwards.
Then let an obstetrician fill the woman's wound with a linen cloth until it is filled; and let the wound on the face be shaped like a sphere.
Then the woman is shaken (or jarred), and her back is slowly raised. For that linen cloth will come out until it becomes before the door of the wound like a sphere, and the fractured bone returns (or heals).
Then place a pledget on her back. When she wants to menstruate, let her easily remove the linen cloth, then let her menstruate; and return it as much as she first inserted it; then let her return to her pledget (or pad) first.
Let her do that for seven days or approximately, for the bone itself will be restored.
And if you wish, take the bladder of an egg, and insert a reed cannula into its opening, and introduce the whole bladder into the sheath of it. Then blow through the cannula with force, until the bladder is inflated within the sheath; for otherwise it will burst.
Then fill it with a pad and let it stand for some days as we have said, until it heals.
And when the bone of the man's or woman's jaw is broken, then administer for its healing, and the same remedy that we have mentioned for the bone of Anchus.
And do not hide the rectum in close fractures, which seldom happen, especially for someone who has some knowledge or skill.
Understand my book well, for the fracture itself indicates to you in many positions the way of healing and the narrowing for its healing; understand this then.
In the case of a man's rod (penis) when it is broken, take the throat of a goose; and introduce the rod into it. Then place on top of it a covering made from cloth, and wrap it up, and let it stand for three days or about that time; and it will heal if God wishes.
Restoration of Bone Fracture When There is an Ulceration.
It is suitable for the one who has a fracture with an ulceration, especially if it is large such as the hip bone or the arm, to hasten and call a phlebotomist immediately; if the conditions of bloodletting are confirmed by you as we have said.
If the ulceration discharges blood, then it is necessary for you to hasten to its amputation so that lime powder is sprinkled over it; if there is nothing else present with you.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day: and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess hot, then delay the restoration for the ninth day until the abscess settles. And do not approach it on the third day and the fourth day completely, for you will make bad things happen to it.
But if the broken bone is prominent under the skin, then it is necessary that you try to reduce it and bring it into alignment with your hands easily and with slight extension.
But if there is no extension possible for it and cannot be aligned by your hands, then reduce it with this instrument. And the instrument is made of iron, whose length is of seven or eight fingers, and its width according to the size of the wound. And therefore it is necessary for the physician to take three or four according to the amount required for the cure of every type of fracture in any way.
And let it be round and have a small thickness so that it does not double up when compressed on top of it during the operation hour; and let it have sharp ends, to which there should be a margin at its ends. And let the top part of it be as thick as halfway down to the bottom.
And this is the form of it.
It is necessary in this operation that the sharp end of it is bent over the protruding bone extremity; and push it together with it in one motion until when the bone returns and aligns slightly.
Therefore try to align the extremities of the fracture against each other.
If the extremities of the fracture are fine and do not accept the instrument well, then it is necessary to cut the bone's extremity until the instrument can hold it.
If you cannot reduce [the fracture] as we have described, then cut it with what is appropriate for him from the incisions which we mentioned, or saw it with one of the saws in any way possible for you.
Then file the remainder on the bone from roughness and small cortices.
Since the bone is reduced and finds a weak spot after reduction causing strong pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Make this. For you give great aid to the weak when you complete the restoration that you do for the bone.
Then immerse a cloth in mustard water, black. And specifically if it is summer. And do not place vinegar or anything with oil on the wound; so that it does not cause rot and decay in it.
Then administer stars (asterisks) at the completion of your bone restoration hour. And release the discovered wound, so that you cut with forceps the opening in the swellings according to the size of the wound.
Take care not to stitch the wound with the fracture. For often have foolish physicians done this; and caused death or rot, or gangrene, that is, pus, on their weak patients. And your suture should be soft, gentle, and diverse from the remaining fracture sutures.
If the wound is bad or large and you fear some of the evils we have mentioned and find pain in the place suspended, then it is not necessary that you place stars over it. And make swellings from tough cloths in the place of the stars and stitch it with them.
When however it is past one day or two and you see the wound already starting to produce pus: then remove from above the cloth which you placed over it with wine. Administer linen and unguents as per our custom to heal wounds; such as the tetrapharmacon ointment, and similar ones.
It is suitable for you to loosen the bandage. You should examine the wound every day at morning and evening until it heals and becomes well.
It is necessary to prepare the limb so that pus drains from it easily towards the lower parts.
If several days pass and the wound does not heal or does not drain pus from it: then you will know that there are fractures of small bones in that place. Therefore, you should investigate the wound with probing. How many of these fractures are separated: remove them and extract them. And those which are not separated and pierce the limb and cause pain, try to cut them off, and remove them in any way possible for you.
If an abscess or purulence occurs at the wound, i.e., if it is a boil or any other corruption and putrefaction: then you must apply to each of them what is appropriate for their treatment as described in their respective chapters.
And from the conversation in which my speech should remain, and to whom you are to give your attention when a bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, like the hip bone or shoulder blade or similar large bones: it is not presumptuous to attempt its attraction, for many times death occurs from this. Instead, leave it alone until it becomes putrid.
Perhaps it falls by itself within twenty days, or thirty.
Then care for the wound, if it seems to you: and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter on the treatment of a swelling in the step of a broken bone.
Often occurs this swelling in the step during healing of a fracture. Mainly those near joints: and it becomes foul from that member's shape. And perhaps it prevents the member from its natural function.
Therefore, consider then if the swelling is recent: administer to it medications that have astringent properties, such as aloes, frankincense, myrrh, pitch, acacia, and similar ones.
Thus, so that you receive some of these or all of them: and prepare them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar: and place them on the swelling on a linen cloth, and tie them firmly with a good suture.
And leave the suture, do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and put another on until the swelling is removed.
Or tie it firmly over a lead plate. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from members.
If the swelling has already turned into a stone and is tightened and urgently requires removal: then bind it from above its side, and cut off any excess protruding: or grind it with some scrapers until it is removed: and care for it until it heals.
Chapter on the treatment when the member is restored, but remains delicate afterwards, not according to its natural state.
When a bone fracture is restored and the limb remains tender and weak afterwards, it is not done except for many reasons. One of the reasons is an abundance of dissolution of ligament and its binding not as required; or due to excess tightening of ligaments, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive embrocation at an incorrect time; or due to scarcity of blood in the body of the weak, and its debilitation.
The treatment for it is to feed the weak and make his body tender until blood multiplies in him. Administer a bath. Insert joy and happiness over him.
Then place pitch on the limb; so that the pitch attracts much nourishment to it. Continue embrocation of it with warm water until the nourishment heals and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter on the healing of fractured bones when they are restored twisted.
When after the restoration of a limb, twisting or projecting bone of the fracture, or nodulation occurs, and it disfigures the shape of the limb, although the limb does not prevent its natural operation; in such cases one should not listen to the speech of him who believes that the limb should be broken again.
And there have been many foolish doctors and restorers who did this on our land.
This operation is indeed highly condemnable, leading to death or great fear that it will prove fatal.
However, if the limp and nodulation are recent; then it should be embrocated with warm water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as the leaves of althea, its root, mellilotus, and similar ones. And let it (be) an ointment like well-prepared diachylon.
Take the mucilage of the root of the marshmallow plant, grind it with chicken fat or sesame oil; and apply (it) as an ointment.
Or take the ripe figs and crush them with dove droppings and similar medications that are called those which reduce consolidation.
And sometimes a knot is loosened by frequent rubbing with an old and gentle friction, which is done with moist hands. And move the affected limb to all its parts at all hours.
If however it has already preceded (the) tortuosity and has become strong, and has turned into a stone, and the necessity of treatment with iron has been provoked: then it is necessary that it be cut above its knot, and the continuity of the bone be loosened, and what exceeds from the knot or bone be cut with the thin chisels: and ease be given to it with diligence and care.
Chapter on Dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some joints from their place. Why it (the member) should not be moved and the figure of the limb becomes deformed. And causes the occurrence of additional pain on the weakened part, and severe injuries.
Therefore when dislocation occurs, it is necessary to hasten to its restoration; nor should one delay it at all.
For if delayed, the location (joint) becomes fixed, and possibly with it the reduction of dislocation.
Therefore it is not necessary to move or stretch during the time of dislocation setting. Because it often causes spasm and painful injuries.
But when this happens, then it is necessary to hurry to the bloodletting of the weakened. Then it should be allowed to rest until the abscess subsides.
Then the limb is to be anointed with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced [in size].
And all the limb shall be cured with it, when its recollection comes to its place.
I myself have already arranged the chapters on dislocation, even as to what preceded it in the fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower extremity.
Chapter on the care for dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two Jaws seldom get dislocated.
Dislocation occurs in two ways. Or they are moved slightly from their places and become somewhat softened. The dislocation should be reduced by complete reduction until it softens to the chest part, until the sulcus runs weak and cannot hold it, nor can it close its own mouth, and the tongue of it is wound up with speech.
When, however, the dislocation is small, then it returns to many positions by itself with scarcity.
If the dislocation is complete and whole, then it must be administered a quick reduction and not delayed too much; and there should be someone to hold the head of the sick person; and the doctor should insert his thumb into the root of the dislocation's mandible bone if the dislocation is from one part. Or he inserts both thumbs at once, if the dislocation is from two parts. And the remaining fingers of his hand should be outside, to hold them equal.
And command the sick person to clean his mandibles and to purify them for eating all parts. The doctor equalizes the mandible and pushes it back until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both mandibles are together; then administer vaporization with hot water and oil until it becomes easy to reduce both of them; do not delay the reduction of both of them at all, as we said.
When they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the sick person is closed, and they do not soften; then place a pad of linen cloths on them, with a wax made from beeswax; and rose oil.
Then bind it easily with soft bands.
And let the sleep of the sick person be on his back; and his head should be stationary between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right or left; nor should he try to chew something; instead, let his food be soft, until when the pains are removed, and the mandible is loosened; then let him eat whatever he wants, and let that be given to him easily.
Do not let him eat or drink at his mouth operation and swallowing, and talking, until the mandible is sutured and healed.
If the reduction of the two jaws becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and do not return to their places: then fevers often occur, and there is continuous vomiting; and perhaps the weak stomach dissolves, and perhaps it vomits bile.
When you see this (scil. the difficulty of reduction): then know that it is a ruin, and he who has this often dies within ten days.
Chapter on the reduction of dislocations of the collarbone, and the extremity of the humerus.
The collarbone is not dislocated from within on the side, due to its continuity with the chest. It is sometimes dislocated towards the outside and this is perceived by touch.
The restoration is that the sick one lies on his back, and extends his arms. Then hollow out a place with your hand, for it will return there.
Then place on it the plaster and the lint, and bind it.
However, its ends following the elbow should not be dislocated unless rarely. If it is dislocated on some day: then it is necessary that it should be reduced and set in accordance with what has been said, and what is prepared for you.
Then place upon it the plaster and lint, and bandage. And command the sick one to adhere to calmness and stillness until he is healed.
With this same treatment, the shoulder joint is reduced when it is separated even from its place.
Chapter on the Reduction of Shoulder Dislocation.
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways.
One of these is that it dislocates towards the touching part below. The second is that it dislocates towards the chest. And perhaps it is dislocated towards the upper part of the Humerus: and that happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated towards the backside, because of the spoon. And it is not dislocated towards the front side, because of the nerves.
Indeed it is dislocated and goes towards the lower side turned upside down mostly; particularly in those whose flesh is scanty. Because it comes out quickly in them and enters quickly.
But in those whose flesh is abundant, it behaves contrary to that, namely because it comes out with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some people that there is a blow or an accident and the humerus is dislocated by a dislocation tool when hot, and it is believed because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary to test that, until you are certain of its nature, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
And a dislocation is known when it is towards the lower side turned upside down; and you distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a healthy one. For you find a clear difference among them, and in the head of the humerus, there is a hollow, and beneath the swollen part of the humerus, it seems as if it is an egg; and the weak person cannot return his hand to its own ear nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards; then you find a clear swelling that is not hidden.
And this type of dislocation has an easy reduction when it is recent or the child is weak.
And its reduction is that the tool raises the hand towards the upper part. Then place your thumbs beneath it and raise the joint with strength towards its place; and the tool raises the hand and stretches it upwards. Then place her below, for he quickly returns.
If he does not return as we have said, and it is from the beginning that dislocation occurs, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water, and embrocation should be administered which softens and soothes, just as if they infuse the roots of althea, fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and it should be administered.
Then the sick one shall lie down on his back: and let there be placed beneath his chest a sphere and wool, which should be equal in softness and tightness.
Then the doctor shall place his heel on the sphere, and push the head of the humerus with force, and draw the hand of the sick one towards the lower part.
And if you wish, bring him back according to this manner: and it is that you make the man present who is taller than the sick one, and he shall stand on the side, and insert his arm under the chest of the sick one: and push the chest upwards, until the sick one is suspended in the air. And another servant shall draw the hand of the sick one towards the lower part of his belly. If the sick one is light: then it is necessary that he be suspended with something else, to make him heavy; for the dislocation quickly returns.
And it is brought back according to another manner: and it is that a piece of wood is shaped on the earth in the form of a round handle, like a glove maker's handle; not too heavy, nor too fine. Then let there be placed beneath the sick one, after the logs have been put on his head; and let the sick one stand according to the length of the wood.
Then extend his hand towards the lower part and extend his body from the other side with strength: for the union returns to its place quickly.
If his reduction is difficult through all that has been said, then use this care: and it is to receive a stick whose length is the measure of two arms, and its width four fingers, and its thickness two fingers: which should have a round head, so that it may be softened the entrance into the depth, according to this form.
Then wrap soft cloths around the round head, so as not to injure the weak stick.
Then place it below the weak point, so that the hand or arm may be extended over the stick to the lower part: and tie the stick to the helper and arm and end of the hand.
Then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and extend the hand towards the lower part, and let the remaining body hang suspended from the other side. For the union enters immediately.
When therefore the entrance is completed according to any method possible: then it is necessary, that you place under the weak point a sphere equal in size from wool. Then place ready ointment prepared from milled powder with olive oil and egg white on the whole shoulder, as it is rolled over.
Then tie a bandage under the weak point of suitable size: and wind the thread over the ointment above: and connect his hand to his neck and let it not be moved for seven days.
It is necessary that food be given sparingly until the member is strengthened: because it is quicker for its healing.
Then it is to be placed again after seven days or five and let it be washed with movement. If therefore it [the wound] is tightened and not softened, then it has already been healed.
If the dislocation [of a fracture] is repeatedly disturbed due to the moisture that happens to it or because of another reason: then it is necessary, that cautionery be applied to it with three holes, according to what was previously stated in the chapter on cautery.
If this is done entirely, and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the dislocation is not tightened, and the plaster and the bandage are repeatedly applied and tightened above it but do not hold and cannot raise it upwards: then you know that the nerves that are at the head of the humerus have already been cut or stretched or softened; and you know that a dislocation will never heal in its place.
A dislocation that occurs towards the chest and breastbone or is reduced towards the back is made with pressure and extension using hands; until it returns and further bandaging and care are applied, until it heals.
If after healing there is heaviness in the limb and slowness of its motion, then the sick one should bathe himself many times until that heaviness is relieved, and it returns to the first nature of his limb.
Chapter on the healing of elbow dislocations.
You should know that the dislocation of the elbow occurs with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty as well; it is dislocated in all directions, especially towards the front or towards the back.
Its [the dislocation's] position is not hidden from you: because it falls under sight and touch, according to whatever form it is dislocated. And when you join the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, its position is declared to you clearly. The joint should be joined and it cannot double the arm nor touch with it its own shoulder.
It is necessary that you rush and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a warm abscess occurs to it.
For if a warm abscess occurs to it, the reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps it does not heal at all, especially when it is toward the backside. Indeed, every kind of dislocation is worse and more painful; and death often accompanies it many times.
And the restoration of it, when it can be reduced, is to extend the hand with two hands; and the arm should be expanded, and the hands of the physician should be above the elbow and below it, and he himself should push the joint with the fingers of his hands together, or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or if the dislocation is toward the frontside: then it returns in such a way that it doubles the hand with its own hand, until it strikes with the root of his palm the elbow which is dislocated.
If the dislocation does not obey in reduction, then administer a strong and forceful extension; and it is that two assistants extend the arm; and hold him also, so that he is not moved during the extension.
Then turn the arm to every side when a cloth doubled long or wide bandage is wrapped around it.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he binds it with oil; so that this is from those which help in lubrication of the joint with ease. Then push the joint with a strong thrust until it returns.
After its reduction, it is necessary to place on it a plaster containing astringency and extract of egg white; and to bind it with a bandage of appropriate size. Suspend the arm of the sick person from his neck for some days.
Then release (it). If it becomes fixed in its place, then loosen the binding from it and let it be.
And if you see that the stitch is not tight enough, then reapply the plaster, the binding, and let it be for some days until it becomes tight. Then loosen (it).
If, however, it happens that there is pain after the reduction of the stitch and the condition is mobile: then administer humectation in bathing, and fine friction, and compression, until it heals, or place upon the stitch a sheep's wool fat (iliatum), that is, the greasy hide of a ram. Then bind (it) and let it be over it day and night. Then remove it, and immerse (him) in the bath. When he sweats, then gently friction the stitch. Then place upon it one, two, and three times with an alum application when entering the bath until it softens.
And if you wish, place upon it dung of a cow, moist and warm with butter, and bind (it) over it.
Do this several times. It becomes softened and returns to its normal condition.
Chapter on the cure of a dislocation by Albucasis.
Many times Almahassem's hand is dislocated, that is, the stitch between the arm and the hand.
The reduction of this dislocation is easy. On the contrary, the other joints (are more difficult). However, it is necessary that speed be in the reduction of this dislocation within the hour in which it was dislocated, before the abscess appears there; or an abscess occurs in the same place.
And the reduction of a dislocation is as follows: Place Mahassem, the weak hand, on the table, and let its attendant extend it; then the physician shall place his palm over the prominent joint, and push until it returns.
However, it must be considered if the palm has already receded towards the wrist of the hand: then let the weak hand lie flat on the table for both extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then the position of its hand should be intrinsically on the table, that is, the inner part of the hand should lie on the table, so that the physician's hand falls on top of the prominent joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then bind it with a plaster sitting on the abscess; and let him be left alone, do not repeat it.
For if it does not tolerate the reduction, nor can you do it again after the days have passed, but the joint remains in its twisted state; and nothing harms the weak except that it is softened by the hand, and it cannot be bound: then you will know that the nerves have been cut or rubbed.
Therefore, there is no skill in it, except that it should be tied with a cautery near the break. And perhaps it does not help with anything.
When Almahassem does not return, then place on him the plaster as we have said. Then it is bound and left for five days; afterwards it is loosened and left, and the hand is exercised.
If it loses motion and something of weight occurs there: then soften it with warm water and rubbing several times until it becomes soft.
Chapter on the treatment of finger dislocations.
When a finger is dislocated in any direction or to the back of the palm, or the palm's inside: then extend the affected finger, and push the dislocation back using your thumbs until it returns to its place.
Then hold the finger's head and turn it towards the direction of the dislocation, and let it remain like that for two days.
Then suspend it, and extend it until it is equal to its straight state on that day.
When it is night, tie it as described, and do not untie it during the day; exercise it with movement, and tie it at night.
Do this for several days until it has healed.
And likewise do the same if a finger is dislocated towards the palm of the hand; tie it to that part and perform your first operation on it until it heals.
And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter on the treatment of spondylolisthesis of the back.
When anyone has a vertebral spine dislocation, either complete of the neck or many vertebrae being removed from their places: then there is no cure in it, because death approaches the weak.
And the sign of it is that the sickness goes out without will, nor can he hold it; and many times some members of his soften from it, or two legs of his, or two arms of himself, or one of them; or a vertebra is removed from its place.
For many times it is removed, for many times it is the removal to four parts.
Therefore that which is removed towards the back, is called Gibbositas.
The cure of it is that you consider then, if Gibbositas occurs from childhood; then there is no cure in it, and there is no healing at all from it.
But in that which occurs by accident, or blow, or similar things, the ancient ones have already spoken about the methods of treatment in a long speech. It does not return to many when it goes forward.
I have already abbreviated from that one, whose little excuses for many because of my proximity to its intention; and in my exposition, I have shown it, and formed its instrument in a different way than they showed it and explained it.
Therefore I say that in Gibbositas which occurs from the front part, there is no healing, nor recovery from it.
And similarly in that which happens to two sides also.
And it is not cured from them, except that which occurs in the back properly, as I say; and there is, that the sick one must be spread on his face on an equal plank almost to the wall; and a wet cloth is spread under him so as not to hurt his chest.
Then place a straight stick fixed in the fire on the ground, at the end of the foot, about its head: and another stick about its feet at the other end of the foot: and let a servant hold the stick, and it not be fastened in the fire. And let another servant hold the other.
Then cover the head of the sick man, and under his chin tie a loose bandage, firm: and extend the end of the bandage to the stick which is at his head: and bind it to that.
Then tie another bandage above his ankles, and above his knees, and at his joints. Then gather all the bandages together, and bind them to the other stick which is at his feet.
Then let all the servants extend their bandages to the part of the stick, and let them not be moved from their places where they are fixed: but they should not be fastened, as we said.
And the doctor shall place his hands on the knee with strength, until it returns: or he shall place a plank over it. Then he ties his feet to the plank until it returns.
If it does not return by this treatment, then take a plank whose length is about three arms. And hollow out a cavity in the wall which I mentioned next to the sick man, into which the end of the plank shall enter. Then place the middle of the plank on the knee. And the doctor places his feet on the other end. And bind it tightly, until the knee is straightened and returns to its place.
Then, if you wish, work with a lathe that turns with your hand: and it is so that you mark two sticks on the ground at the head of the sick man at the end of the other foot, whose length is an arm: and at his head at the end of the other foot two sticks.
The length that is between every stick [is] one palm: and now a hole has been made in every place where the tourniquet runs: and securely fasten all the sticks to the ground very much, so it does not move at all.
Insert a round stick: and there is a tourniquet in which the ligament is turned in two holes of two sticks.
At the end of it is a hole, in which the stick is fastened, whose length is one palm and a bit more [than that]: and similarly on two other sticks there are [holes] too.
Then bind the ligaments that you bound on the chest of the sick man with the tourniquet that is at his head: and bind the ligaments that you bound on his limbs in the tourniquet that is at his feet.
Then stand at every tourniquet the servant who turns his hand with a cloth, by which the tourniquet is turned: and the doctor ties the Spondilium, as we said before.
Here is the form of the tourniquet [that follows].
Then after the Spondilium returns and the place is tied, then it is necessary that you put on an ointment of dried figs with egg white. Then [apply] wool. Then place on top of the ointment a star-shaped figure from a board, whose width is three fingers or about that. And its length should be such as to cover the area of the swelling and the healthy part of the Spondilium.
Then it is tied with the ligament that I mentioned. The sick man should use a subtle food until he gets well.
If something remains protruding in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that [they administer] medicines that soften and soothe, with the use of the board that I mentioned for a long time. And now, the leaf (or plate) of lead is administered to it.
And at times, it happens that a prominence occurs on the last vertebra of the back; and it is thought to be a dislocation, and it is the bone that protrudes. Therefore, it is not appropriate to make an assumption with this medicine; for perhaps it will cause death.
Chapter on the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Know that the joints of the ankle and the joints of the shoulder do not happen unless there is a dislocation; nor does it happen to them what happens to the other joints from a slight removal and concavity.
Indeed, the ankle joint is dislocated in four parts. That is, because it is dislocated to the front and to the back.
Indeed, it is mostly dislocated inwardly; and it is less often dislocated to the front and to the back.
And the treatment for dislocation to the interior is: because when you connect the weak foot with a healthy one, it is longer; and the knee of this [dislocated] one protrudes more than that of the healthy one, and the weak one cannot double its foot at the groin; and there is a place following the groin which has been pressed by a hot press, because the head of the hip has already reached there.
And the sign for a dislocation to the outside is that its symptoms are contrary to these symptoms [described previously].
And the sign for a dislocation to the front is that it expands the healthy foot by its entire length; however, it does not double [the step] without pain in the knee; and if it tries to walk, it cannot do so forward; and urine retention occurs, and the groin area is pressed, and there is striking on the heel during walking.
And the sign for a dislocation to the back is that it does not expand the knee, nor can it double [the step] before doubling the groin; and the leg is even shorter than the other; and the groin area is softened, and the head of the hip is in its place.
The reduction [of this dislocation] is as follows: consider then if the dislocation is old, which has already healed with it. Then if you administer a reduction and it remains according to its disposition: then there is no cure at all in it. Therefore, one should not make presumption of it too deeply.
In the case where the dislocation is recent, and it belongs to one of the four types of dislocations: then proceed to this, that you wish to reduce it, and stretch it towards its interior and exterior parts, and move it right and left: perhaps it will return, and it will not need any other care.
But if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary to prepare a strong assistant and he should extend the leg from its lower part: either with his hands or with a rope tied above the knee; and another assistant should extend his hand from above so that he introduces his hands under its joints. Then bind it with a soft rope around the root of the hip, and hold the end of another ligament.
And let the extension be from its anterior part of the groin to the breast part, or from its posterior part to the back part.
Let the extension of all [bodies] be one until the weak [body] is raised from the ground and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is a common type in the four types.
If the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all that I will say about its cure.
In the reduction of it itself when the dislocation is towards the interior, it is necessary for the weak to lie on its healthy side. Then place a rope around the root of the hip, where it is between the head of the hip and the place that is under the groin. Then extend the rope upward from the groin to a higher part of the body, to the breast part.
Then let another strong man take hold, and enlarge the large place of the weak hip, and extend it to the outward extension with great force. Now it has returned to its own place.
And this form is easier than the other forms of cure, by which this member is restored.
If it is excised over you and does not obey you to the entrance with this form of cure at all: then it is necessary, that two weak feet are tied together with a strong ligament, loose, on both heels, and on both knees; and let the length of each be four fingers' width from its root; and let the injured leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
Then suspend the weak one over the head of the beam that is in the house; and let its length from the ground be two forearms' width.
Then command a strong youth to brace the head of the hip; and suspend it with another one; and let another youth push, bracing the hip with strength, for the joining returns to its own place quickly.
In its own return, when there is a dislocation to the outside, it is necessary that the weak one lies on the platform, according to what we said in the one with humpback. And let a ligament be bound over his leg, the weak one itself, and over his chest.
Then two beams are placed, one at his feet, and another at his head. Then a beam is placed in the middle of the platform, fixed well; over which are rolled wet cloths so as not to hurt the weak one; and let the beam be between his hips, so that it is not drawn downwards at the extension.
Then let everyone go to their place, and the doctor equalizes the reduction with his hand.
If it obeys for returning, it will be good.
And if not, place it on the table and press it, as we said in gibbosity, equally. Moreover, the weak one should lie on its healthy side.
And when dislocation is towards the front, then it is necessary that the weak leg be extended quickly; and this is according to the same narrative above on a stool; and let the physician place the palm of his right hand on the thigh of the weak one. Then bend it with the other hand, and with that bending place it extended towards the lower parts at the knee.
And if dislocation is towards the back: then it is not necessary that the weak one be extended towards the lower parts and raised on the ground; instead, it should be placed on a hard surface, as it should also be when dislocation occurs to its outward side, according to what we said about lying down on two surfaces; and it should be in front of its face and the ligaments stretched; according to what we said recently.
And it is necessary that compression be administered with a table also on the place from which the dislocation departs, when reduction is completed according to what is necessary.
And the sign of its reduction is not hidden from you: and it is to extend two legs of the weak one; and when you see that they are equal, and the weak one tightens his leg and stretches it without any hesitation; then you will know that the limb has returned, according to what is necessary: then join the hips, place a plaster, and tie with a bandage, which means a wheel; so that the dislocation does not move towards some part; and let the weak one remain quiet for three or four days.
Then unloose the ligament and plaster, and connect the leg with the other; then if you see that they are equal in position, then you will know that the dislocation is already fixed; therefore release the weak one for walking.
If you see something softening (rotting): then return and pack it, and bind it according to your first binding method; and leave it even for three days.
Then dissolve that (the ointment) and make it delay in walking on both sides for some days, until it recovers well.
Part of a Treatise on Dislocations Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outwardly, inwardly, downwards (posteriorly), that is, backwards.
And it is not dislocated forwardly.
The sign of its dislocation is that you command the weak person to apply his leg to his hip. But if it does not adhere with the thigh: then know that the knee is dislocated.
The restoration of all the ways of dislocation is that you make the weak person sit upright, so that he now extends his leg if possible over it, and lets his back rest on your face; and place his foot between your feet.
Then make the knee adhere with your palms, and apply them straight across the knee in between the fingers. Then apply with your palm two sides of the knee with force. Let another servant extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place.
The sign of restoration is that the leg adheres with the thigh gently, not forcefully.
Then pack it (the knee), and make the leg adhere with the thigh. Then bind them together with lint for three or four days. Then dissolve it (the binding).
Let the weak person not walk for some days until he is healed.
If you are refused reduction (manual repositioning), then administer strong extension with bandages, whose method was previously mentioned in the treatment of ankles, until it returns.
Treatment for Dislocation of Heel Bone.
When the heel bone is sometimes moved slightly and other times it is dislocated completely. And its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
The sign of its dislocation is that you see the calcaneus swollen, advancing towards the part to which it is being dislocated.
The cure for its removal (dislocation) is simple repositioning: and it is that it should be stretched easily with the hands, and made equal until it returns.
In the cure of it (dislocation) when it dislocates according to its complement, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright: and let him be held by a strong attendant from behind the middle of his back.
Then hold with your right hand the foot from its upper part and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the place of the calcaneus.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with your left hand on each side (of the foot).
Then extend with your left hand and push the front of the foot with your right hand towards the calf without effort.
Do that twice as we have said.
Then push the front of the foot towards the calf on the third time and you pull the calcaneus.
If therefore it returns to its place once or twice in this manner and you see the foot made equal, that is good: but if not, then repeat the operation on it; because it will return.
If its repositioning is prevented by it as we have said, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a pillow strongly in the ground so that it falls between his hips: and now roll over him a cloth to prevent the sick person from being hurt.
Then take hold of his hip by an attendant: afterwards the other attendant should stretch the leg either with hands or with a strap tied around the neck of the foot. Then all attendants should stretch against the counter stretch (of the dislocation): and let a pillow stand between the hips of the sick person holding him so that his body is not drawn towards the lower part during the stretching.
Then, the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, and the other servant holds the sound leg below. The dislocation returns quickly.
When the dislocation returns and it is shown to you that the healing of it has taken place: then put plaster and wool, and tie it firmly with bandages, and bind the foot with a bond to the leg.
And it is necessary that you be careful or fear of the nerves which are above the heel behind, so that the bandage is not too tight and injures them.
Then release him for two or three days. If the bandage softens, tie it again: then loosen him on the third or fourth day: and prevent the weak from walking for forty days. But if he tries to walk before that time, there is no security, unless the dislocation is loosened again, and it breaks, and will not accept healing afterwards.
If a hot abscess occurs to him: then it is necessary that you administer for its soothing that which was previously told in another place about the cure, and the embrocation, until it is removed.
Chapter on Dislocation of the Toes of the Foot, and Cure.
It is necessary that what is dislocated from them be reduced with little extension without effort: and this indeed is not difficult, but rather easy.
If the dislocation is in some knots of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that the weak sits his foot on a level place of the ground, or on a table: and he stands as if walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot on that which projects from those joints. Then press it with your foot with force until it returns, and you see that it is reduced, and the projection no longer appears in its place.
Then place under his foot a board that can hold the whole foot, which has two holes. Then tighten it with a bandage for three days. Then loosen it, and let him rest from walking for many days until it is tightened and secured against displacement.
On the types of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When something like this occurs, and you attempt its treatment and restoration, death often happens many times over; and therefore, one should not presume to treat it unless he is wise in the art of long practice, merciful, pious, slow, not daring, nor presumptuous; and that he should use only medicines which assuage hot inflammations in the beginning; and let him leave the sick to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for salvation from destruction with mildness of illness, and where there is something that appears promising. Therefore, try the reduction of it immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a hot abscess occurs.
If the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that assuages the abscess; and care for the wound with it as suits it from dry ointments.
If the dislocation is with fracture and splinters separate from the bone occur, then try their removal, and do what was said before in simple diseases in those places.
And beware according to your own strength, and guard yourself from entering into the path of fear; as was said before by my preaching to you.
For it is better for you before your Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more beneficial for your body in your time among them.
