After I have completed this book for you, O Sons, which is the last one concerning knowledge in medicine with its complement, and having reached the end of it by expositions and explanations, it appeared to me to be fitting that I complete it for you with this Treatise, which forms part of operation, i.e., surgery with hand.
Since operation with hand is laid low in our region and during our time entirely removed: perhaps the knowledge of it has perished, and its trace vanished; and only small descriptions of it remain in old books, which have been altered by hands; and error and hesitation have arisen until the intention is closed and the force waned: It seemed to me fitting that I bring it to life again with the organization of this Treatise according to the way of exposition, explanation, and abbreviation; and that I come with forms of iron tools of Cautery, and other instruments of work, when it is made by addition of declarations, and by the proper use of what is necessary.
The reason why a good craftsman with his hand is not found in this time is because the art of medicine is long, and its author must exercise himself before that in the knowledge of anatomy as Galen narrated, until he knows the aid of members, their forms, their connection, separation, and the knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, their number, their departure, veins pulsating and quiet, and their outlets.
And for that reason, Hippocrates said that much is the name with a name, and little is the work, especially in the art of hand.
We have already spoken about it at the beginning of this book.
Whoever is not knowing what we said about anatomy, will immediately fall into error, in which people are killed: as I have seen many of those who are formed from this science, boasting about it without knowledge and without experience.
I have seen a stupid physician cut an aposteme (boil) on a woman's neck and accidentally cut some arteries in the neck: therefore, blood flowed from the woman until she fell dead at his hands.
I have seen another physician who dared to remove a stone from an old man who had grown it, and the stone was large. So he came to him, and removed it along with part of his bladder. Therefore, the man died on the third day.
I had already been called to remove it; and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient that he would die.
I have seen another physician who received a staff at some Duke's land for medicine, and it happened to him a eunuch black, who was with him, suffered a fracture near his heel: and the physician, in his ignorance, bound up the fracture over a wound with splints, strong bandages, and needles, and did not let the wound breathe.
Then he cured him according to his own devices. Then he released him after some days, and ordered him not to undo the binding: and it stood thus until a boil came on his leg, and on his foot, and it led to his destruction.
I was then called to him: and I hastened to undo the binding: and peace came upon him, and he was freed from his pains.
However, the corruption had already been confirmed in the member: and I could not stop it.
Stop then the corruption to walk in the member, until it perishes.
And I saw another physician who pierced a malignant ulcer (apostema), and it became worse over days until the wickedness of it was manifested with its master (lord).
Because when a cancer is pure from the melancholic humor, then it is not appropriate to approach it with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can endure, so that the whole of it is cut off.
And because of this (saying) O Sons (of the Prophet), it is necessary for you to know that an operation is divided into two divisions, namely, an operation which is associated with safety: and an operation with which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already awakened throughout this entire book, where the operation comes which has fear and dread.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of that (matter) and separate it from itself: so that fools do not find a way to speak about it and shame it.
Take then the measure with care and protection, and your sick ones with ease and firmness, and use a better way leading by the grace of God to health and praiseworthy success: and let go of terrible illnesses difficult to heal; and free your souls from what causes you fear, so that hesitation in faith and comfort may not enter upon you.
For it remains more to your glory, and it is higher in this world, and finally to your wealth.
Galenus indeed said so in some of his advisories. Do not heal the evil sickness, lest you be called an evil physician.
Now however, I have divided this Treatise according to three Chapters.¶
Chapter One.
On Cautery with fire, and Cautery with sharp medicine, is discussed, and ordered from head to feet, and the forms of instruments and tools for Cautery, and all that is necessary in the procedure.
Chapter second.
On sectioning and perforating, phlebotomy and wounding, as well as arrow extractions and similar matters; and the entire chapter ordered in forms of instruments.
Chapter third.
On restoration, dislocation, treatment of twisting, and similar matters; discussed and ordered from head to feet, and the forms of instruments.
Before I remember the operation with him, it is necessary that I say the qualities of his remedies and his harms, and in which compound they are displayed.
I say therefore that the discourse on the quality of the cautery and its harm is a long, subtle, learned discourse, a secret hidden thing.
Also, there was a multitude of wise ones in it, and they disagreed among themselves; and for me, it is enough with little from their discourses, fearing prolongation.
I say therefore that the cautery applies generally to every compound, which is with matter, and without matter; except for two compounds, which are a hot compound without matter, and a dry compound without matter.
But in the hot and dry compound with matter they disagreed. For some, it was said that the cautery is beneficial in it. And others said the contrary to that one, namely that the cautery is not suitable in a disease which is from heat and dryness; because the nature of fire is heat, and it is inconvenient to be healed from a hot and dry disease with heat and dryness.
And he who says the contrary to that one said: by the cautery, it is a remedy for every hot and dry disease which happens in the bodies of men; because when you compare the body of man and his humidity, to the compound of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I certainly say through his discourse: because from experience he has already revealed that to me several times.
Nevertheless, it is not necessary for him to come to that, unless he who has already been proven and exercised in the last chapter of cautery, and knows the diversity of human complexions, and the constitution of diseases within himself, and the causes of them, and their symptoms, and the space of time of them.
From the remaining temperaments, there is no fear for you: and particularly in cold and moist diseases. Indeed, all physicians agree on them: and they have not disagreed in their treatment with Cautery in them.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing by Cautery with fire and its goodness upon the Cautery with a medicine burning, because fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member being cauterized: and it does not harm another adjacent member unless with minor damage.
The action of burning medicine reaches to that which is distant from the members: and perhaps it causes difficulty in healing in the member, and perhaps it kills.
But fire, because of its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not do that unless it is excessive.
Indeed, we have come to know that through experience, due to the length of service and devotion to art, and steadiness concerning the truth of things: and because of this I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not that it is not allowed for this book of mine, I would bring to you the secret hidden in fire and the quality of its operation in bodies, by which it expels diseases demonstrated by philosophical discourse, which would be clear to your minds.
And know, sons, that they themselves disagree in time, when it is fitting to make a cautery, and they put the better time according to truth.
And I say that a cautery is fitting at all times: therefore, because damage occurring by time is immersed in the benefit which is drawn with the cautery. And particularly if a cautery is for pains arising from necessary, strong, urgent pains that cannot tolerate delay: therefore because it is feared that evil which is greater than small damage due to time may occur.
And that saying does not enter your minds, O sons, except for the common people and foolish physicians, namely that they do not always return to health by cauterization: and they place this as a consequence, but matters are not as they think: therefore because cauterization is not, except in place of medicine, which alters the temperament, and drives out humors that are the causes, wherefore pains occur.
However, cauterization is superfluous over medicine because of the swiftness of its health, and the power of its operation, and the vehemence of its dominion: and it is possible that illness may return at some hour of time according to the temperament of the sick person, and the location of his illness, and the power of his illness: and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of superfluities in him: and what reaches him for acquisition through food and similar things from those causes, unless illness occurs, where cauterization is administered.
A subtle illness in a member of small superfluities and humors, such as cauterization of the tooth, due to pain and similar things, it is possible that this pain will not return in him. But this happens rarely.
However, the speech of the common people is again correct that cauterization is the last medicine: not with regard to what they intend in this matter, since they believe that there is no healing that comes with medicine, nor with anything after the end of cauterization.
But the matter is the opposite of that speech and intention, namely that cauterization is the last medicine, is not except when we administer modes of healing for some illnesses, and they do not come from medicine: then at the end of the matter, we apply cauterization, and it heals: thus it happens that cauterization is the last medicine, not according to the intention that the common people and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that cautionery with gold is better than cautionery with iron; and they did not say this unless on account of the equality of gold, and the nobility of its substance; and they said, that it does not cause a place of cauterization to produce pus. It is not this absolutely: because I have already proven it, and I found that it does not do this in certain bodies without others.
And cautionery with it (gold) is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you make the cautionery in fire from gold, it is not made clear to you when it burns according to the quantity that you want, due to the redness of gold; and when it runs towards it (the fire), and if you add more ignition on top of it, it liquefies in the fire, and turns into layers.
Therefore the craftsman falls into this task (of making cautionery with iron); and because of this, cautionery with iron is more swift and near for us in terms of rightness for the operation.
And I myself have already organized this Chapter on Cauterization, according to chapters; and I have ordered it from the beginning to the end, so that it will be easy for the one seeking what he wants from it.
Chapter II.
Here Cauterization is against the dominion of humidity and coldness on the brain; which are two causes of swelling, and abundance of flow of fluids from the head to the eyes and ears, and abundance of sleep, and pain in teeth, and pain in throat; and universally all illness that comes from coldness, such as paralysis, sodae (a type of seizure), epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ones from these illnesses.
The method of cauterization is to instruct the sick person: that it should be evacuated first with a solution of medicine cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the sick person, and his age, and his custom.
Then instruct him to make radii on his head with a cupping glass. Then have him sit between your hands square, so that he has placed his hands upon his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger comes, mark that spot with an unburnt (or uncauterized) mark.
Then heat the cautery in oil: whose form is as follows.
Then place it on the marked spot with the unburnt (or uncauterized) part, descending gradually as your hand is tightened, and you turn it. Then release your hand quickly, and look at the spot.
If you see that a quantity of bone or pus has emerged from the skull, then release your hand. And if not, press your hand again with the iron itself, or with another tool if it becomes cold: until you see the bones which I have told you.
Then take something from salt, and dissolve it in water, and immerse the cup in it, and place it on the spot: and leave it for three days.
Then put the immersed cup over the spot, and leave it until the scab of the fire is destroyed. Then treat it with the ointment tetrapharmacon until it is healed.
They have said that the more an ulcer remains open, the more it discharges pus: wherefore it is better and more helpful.
They said that some should be cauterized down to the bone: and the cautery must be held until something of thickness of the bone is heated.
Then it is scraped after what has been burned from the bone, then it is cured.
And others say that when the cautery reaches the bone, an impression should be made on it for as long as the bone falls out, so that it becomes like the shape of a knife: or an instrument that women place in a small amount of infused alphabet: and they believe that the vapors of the head will expire from this place and the open wound should be left open for a long time.
Then it is cured until it consolidates.
But I do not see these two types of cautery at all, except in certain people according to the way of fear.
And let it be left alone, in my opinion it is better for its own health.
For the head becomes weak from the dissolution of its own natural continuity; as we have testified in other members: and above all when the head of a sick person is naturally weak: and the first species of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, and I use it: therefore operate with it for safety.
Chapter III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the head and it persists in an ill person and he uses herbs, chickens, leeches, bloodletting, oils and plasters. And particularly if the head has already been cauterized with a single cautery as we have mentioned and it does not improve with any of these: then consider. If the head of the sick person is strong by nature and not weak, and it finds excessive coldness: then cauterize with another cautery slightly. Then cauterize it over the entire horn of his head with a cautery, so that the skin is not pierced through and a quantity of bone is exposed as we have mentioned. Cauterize it with a single cautery on the occiput of his head, in the place called "vas": it is the place where wind is placed: and pour your oil in this, and do not expose bone. For the sick person finds, on account of that violent pain, it is different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And I shall say that this cautery is in its place: and it must be a cautery with which horns of the head are cauterized, and the occiput more delicately with the cautery with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur in part of the head or the pain extends to the eye, and the head is treated with cleansing medicines and other treatment as I have said in the division of diseases, and it does not improve completely: then cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterization with a burning medicine, or with iron.
The cautery with the burning medicine, is to take one clove of garlic, peel it and cut off its ends from both sides. Then divide the place of pain at the time with a wide leech, until there is a place beneath the skin where a tooth can be captured.
Insert it (the tooth) beneath the skin there and let it be concealed; then bind above it with a suitable ligature and leave it for fifteen hours and afterwards dissolve it; then extract the garlic clove and wait two or three days; subsequently place the hot iron (cautery) submerged in butter upon it until a pus forms; then treat the place with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to perform this (procedure) with certain burning medications which I wrote about in the twelfth treatise, on the Middle Ages.
However, cauterization of this kind is as follows: Hot Iron Cautery, whose shape is this.
It is called a Clavilis because the head of it resembles a nail, and there is something curved on it, and in the middle, there is a small projection.
Then place it on the location and hold your hand; and you turn the iron slowly with speed: and the amount to be burned should be of the thickness of the skin, as its middle part. And lift your hand so that an artery below is not burned and blood flow occurs.
Then immerse the cotton in brine water, and place it on the location and leave it for three days; then immerse the cotton with butter; afterwards care with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize this half-skull fracture with the second part of the Cautery. Be careful not to cut an artery in this half-skull fracture, not old ones specifically.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in an old half-skull fracture.
When you treat a half-skull fracture as we have said in the previous cure, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment does not help; and you see from the disease that what we have said with the first cautery with medicine or with cautery with fire does not suffice, then it is necessary that you burn the Cautery knife, until it whitens after you mark the location of pain with a line, whose length should be half the finger or similar to that; and place your hand aside for a moment, and press it until you cut an artery, and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary that you be careful not to burn the jawbone which moves during chewing, so as not to burn the side or the nerve that moves it, thus causing a spasm.
And this is about the care and caution concerning the flow of blood from a severed artery. When it is cut (the artery), there is fear; especially of him who does not know what he is doing and is not skilled or experienced. Therefore, the operation is abandoned with it first.
And I will come again with a reminder of the regulation for controlling the flow of blood from an artery according to its own method, and in its place in this book.
If you see that this Cautery does not suffice for him because of his sickness, and you see the body of the weak person bearing a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said, care for the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish to administer a cautery, do so as we have said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with a cautery having two blades. For cautionery is better this way and more effective.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing an earache.
When pain occurs in the ear due to coldness and is treated with solvents, and the rest of the treatment as we have said in the division, and yet the pain does not subside, then cauterization by fire: and this is what is called Punctum, whose form is as follows.
Then, after the cauterization, make small incisions around the entire ear, as one revolves it: or around both ears if pain is present on both sides. Then, with the cauterizer, extend slightly from the root of the ear after marking the spots with pitch: and let the amount of cauterization be ten punctures on the entire ear, approximately like that.
Then, care for the marked spots until they heal.
Chapter: Method of Cauterization in Strangulation.
Chapter 7.
Strangulation which is treated with cauterization, is not except when it occurs from phlegmatic conditions, as we have said in the division of diseases.
And avoid cauterization for conditions arising from exhaustion or spasm of a nerve.
If treatment of this type of strangulation with herbs, cleansing, gargles does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the weakened person with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and second slightly below the earlobe, and third at the junction of the two lips.
Place your cauterizer on the weakened side. Since softening does not occur unless in the healthy portion.
The form of cauterization is to cauterize the spot with the cauterizer directly on the end of the upper part of the ear, just below the tip of the skull a little: and another at the earlobe; whose length should be the same as the length of a thumb. Place your hand with the cautery until it is burned to the depth of half the thickness of the skin.
This is the form of Cautery, and it is a species from the knife, whose shape is given below: however, it should not be too fine as you can see; and it must have a knife in it that is not excessively thick.
Then take care of the place with it (the cautery) until it heals.
Chapter on the Method of Cauterizing in Ancient Aphasia.
When apoplexy occurs and your care with what we have said does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him four times with the cautery on all the corners of his head, and with the cautery in the middle of the head, as previously described, and with the cautery on the back of the head, according to what has been said; and the method of cauterizing should be as previously described.
Also, it is cauterized with the Cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and this is the final remedy.
Then take care of it with what has been said before.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in drink there are first of all large amounts of hyssop, and cleansing pills for the brain.
Then shave completely the head of the sick person, and place on his occiput ointment made from sinapis (mustard) described in the treatise of ointments; place it on him frequently.
For this is the method of cautery; and make it according to the order as I said there.
If therefore he is healed by that, it is good. If not: then make for him three cauterizations on the back part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye; and place between every cauterization a thickness of a finger.
Then care for the cautery, with that which preceded.
If however you wish an additional treatment, and the sick person can endure it; then make a cauterization in the middle. And if you wish an additional treatment: then cauterize him over two horns (i.e., temples).
Then care for it until he is healed; and let the cautery be anointed according to the shape that was given before.
Chapter on method of cauterizing in Paralysis, and softening (i.e., treatment for paralysis).
Chapter X.
It is necessary to proceed with the cleaning of the head with hyssop and as I said before.
Then shave completely the head of the sick person; afterwards cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the horn of the head, and over the back part of it, and over three on the neck.
If in sickness there is a need for softening of the body by more than these, and the sick person can endure it, and the sickness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauterizations on the vertebrae, and the last one with a cautery until he burns most from his skin, and loosen your hand. Then take care of [the patient], until he is cured: and so cauterize with oil.
On the method of cauterization for epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless his epilepsy is due to phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain of the patient first, with the herbs mentioned earlier, and with the remainder of the treatment as we have described in the division. When the patient is seriously ill or is intolerant of the application of drugs.
If the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medicine, then administer gargarisma, and cleansing mastication, before that, for many days with good food.
Then shave the patient's head, then cauterize him with a single cautery in the middle of the skull, according to what was described earlier: and with another cautery on his occiput, and over all the horn of his skull. If the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with the cauteries mentioned in treating paralysis, and soften the body on the spondylus of the neck, and the spine: and let the cautery be olive oil as described earlier.
If the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery, according to this method.
On the method of cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the cauteries, which we mentioned in the presence of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of declivities leading to melancholy and the body is damp, then give him a drink that purifies his brain, according to what was said earlier in division: then shave the head of the sick man, and make afterwards a well-made tourniquet from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and let the sick man sitting square be held from all sides.
Then apply a liniment. And it is more suitable with old olive oil butter. And heat it over a gentle fire, using a measured temperature that the finger can bear when it is inserted into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and let it be until it cools down.
Do this to the sick man every week once, with the rest of his good regimen, until he is cured.
Or if you wish, cauterize him by making small holes in many places of his body, apart from holding the cautery in your hand: it should smell good.
For this type of cautery dampens the brain with its quality.
Then place on him a cloth soaked in butter or chicken fat.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in water flowing to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When you are informed of the origin of water in the eye through the signs that were said earlier in division, then begin and give the sick man a drink, with what purifies his head.
And keep him away from all moisture, and make him sit in a bath for some days of fasting.
Then order him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his own head. Then cauterize it over two temples with two cauteries, if there is no opening for the descent of water in both eyes at once: or from one side, if there is an opening for water in one eye: and cut off with the cautery all veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in width like the temples: and avoid bleeding.
If you see something from it (the affected area), then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting off, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it (the affected area) is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two cauteries brought to the extreme.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in the eyes (anciently).
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and continuous: and they are over veins and arteries that are manifest on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is from an excess of cold, phlegmatic humors: then cauterize with the same cautery as was narrated in the opening of water descent, cauterize in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries over two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck under two bones. And if additional help is needed, then cauterize it (the affected area) on all sides carefully around the eye, over the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in nasal foulness.
When you are treating it, as we said in division, and the medication does not help: then hurry, and give infirmocochias for three nights in drink; afterwards shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with the oil-filled cautery. Then cauterize it with two cauteries and a clawed cautery, over the two eyebrows under the hair slightly.
And beware of the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the clawed cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in softening the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, using this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it over the two eyebrows slightly in every part; and they will extend from both temples; and let the entire length of the cautery be according to the length of the eyebrow; and do not place your hand with the cautery at the very end, but rather according to the amount that is burnt by the third eyelash.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn inward, pricking the eye.
The cautery is in this way according to two methods: either a cautery with fire, or a cautery with a burning medicine.
In the cautery with fire, command the sick person to release his hairs beforehand, if he is among those who clean them, until they are long and even. If the hairs prick him at their origin: then bind his eyes with a plaster, so that they do not move, until they grow out.
When they are born and equalized, then place the head of the weak in your lap; afterwards mark on the eyelids of his eyes with wax, mark it like the shape of a myrtle leaf; let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then pour boiled wool into goat's milk or psyllium mucilage over the eye.
Then heat the cautery, whose shape is as follows: (There are no further details provided on the shape of the cautery.)
Then cauterize slowly in several places according to the mark you made, until the surface of the skin burns and appears like the shape of a myrtle leaf entirely.
And the sign of your health is that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting and hairs rising at the point of the eye.
Then raise your hand then, and let him go for three days.
Then place the wool over it with butter until the eschar is removed. Then take care of him with an ointment until he is healed.
If any hair returns after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft: then cauterize that place again, just as you did before.
If there are hairs below it: then cauterize it until the hair grows back to its natural place and is equalized so that it does not poke the eye.
You must instruct the weak person to pluck out his hairs until they grow long and are equalized. Make a shape of a myrtle leaf from parchment.
Then take from known soap and from unslaked lime each a pound or about that amount; then grind them together with good pressure, and make it quickly so it does not become cold. Then spread it out on a piece of parchment that you have made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over one or both eyelids. Place a cup containing soaked cotton wool in the albumen of an egg, and have the head of the sick person be in your lap.
Place your index finger on the medicine and press it slightly. You move it whenever the sick person feels the bite of the medicine, for its bite is like fire.
While it continues to feel this bite that it senses from the medicine, then release the medicine and move it with your finger. When the bite ceases, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
Then look to see if the eyelid is rising, as it rises when heated by fire or cut, this is good: and if not, then repeat the application of medicine on the place where the medicine does not press or discolor, until your operation is even and the eye contracts.
Then put the cotton wool over it with butter until the burnt skin is removed. Then treat him with diaphine ointment or another one until he is cured.
It is necessary for you to keep the last protection during the operation so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes softened after days and some hair falls into the eye from it, then repeat the medicine on that place which has become soft from the eyelid, as you did at first. Then take care of him until he is cured.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness. Therefore your consideration should be such that the path of righteousness is not concealed from him who is devoted to this art.
On the method of cauterization for a lacrimal fistula.
When treating a fistula, as mentioned earlier in the classification of diseases, and your treatment does not help: then it is necessary to cauterize it in this manner.
Command the sick man to place his head in your lap, and let one of his attendants hold his head thus between his hands so that it is not moved or shaken with his head.
Then place a cotton soaked in oil or in the mucilage of psyllium on his eye: then hold a cautery iron over it whose shape is this.
Let it be concave like the form of a swan's feather from one end, with which the cautery iron is made: and if you wish it to penetrate to the other end as well, or if you wish it to be raised up in this manner.
However, this concave shape is better for your use.
Then press the fistula open if it is open and drain the pus from it, and excise it: but if it is not open, then you should open it and drain the pus out of it.
Then place the cautery iron on it when it has been heated very strongly.
And hold your hand near the cautery iron from the eye towards the nose, so that your hand does not wander or shake the sick man: and place the cautery iron on the eyelid fat, and destroy it.
If you therefore reach the beginning of your cautery to the bone, it will be good. But if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and let it lie for three days.
Then place cotton with butter on it, and treat it with an ointment for ulcers until it heals.
If it exceeds forty days and is not cured: then place sharp corrosive medicine upon it until the bone appears; and shave it according to its own chapter.
And here is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some early authors have described. Direct yourself to the location of the fistula and find it; then place a thin cannula (camahan) in the fissure itself, namely, a fine tube whose form is as follows. Pour into it an amount of drachmas made from melted lead, and hold the cannula firmly with a good retainer, so that the weak one does not move at all, lest the molten lead runs to his eye.
It is necessary that you place a warm poultice on the weak one's eye, either in egg white or in water.
For lead burns the location of the fistula and heals it with a marvelous healing.
If the fistula is healed, as we have said by cauterization and treatment, that is good. If not, then it is necessary to make a nasal opening and redirect the fistula to the course of the nose, according to its own place.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in facial fissures.
Many times, fissures occur on the lip, which are called Pilae, and especially in children's lips.
When you treat these fissures, as we have said in the division of diseases, and treatment does not help, then use small hot cautery (cauterium) with a knife, according to this shape.
And let its indentation be according to the sharpness of the knife.
Then place it hastily into the fissures while the hot cautery reaches the depth of the fissure.
Then take care of him with pitch, until he is healed.
On the method of cauterization for a mouth fistula.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gums, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and breaks, later it becomes old and pus runs, and a fistula is formed: then take care of the fistula itself and do not apply treatment to it, then it is necessary that fire cauterization be done according to the quantity that can enter the fistula. Then introduce the fire into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron heated reaches its depth and end: do this once or twice.
Then take care of it afterwards, as I said regarding treatment, until it is cured.
If therefore the pus separates and heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and remove the rotten bone according to what comes in its head.
On the method of cauterization on softened gums and teeth.
When the gum becomes soft due to moisture, and the teeth move, and treating it with medicine does not help; then put the head of the sick person in your lap.
Then take a cautery, whose shape will come later, so that you place the Cannula on the tooth; and insert the heated Cauterium quickly into it: and hold your hand for a short while, until the sick person feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And clean your hand; then repeat the cautery as often as you wish.
Then let the sick person rinse his mouth with water and salt, and hold it for an hour; and then spit it out.
The tooth moves to become firm, and the softened gum contracts, and the corruption of moisture dries up.
Method of cauterizing for tooth pain.
When the tooth pain is due to coldness or there is coldness itself, or worms, and treatment with medicine does not help; then cautery is done in two ways: either cautery with butter, or cautery with fire.
Cauterium however with butter is, that you receive the waxed butter and boil it in an iron cauldron or copper vessel. Then take a cup and fold it over the end of the wound. Then immerse it (the cup) in melted butter; place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it cools down; then repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or a cup in cold butter; place it on the painful tooth and put hot iron on top of it until the heat reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
The cauterization with fire is done using a copper pipe or an iron pipe. There should be something thick (a barrier) in the body to prevent the sharpness of the fire from reaching the weak bone.
Then apply a hot iron (cautery) with the appropriate shape to the tooth; hold it until it cools down.
Do this several times because the pain will gradually disappear, either on the same day or on another day.
And it is necessary to fill the weakened bone with good butter during the application of the cautery and hold it for an hour; then spit it out.
This is the shape of the cautery.
Cauterize using any shape you wish, provided that it is possible; this is the form of the pipe (cannula).
Chapter on how to cauterize ulcers.
When ulcers are caused by phlegm and cold humors, and do not respond to medication, and you wish to treat them quickly, then use a concave hot iron (cautery) with this shape:
Having two open ends so that smoke exits from one end at the Cautery and place it burning once on top of the ulcer; and if you need it, put it again, until it reaches the depth of the ulcer.
If the ulcer is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the ulcer.
Then leave it for three days and place a covered cup filled with butter on top of it until the burn caused by fire is removed.
Then treat it with a tooth ointment until the form of the canal is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in laryngitis and constriction of breath.
When dampnesss attack the channel of the lung and especially when it is accompanied by coldness of constitution, then the sick person should be evacuated first with dissolving medicines.
Then cauterize it in the neck at the root of the throat in a depressed place and be careful not to reach the throat with the cautery nor the skin unless something from it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the end of the hip bone and let the cautery be a nail as described earlier.
Then treat it with what was previously mentioned until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in diseases of the lung and cough.
When cough and disease of the lung are from cold dampness, and the sick person does not have fever, nor phthisis, and the illness is old: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the clavicle in depressed, smooth, empty places. And cauterize it with another one in the middle of the chest between two breasts and let the cautery be a canal as described earlier.
If your treatment is cauterization by puncturing with a cautery called "Punctum," which shape was described earlier in the procedure for ear pain; and if there are punctures from thirty punctures up to others.
Then heal it with that method (the cauterization) until it heals.
Now let the cautery have three branches in this shape. Therefore, when you use the cautery, alleviate (the pain) with it as if you were using three separate cauteries.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head of the arm is dislocated due to the cause of humidity and it does not reposition itself within an hour after its dislocation, until this becomes a habit for it, then it should be dislocated again by a slight movement that occurs as we have already testified; afterwards, in such case, you should immediately restore the dislocation. Then the sick person lies down on his back or on a healthy side. Then loosen the skin that is inside the Titillicus (the affected area) towards the upper part with your left hand fingers; and if it is connected and dislocated towards the internal parts.
Then take a cautery with two prongs. This is its shape:
Then cauterize the skin, until it penetrates it on the other side, and the figure of cauterization with four cauteries will come.
And sometimes the cauterization is made with a cautery having three points, for this reason the figure of the cauterization will be with six cauteries: and they are the points according to the delicacy of the skin touched.
And this is the form of the cautery having three points.
And sometimes one is added to this method, for this reason there are eight cauteries.
Then place on top of the cautery split rods with salt. Then make the patient rest in peace so that a limb is not moved at any time until it recovers.
And if the dislocation is towards the upper part (shoulder), and this rarely occurs, then cauterize it on the shoulder with a pointed cautery or many cauteries poking.
For union strengthens, and moisture is removed; and the sick person recovers.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and much moisture occur in the stomach, until it expels itself from its composition, and catarrh multiplies towards it, and persistent methods of treatment, and this does not help; then the patient should lie on his back with his legs extended, and his hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries: one cautery in the size of a cochlea of the breast, another cautery like a nail, and two cauteries below the sides of one cautery's base, until the figure of the cauteries becomes triangular. And stretch it between each (part) so they do not join, when pus forms.
Let the depth of the cautery be the size of two fingers breadth of the skin.
Let the figure of the cauteries be as such without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape, let the cautery which is used for this have the shape of a circle according to this shape.
The stomach is cauterized by pricking it with a cautery that presses against it; and it is as if signs are placed on the stomach according to the size you wish with encaustic: then cauterize the place with the cautery for the point, then care for it with the treatment that preceded until it heals.
Paragraph on the method of cauterizing Epirrhus (Epirus).
When there is pain in the liver due to coldness and moistness, or from gross flatulence, until it expels its superfluous excretion through its natural discharge, and the patient does not get better by what was said above: then the patient must lie down on his back on his neck, and mark three cauteries with encaustic according to this figure, and the same size below Epirrhus where the elbow of a man reaches; and let the space between each cautery be the size of a finger; and let the cautery be as long as the body; and do not press your hand too much with the cautery.
Let its (the cautery's) size which is heated be the thickness of the skin plus half of it; and let the patient stand on his feet.
If it is not standing, then let it lie (down), which already extended its legs, and raised its arms.
This is the form of cautery.
And indeed it is possible for you to use this cautery with a sharp surgical knife when subtlety and wisdom are present in your art.
Be careful that you do not advance too far in cauterization so that the thickness of the skin is burned completely, for then the entire body is burnt and it reaches the bowels; because there the skin is delicate, therefore know this.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing liver abscesses.
When there is a discharge and the desire to know if this abscess is in the liver flesh or its membrane; then, if it is in the liver flesh, a mild pain and heaviness occurs without sharpness; but if it is in the liver membrane, with pain there is strong sharpness; and you see that the treatment of it has already exhausted the doctors.
Therefore, the sick person must lie on their neck. Then place the position of the abscess with the hot iron; then heat the cautery similar to a small rod. And this is its shape. And use the cautery with it until the entire skin is burned and reaches the pus sac, until all the pus comes out; then take care of the wound by treating the discharge, until it heals.
And it is not appropriate to use this cautery method unless one's passion for the art of medicine is prolonged; and through whose hands these diseases frequently occur with experience; then he may dare on such an operation.
But it is better to let go of it (the abscess), in my opinion.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing pleurisy.
The ancients said, cautery with the roots of Aristolochia for a cold pleurisy in this manner. And it is to receive from the dried roots of Aristolochia, one longer root which can be found among them, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil and light it on fire. Then cauterize with one hot iron in what is between the joining of the collarbone with the neck, and with two small irons under the chin a little below where the beard is.
And with two irons also in what is between the fifth and sixth ribs a little below towards the back; and with another iron in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three irons from the back; one in what is between the scapulas; and with two irons on the sides of the chest, the lower iron being what is between the scapulas.
And you must not press your hand with the iron, but rather let it smell freely of the skin.
And some ancients have said that there are humans who use an iron similar to a ray and burn it, and push it inside what is between the ribs until it reaches the abscess, and let pus come out; as we said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this perforation with iron is feared that either the weak person will die immediately or a fistula occurs at the place which does not heal.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the spleen, Head XXXII.
When you treat the illness of the spleen, as we said in the treatment of diseases and your treatment is not effective, then cautery on it is in three ways, all of which are correct.
One of them is to make three or four cautery points, arranging them along the length of the spleen according to the shape of Epate's cauteries, whose preceding figure it is.
And let the size between each cautery be that of a finger, or more or less.
The method of cauterization on the liver, which I mentioned in the liver cautery, shall be equal.
Do not press your hand with the cautery, and let the patient be weak lying on his back.
Another method of cauterization is: holding the cautery with two prongs, as I said in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; and peel off the skin that is directly on the spleen, where the arm of the weak person arrives; and your peeling should be according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert two prongs heated very hot until they penetrate the skin from the other side; then remove the cautery; thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with a cautery having three prongs.
Then take care of the cautery after you release it to emit pus for many days; for it is more helpful than the other methods that preceded it in treatment.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in dropsy.
A cautery does not fall in dropsy unless it is properly applied.
When treating a dropsy with the methods of treatment that I mentioned in the division, and if the treatment is not helpful, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two behind the loins, and one on the breast and another on the stomach; and the size of the cautery should be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open cautery, so that it may emit pus over a long time.
And do not evacuate the weak from treatment after cautery, for it is necessary that two intentions be gathered to him: and healing will hasten towards him with God's help.
The form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be clavils, according to its preceding form; and the one with which the back is cauterized should be oliuaris, according to its preceding form.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing feet and legs.
When they are amputated in hydropicus and filled with citrine water, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot at the nocrati, which is between the auricular and anular; then lift your hand with the cautery, do not twist it; then lift your hand; do not touch it again.
The water of citrine will boil, and let the cautery be in this shape.
Then make two cauteries for each leg, and let the cautery be with the end of a small cautery at the end; and let the cautery be along the length of the leg, one below the knee, and the other lower by about half the length of the leg; and over the entire hip, place two cauteries; and release the open cautery without treatment for a long time, so that something boils out of it; then treat it with the rest as we have said.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in the solution of the abdomen.
Chapter XLV (45).\]    Cauterium
When the solution of the abdomen is due to cold and humidity, until the powers retained and digestive ones, which are in the stomach and intestines, weaken; and it is treated with methods of treatment, but does not heal; and you see the weak enduring a cautery with excessive strength, then cauterize it with a large cautery over the stomach, according to what was preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle clavils cautery; and a large cautery or two cauteries over the alcatin above the alhosos.
If you see excessive moistures and the patient enduring it, then cauterize it with a cautery on the crown and also on all of it [the head]: and perhaps add two small cauteries near the stomach.
The treatment is advancing, whose benefit is not in error.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, either one and they are from thick, cold or corrupted fluids, which cannot be cured as we have said in the division, then cauterize with three cauteries on the lower part of the back of the hipbone slightly triangularly under the almeidati, and cauterize under the navel about two fingers.
If you think that his stomach is chilled and his food is not digested, and you see the face turning pale, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery, as mentioned before: also cauterize on the liver and another one on the spleen, with a cautery claw: leave the open cautery for some time: then take care of him until he is cured.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you remove althelul, then heat the cautery which is similar to a rod. Then introduce the heated cautery into the removed althelul: and press your last finger until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows: do this once or twice.
If there are many althelul, then cauterize each one with a cautery as I have said. Then take care of them with what helps them from ointments until they are cured.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on alkali, it is more ultimate in help.
On the method of cauterizing an anal fistula.
Chapter XXXVIII.
If the sick person does not obey the incision and operation as we have described earlier, and is afraid of it, perhaps he will heal with a cautionery.
When there occurs a fistula, and it becomes old, pus runs out of it, and the surrounding tissues are corrupted. Therefore, it is appropriate to examine it with a thin probe. Then recognize the depth of it using a probe.
Then apply fire cautery which is similar to a rod. Then you introduce yourself with the fire cautery into the fistula and determine the depth where it was inserted.
And repeat the cautery on it until all the corrupted tissues are burned away, once or twice or thrice, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerve or large vein if there is one; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or intestine, then beware of these places altogether.
And do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshly place; and consider that it does not penetrate.
Then care for the place until it heals.
If the place is covered and the material removed from it and it remains for a long time; then know that it has healed completely.
And if the material is not removed from it, then know that it penetrates or there is a deep corruption of bone in it, or something similar from those which will be remembered in their places.
Chapter on cauterizing Kidneys.
When there is pain in the kidneys due to cold or gross wind and it weakens the body of the sick person, then it is necessary to cauterize it on top of the almethenum over both kidneys, with a cautery on all the kidney with a cautery claw, whose method has been previously mentioned.
And perhaps we cauterize it (the wound) again at the almond stage. Because three lines will come. Therefore, they will be more beneficial (or effective) at healing.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the weak cannot retain urine, then cauterize it below at the lower part of the scrotum over the bladder, where the pubic hairs begin, and with one cautery from the right scrotum, and another on its left; and let the length of this cauterization be according to the size of the knuckle of the thumb; and cauterize it with a lower back cautery, or with two cauteries if necessary; and let it be according to the preceding cauterization.
When weakness and softening occur in the uterus due to cold and humidity, so that the weak cannot retain fluids, then cauter
When cold and humidity occur in the uterus, preventing conception, and the menstruation of it is corrupted, their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs during their onset; then it is necessary that it be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cautery below the lower back, or with two cauteries; and let the cauterization be like the one described for the bladder.
On the Cauterization of the Anus in Dislocation.
When the mucous discharges flow towards Ancha's plaster and cause it to leave its place: and a sign of this is that the leg extends over the other when they are compared one against the other: and there is an empty spot found at the dislocation in it.
Therefore it is necessary that the weak part be cauterized over Ancha's plaster with a similar cautery circle: after you mark it with wax around the plaster, as prescribed: and so that the plaster falls into the center of the circle.
If this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large oil-soaked cautery: and let the depth be according to the thickness of the skin's entirety.
Then care for it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in Sciatica.
When pain occurs in Ancha's plaster and the cause is coldness and humidity: and it is treated with what was said above, but the treatment does not help and it worsens: then it is necessary to dissolve the weak part from thick humors with fetid pills or artificial pills, and similar ones. Then cauterize it.
And the method of cauterization is according to two methods: either with a cautery with medicines that drive it out, or with fire.
The cautery with fire is in many ways.
One of them is to cauterize over Ancha's plaster with three triangular cauteries in this shape. Make a good or bad depth for them. Let the space between every cautery of any size be that of a finger's breadth; and let the cautery be made of oil.
Sometimes, a cautery is made in the middle of the anus itself. Why are there four cauteries?
If you wish to cauterize with a ring, the shape of which preceded in the cauterization of an anus dislocation, let it be one: so that the ring encloses the entire anus.
Burn the thickness of the skin all over.
This is the method for cautery in sciatica, when the pain is adhering to the anus itself and does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, at the place indicated by the patient where the pain is, and with your cautery four fingers' length towards the outer part: let the cautery be a knife-shaped one.
Let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends near the toes of the foot, then cauterize it there where the patient indicates with a cautery point, three, four or more if necessary.
If he indicates that the pain is under the knee turned towards the leg, then cauterize it there with a knife-shaped cautery.
Be careful with all your cauteries that you do not burn a nerve or the major artery, and attract harm to the patient through it, or cause contracture.
I myself have already seen one and another of those who cauterized above the calf, and burnt in the cauterization, and the leg swelled up until it reached the foot, and was perforated completely, and the whole foot rotted: then there followed a rupture of the stomach, and death afterwards.
If pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize both according to this method.
And some wise men said in the cauterization of the anus, whose cauterization this is the method. Make a similar object of iron, whose diameter is half the width of the palm; and it should be at its place according to the size of the knuckle, or slightly less; and within that small object, there should be another small object.
And there should be a space that is between every small object according to the size of a knuckle; and the small objects should be open on both sides; and their height should be like a knuckle, or two knuckles; and make handles of iron properly fitted in the small objects.
Then it is heated in fire until it glows and sparks; then it should be placed on the cushion of the anus resting weakly on the healthy side. Cauterize therefore with three round cauteries at once.
Then, let it be for three days. Then pack it with butter; and let the open wound remain for many days. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says: in this way of cauterization, O sons, we have not been sufficiently accustomed to it due to the fear of its appearance; and for that reason, we find few who dare upon it.
However, it is one of the good cauteries for him who can endure it, and it has a place in that condition.
The cautery with stimulating medicines is to make two small objects having a perforated armillary sphere, into which descends the key of its door from brass or iron, the length of the wall; whose height should be two knuckles, or as if they themselves.
And let there be a space that is between each quantity of the finger's thickness, and let it be open below and above; and let it contain each other in this manner.
Then place it on a boxwood plank, with the weak one lying on its healthy side. And press your hand on the boxwood plank strongly. Then pour water into two circles between them which is heated slightly by fire, and hold it for the amount of an hour; let the weak one bear the bite of it, and its burning, for he himself has found that biting like fire until the biting stops.
Then scrape your hand with a tool and remove warm water from the plank along with sweet water; then let it be for three days.
And place butter on it until the blackness of the burning is removed; and let it be for some days, and pus will run out from it. For it is the ultimate treatment.
Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg: make a setting for it in that which contains water, according to what you have made on the plank equally.
And this is the method of hot water; and I have already written it in the treatment of rectifying remedies. Take alkali and powdered unburnt lime, mix them in equal parts; grind each of them and put them into a new pot, the bottom of which is pierced with a small hole according to the size that the radius enters; and put another pot underneath it which is covered; throw over the alkali and lime from sweet water, so that each of them immerse by a finger depth; then press them with good pressure using your hand; and let the pot be until the acid water goes down in the bottom of the earthenware pot.
Then gather all that water and pour it over another leg: and boil, until it returns.
For indeed, it will then be very strong and sharp, which is given in many operations of medicine, and in the cauterization of other members. Because it effects the operation of fire itself.
And among the medicines with which cauteries are made, such as alum and tesisie, and honey from the nut tree, and chalk with soap, so that each be mixed together. (¶ is a paragraph symbol)
And Galen himself, in his narrative, reported a cure of a certain man from among the ancients, who was healed of pain in the anus and the sciatic vein: and he praised it very highly. And he said that it did not require another cure, and because he was healed from a single application, until he reported that perhaps he himself entered the bath and came out of it already healed.
And it is to be taken from the green seed of seitaragus: and if green seed is not found, dry one should be taken, fresh: and grind it very much with a little fat, and place it on the anus, where there is pain, or leg, or in the hip: and tie it and let it stay for the quantity of three hours, or as much as it feels weak from the heat of the cauterization. Then introduce it into a bath.
When his body becomes warm, introduce him into the sun. For pain departs, and it heals.
And know that no one should use a cautery with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides, who said that the feces of goats, when it is cauterized with them on the sciatic vein, add it: and the cautery is made in this manner. Take flax, and let it be soaked in ancient oil, and place it on a deep place which is between the toe of the foot and the heel, and closer to the heel.
Then take dry goat dung, and ignite it until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the flax, and let it rest until it goes out. Repeat that procedure. Do not cease to do that until sensation reaches the marrow, and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called Vaccine cautery.
Chapter on the Cauterization of Back Pain.
Whenever there is pain in the back due to multiple causes, either from an accident, or a blow, or excessive evacuation, and similar things, due to the influx of cold and moist matter; and cauterization does not apply except in this single case which is made by the influx of cold matter.
Therefore, after the evacuation of the sick with fetid pills and similar things, they should be placed on the back where there is pain, three lines wide according to the palm of the hand, after marking them with encaustic in every line of five cauteries or more according to the amount that comes from the strength of the patient; and the cauterization should be done with cauterion puncti.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries together with the middle clavile cautery, in this manner.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing humpback deformity.
This disease often occurs in young children.
The sign of the beginning of this deformity in children is that it happens above them when they breathe deeply during elevation and movement; and you find at the end of the vertebrae of the back and their knots, which has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When you see that [thing], and wish to do it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is in the shape of a circle.
Take the cautery over the whole mussel shell equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the mussel shell with a pointed cautery, take two or three lines, and let the points be close together.
Then care for that place until it heals as we have said.
Beware not to administer the cautery on a hump which is caused by a spasm of the nerve.
On the method of cauterization for gout and joint pains.
When the pains of joints are caused by cold humidity that flows into any part of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary among physicians to call this gout properly.
When gout caused by cold is treated with methods of treatment and the pains are not removed, then cautery removes them.
And it is that you should cauterize [the affected area] after evacuation around the joint of the foot with many cauteries, and let the cautery be Olivary.
And if you need points on the sole of the foot, then do it with a pointed cautery. If the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it on the entire knee with three or four cauteries from all sides, with this same cautery of Clavius.
But if you require more of this cautery, then cauterize it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, rather let it be about the thickness of the skin.
If the pains ascend to the knees and back, then administer what was said in its own chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then make incisions around the joints of the fingers, as two lines are rolled up.
If pain persists in the fingers, then pierce them all over every knot and on the back of the hand.
If pains rise after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both from all sides.
And do not evacuate a sick person by good regimen or by taking medicine. For if the regimen is good and phlegm is evacuated, it will be healed with this cautery aid from God.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing ruptures.
If there is a rupture in the groins and the intestine or spermatic cord descends towards the testicle, which is beginning to appear nearby: then it is necessary to order the sick person to fast on his own day. And let him use the laxatives so that feces will descend from his belly.
Then let him sit on your hands upon his back: and command him to hold his breath until it comes out or appears pus or intestine.
Then put your fingers on him and sign with wax under the wound on his neck, with a mark whose end resembles half of a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then heat the cautery, which has this shape, until it turns white, and throw sparks at it. Then pull the intestine or pus into its hollow. Then let the servant place his hand on the spot to keep the intestine from coming out: and you have already opened between the legs of the sick man, and placed a pan under him, and one servant is serving at his legs, and another at his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on the mark, with your hand holding the cautery upright. Hold him until you follow the bone with it: or hold him again with another instrument, if you do not reach the bone with it in the first attempt.
And observe carefully that the intestine does not come out during your cautery work, lest you burn him and something happens to the sick person or great harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is of no use.
The cautery for children must be delicate, according to their measure.
Then treat with ointments, until he is healed.
The sick man should lie on his back for forty days, until the wound is healed.
It is necessary to put food for him according to the length of his healing time, so that his stomach is softened and nothing comes out from it during the operation or evacuation.
Then when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a properly made ligament and hold him for another forty days.
And it should be diminished by labor, and filled with food and drink, and vehement voices.
When using this regimen, healing occurs in its entirety.
I will say the cure of ruptures with incision in its chapter.
But when ruptures occur in the remaining abdomen and are new, and the force is not added, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and that which is burned should be as the third part of it from then on. Then cure itself, when I said so: do not add anything.
And it was said by some first ones: to cauterize the rupture with a triangular cautery according to this shape.
After it is signed with pitch and a line is placed that is across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line downwards. And place your hand in the middle with the nail-cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Chapter on the manner of cauterizing in pains caused by fall or blow.
Chapter XLVIII.
When it happens in certain limbs due to a fall or blow and the pain persists for a long time, and no cure occurs with medicines: then it is necessary that it should be cauterized with the puncture cautery.
And let the cautery be for all members according to its size and its weakness, and its power, and the looseness of the torsion, and the pain from it.
If it is cured by the first cautery, it is good. If not: then apply another cautery on top of it.
Because it is the custom of these pains that they are changed from one member to another nearby. Therefore it is necessary that you follow them with a cautery until the sick one is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in Leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes greatly benefited by cautery. And especially the type of leprosy that is caused by decomposition of phlegm and black bile; therefore consider cauterizing it.
If the leprosy is beginning and you have treated it as we said in the division, and it does not subside or stabilize; and you fear that corruption will spread over his entire complexion: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, known as the fontanelle, and the second lower towards the forehead at the end of the hairline, and two above the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And finally press your hand with the cautery slightly until it makes a smaller impression on the bone, and the cortexes separate from it; in order to alleviate the expiration of gross vapors from it, and cauterize with the cautery also over the spleen, according to what has preceded.
But if the leprosy is already spread over the sick person, and it appears clearly: then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries which we said in the head, and with a cautery over the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries over the cheeks, and with two cauteries over the spondyles of the neck, and six over the spondyles of the back, and one large over the alhahosos at the base of the tail and one on it, in the almeidat: and two over the ankles; namely over all the ankle with one, and two over the knees, and two over the elbows, and two over the wrists, and two over the softnesses of his chest: and cauterize him over all the joints, from the joints of his fingers of his hands to his feet: and cauterize over all the calcanei of his feet, and the follia of his hands.
Beware lest you burn the nerves that are above the last calcaneus.
And sometimes cauterized by a cautery on the ear lobe, and another on the belly of the stomach, and another on the epigastrium.
Know that the more you apply the cautery, the more it is helpful, and the more it conforms.
Know that the sick do not find pain in the cautery as the healthy do; therefore because his body is already stunned.
It is necessary that the cauteries should be of size and weight according to the members and joints; according to the kinds of tools that preceded them.
Then care for the cautery with flour of herbs and honey, and the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in stupor.
When a limb is numbed and treated with medicines, oils, plasters, but does not heal, then cauterize the numbed limb with cauteries, according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
Let your cautery penetrate slightly into the skin's thickness. Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And sometimes when cauterization is performed for numbness that occurs in the hand and foot, in the joints of the back at the exits of nerves that move that limb: the numbness is removed.
But let him not presume to do this, unless he is wise in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves moving the body.
Title LXI.
When Albaraz (a type of ulcer or lesion) hardens and does not yield to any medicine: then cauterize it deeply with a cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and the color changes.
Then treat it with a mixture of grain from herbs and lentils with rose oil, arnoglossus leaves, dove blood, and frog blood: each ingredient in equal parts: mix all these together, soak them on a cloth, and apply them to the place until it heals.
Chapter on Cauterization in Cancer.
When a cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference, as it is usually done.
The wise ones said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
It does not seem good to me (that is, to cauterize in the middle): I fear that it would ulcerate; and I have already seen this happen many times.
It is better to cauterize around its circumference with a circle, as we said; or with several cauteries.
Chapter on the manner of cauterization in Adubelati.
Chapter LIII. When someone has an Adubelati (a kind of tumor) that is slow in maturation, or because it is caused by excess, or because the person is old and weak, or because of time, and wishes to hasten the maturation of the Adubelati, then cauterize around its circumference with several small cauteries, puncturing it. Then let it be. For it will hasten with the maturation itself.
If you wish to perforate it (the tumor) with a cautery, then heat the cautery with fire, and this is its shape.
And place it in the middle of the Adubelati until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be weak, so that its course may be alleviated with purifying.
Then care for it until it heals.
Chapter on the manner of cauterization in a rotting tumor.
Chapter LIIII.
Corrosion is not but corruption walking in a limb and consuming it; just as fire eats dry wood.
If you see corrosion in a place that can bear cautery with fire, then apply much cautery, small and large clamps according to what is appropriate for the place where there is corrosion.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you root out the entire corruption, and nothing of it remains deep within.
Then let it be for three days, and put on the cauterized places ground sulfur with oil until all scabs are removed and all corruption is completely gone.
Then treat it with ointments that stimulate flesh growth.
If you see after three days that flesh is growing in a healthy manner without corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery on what remains from the corrupted places.
And corrosion is treated sometimes with strong medicine. But it arises in place of cautery itself.
Nevertheless, cautery with fire is quicker help; and I have already said that cauterization of it with strong medicine is used in division; therefore take it there when you need it.
[Section title] On Cauterizing in Nails and Warts.
Chapter 50.
Often occurs in the lower parts of the feet this disease: and it is a large, filtered substance that harms the foot.
And there is indeed cautionery for them according to two modes: cauterization with fire, and cauterization with hot water.
As for the cauterization with fire, it should be done as follows: make a hollowed-out cautery similar to the beak of a vulture from iron, according to its size so that it contains a nail from all sides; and let it have sharp edges.
Then place the heated one on the nail. Then rotate the hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail; and leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply ointments of forest malva crushed with salt; and leave the ointment on it at night. For it will be rooted out from its roots.
Then care for the place with a salve made of fresh flesh until it heals.
If they have not been converted [changed?], and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet: then administer cauterization with hot water; and it is, that you take a tube made from copper or iron or from the beak of a vulture; and place it on the nail or on the cuticle. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube; hold your hand and rotate it slightly so that the tip of the tube presses on the root of the nail, and let the hot water find its way to the depth, to the root of the nail; and let the patient wait for a while under the pressure of the hot water for about an hour.
Then release it, for the nail will be rooted out along with its roots.
Follow it thus one after another, until you reach upon all who are from them in the body.
Then care for them when they are eradicated, with that which generates flesh from unguents.
On the method of cauterizing in tremor.
When trembling occurs to someone due to cold in a nerve, or quartan fever, or another reason: then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries, or five on the back of a dorsal spondyle, and between every spondyle with a cautery, and in its chest with a cautery, and above its stomach with a cautery.
For trembling quiets down when cauterized with oil, and hastens the health of cold illness.
On the method of cauterizing albathir.
Chapter LVII.
Sometimes, in the body, albathirs (abscesses) that are foul, i.e., pustules, which are produced by corrupted matter, are expelled.
Therefore, when they appear first, it is necessary to cauterize on every head of the pustule with a subtle cautery and with myrtle wood whose end is set alight with fire. Or with the root of aristolochia (long). Or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes cauteries are applied to adomenes (the abdomen) at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and they do not increase; and excess is broken, making them, and healed from them.
Nevertheless, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy (bloodletting).
On the method of cauterizing during blood flow from an artery in a wound.
Multiple times occurs the flow of blood from an artery, which is cut near a wound, this happens externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or cauterization of a member, and similar to these: and it becomes difficult to separate it.
When this happens to anyone, then immediately place your finger on the orifice of the artery, and press hard upon it; so that the blood is held under your finger, and nothing comes out from there.
Then place a small oil lamp cautery on the fire, and many of them, in large number; and blow upon them until they are very hot.
Then take one of them, small or large, according to the wound and place where the artery is broken; and place the cautery on the vein, after you remove your finger quickly; hold the cautery until the blood separates.
If the blood is forced out when you remove your finger from the orifice of the artery, and extinguish the cautery, then immediately take another cautery, from those which are prepared in the fire.
Therefore do not cease to perform this with one after another until the blood separates.
And beware, lest you burn the nerve which is there, and some other evil befall the weak man.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to separate it; especially because the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is pulled out, its extremities contract and the blood separates. Or it is tied with a strong thread. Or medicines are placed upon it, which have the property to separate blood; and it is pressed with a suitable tourniquet.
Whoever administers amputation with a ligature, and constriction with cloth, or placement of burning things, and similar [procedures], does not fully heal it, except rarely.
If it happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine available: then let him begin with the positioning of the index finger over the opening of the vein itself, as we have said, and its tightening very much, until the blood is blocked from above the wound, and on the artery. And the finger shall not be removed, above it with cold water of violent cold always, until the blood freezes, thickens, and is cut off.
And meanwhile let him consider in that, what needs cautery, or medicine.
§ On incision, perforation, and phlebotomy in wounds, and similar [issues].
We have said in Chapter One, every sickness in which burning with fire is suitable and medicine burns, and the occasions of it, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
And I set forth chapters from the neck to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter by the same path, so that he who seeks finds the sought for [information].
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you sons to learn what is found in this chapter on account of the fear which was mentioned in Chapter One on cauterization.
And for this reason, caution must be greater, because in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation with blood often occurs, with which life remains open at the opening of the vein, or incision over an abscess, or the opening of drainage, or treatment of a wound, or extraction of arrows, or incision over a stone, and similar [issues]: from all of these the tremor and fear occur, and death occurs in many of them.
And I warn you not to let it fall upon you where there is hesitation, for sometimes in this art modes of humans fall upon you with the modes of weaknesses. For there is one who gets angry with his illness and death is easy for him; because of the vehemence he finds from his weakness and the length of his wickedness. And when an illness is from fear, it signifies death.
And there is one who gives you a pledge and promises to heal you, hoping for health, but his illness is destructive.
Therefore, it is not proper that you agree with him who comes to you whose mode is such. Let your caution be greater than your greed and your avarice. And do not presume about anything from it, unless after certain knowledge, which has been proven to be a praiseworthy sequence in your case.
And use in the cure of all your sick, by prognosis and indication about what is fittingly healthy for them.
For there is help for you in it regarding the acquisition of fame and glory, memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, His understanding, and not take away from you guidance and inspiration; for it is in His hand.
And I myself have arranged this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what preceded in the chapter of Cauterii, from the neck to the feet; so that you may be relieved of what you seek from it and what you need.
Chapter on the treatment of water accumulating in children's heads.
Chapter 1:
Know that this weakness often occurs in children at birth or when the midwife squeezes the child's head without ease.
Sometimes it also occurs due to hidden causes which are not known.
I myself have never seen this sickness in any but children, and death followed all whom I saw of them; for that reason it seemed to me that the operation should be abandoned in such a case.
I myself have seen a child whose head was full of water and whose head swelled every day until he could not sit up himself, because of the size of his head; and the moisture increased until he died.
This moisture, it accumulates between skin and bone or it accumulates under the bone above the forehead.
And the operation in that case, if there is moisture between skin and bone and the abscess is small, then a slit should be made in the middle of the head, one fissure wide enough, its length like two knuckles, until the moisture runs out.
And this is a form of trepanation (spatulum).
If the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then make these two slits according to this form.
If the moisture is under the bone and there is a sign that you see that the skull openings are wide open from all sides; and water sinks when you press it with your hand towards the inside, and it is not hidden from you, then make three slits in the middle of the head according to this method.
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. Then suture the slits with bandages and lint. Then apply oil and wine to it until the fifth day.
Then loosen the sutures, take care of the wound with ointments and salves.
Do not omit to tie the head with equality. Feed the ill man with dry food of little moisture until he is strengthened and cured.
Another method of incision is to consider where the size of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
Whenever it is more, either in the head, or in the skull, or in the right, or in the left.
Therefore advance with an incision where it appears to you that there is an abscess and fill with water: and cut it as much as possible.
And observe, do not cut an artery, and let the flow of blood occur, and let the sick person die from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Section on the incision of arteries that are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When catarrh occurs to someone's eyes or chest, and it grows old and medical treatment does not help: then the final cure is more in that, incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when one wants to cut them (the arteries), it is necessary for the sick person to shave his head. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then let the sick person press his neck with any cloth of his. Then consider where the vein throbs. And these places are the places that are depressed behind each ear: and they are rarely hidden except in some men.
Then mark both (the places) with pitch: and cut one on each side with a spoon-shaped knife, the incision reaching to the bone: and make this opening through the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spoon-shaped knife under the artery, and cut it towards the top with the incision.
Let the length of the incision be as long as two fingers joined together.
For when the vein is cut, blood flows out with a pulsating discharge, which jumps to the inside with frequent leaps.
If the artery is not visible to the senses, then it is necessary for measurements from the ear to determine the amount of space of three fingers. Then mark with pitch and cut until the bone.
And what must be released from the blood is about 6 ounces, perhaps you will release more or less from it. Entire this according to the quantity that appears to you from the strength of the sick person and the filling of the artery.
Then consider about the wound. Then if there is something left on the bone from the siphon, then cut it, so that a hot abscess does not occur: then press the wound with flax from linen cloths.
Then care for him with an ointment until he is healed.
On the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When an old hemicrania or acute catarrh due to acrimonious humidities and warmth in the neck of time, or an old soda, severe, and similar to these occur in a man: and it is treated with methods of curative medicine, but that does not help; then we are experienced in dealing with such maladies, extraction of arteries from the neck, or cauterization of them, as we have described.
And the method of operation for their extraction is that the sick person shaves hairs which are in the neck, and bends to the visible artery in the neck. Moreover, it is shown to you by its pulse, and it rarely hides except in a few men, or severe coldness.
If it is hidden to you, then let the sick person tighten his head with any cloth of his; then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or boil the place with hot water, until it appears to you in a clear appearance. Then take a spoon, which I previously made. Then peel the skin with it easily until you reach the artery. Then insert a hook into it and draw it out towards the top until you draw it out from the skin, and make it come out from all sides of the layers beneath it.
But if the artery is delicate: then insert it with the tip of the hook. Then cut from that part according to the amount by which its ends will be extended and contracted, and there should not be a blood flow. For if it is not cut, and if it is not separated, the blood does not rise deeply.
Then evacuate from the blood six ounces, up to three.
If the artery is large: then it must be tied in two places with strong thread, double filament, silk, or cord of alhohod, so that rot and decay do not occur before the wound is consolidated, and there should not be a blood flow.
Then cut off the excess, which is between two ligaments. Do that at that hour, or another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautionery to the bone, with a small knife-shaped cauterization; until its ends are cut off, and it remains in the same place as the operation.
And it is a better operation, unless the patient has fever, or suffers from cold conditions. Because cautionery comes from those things that help to stop wetness. Therefore it is a help.
And after the extraction of the artery, the place should be filled with old boiled material; and fine powdered lice should be placed on top of it.
And after the solution, it is to be cleaned with dry medicines that cause new flesh to grow and with linen until it heals.
If there happens to be bleeding from the artery while you are operating, then hasten to cut it with cautionery or fill the place with wax; and press your hand until the bleeding stops. If there is nothing from those present, then place your finger on the place until the blood freezes. And immerse the place with water of strong cold, until the sharpness subsides and it is pressed as necessary.
And because the vein is lighter and easier to extract, it is to cauterize the vein with this cautionery having two small knives; and the sharpness of the two knives should be similar to almandine. Nevertheless, they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they are as sharp as two knives, cold should be applied to both of them; and they will not cut flesh swiftly. Since there is a certain thickness in them, heat of fire should be applied to them; and the flesh is cut off swiftly; when this operation is thus performed, it is better than any operation, and lighter and easier.
This is the form of the cautery.
And let the space between two knives be of the size of a finger's width, after you mark two places with encaustum (wax); and place both extremely hot ones, until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places: to expel what is between its extremities. They are not consolidated with this cautery thoroughly.
Head IV.
Chapter on the treatment of continuous, acute tears from the eyes.
When the tears are continuous and there is a flow from veins on the outside of the skull; and no medicine for treatment is applied to them with medicines, and you see the face of the sick person blushing, and it feels like the crawling of ants on the forehead; and his eyes are sunken, wet, so that the hairs of their eyelashes have already been corroded by the corrosion; and his eyelids are heated due to the acuity of the tears: then the ancients resorted to this treatment for them, and they called it treatment with a knife.
And it is, that you order (the patient) to shave the hairs which are on his forehead. Then make three equal incisions in the forehead: and let the length of the incision be as two fingers, and let one incision be equidistant from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second slightly below the movement of the arms, and the third on the other side: and avoid cutting the arteries which are on both sides. And extend your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the space of all incisions be the size of three finger joints connected: and have a piece of sponge prepared, or dry cloth multiplied, with which you can absorb blood.
Then insert the pointed end of two pieces, whose following shape is: From the incision which is from the temple, up to the second incision: and scrape with it the entire skin that is between two incisions, together with the fat that is above the eye. Then do the same from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then remove the pointed end and insert another tool, called a sharp knife, from one side gently, not sharp on the other side. And this is its shape.
And place its sharp side facing the attached flesh with skin, and its blunt side facing the bone: and push it until it reaches the middle incision: and cut off with it all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes, except for the incision which appears on the skin.
Then do the same in the middle incision up to another incision.
And when an equal amount of blood flows out, squeeze the places from clotted blood pieces.
Then place a linen cloth from an old pot on every fissure, and place over them small pieces that have been soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And ensure that no hot abscess occurs.
On the third day, loosen the ligature and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then take care of that with the ointment of basilicon, and the others that heal wounds until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Chapter on the treatment of acute tear ducts and nasal catarrh from inside the head.
When someone has frequent, severe, and persistent catarrhs or acute tears, you notice their eyes are weakened, small, and their appearance is already poor: and the eyelids have ulcers, hairs fall out from them, and there is a sharp pain deep within the head, which causes sneezing: then take from these symptoms, those substances that catarrhs or tears do not come unless from many veins.
A better treatment for them is this. And it should be prescribed to the sick person to shave their forehead. Then make one incision in the middle of the forehead, or slightly to the right or left in width, starting from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision extend to the bone: and stretch out your hand away from the temples that move during chewing until the bone is exposed: and remove all blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with a heated iron or with linen cloths. Then tie on top with thread: and soak the thread with wine and oil to prevent a hot abscess from forming.
And when you release it and see that the hot abscess is about to decrease: then you must break the bone, until meat begins to grow in it.
Then care for it with a drying treatment that promotes growth of flesh: just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin: and prepare a plaster from them, and apply it to promote growth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
Section on treatment for the one falling into the ear.
Every thing that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either it is a mineral stone, or something similar to a stone like iron and wood; or it is from a plant such as chickpea and beans; or it is liquid such as water, vinegar, and similar substances; or it is an animal.
When a stone falls into the ear or something of that kind which does not grow in the ear, expose only the ear: if you see a stone, then pour something from broken oil, or sesame into the ear. Then administer the extraction of it and make him sneeze with powder and apply opium to the nostrils near the onset of sneezing, when you put around the ear fragments from cloth or wool and stretch the ear towards the upper parts.
Often it comes out with this care.
If it does not come out, then administer the extraction of it with Geisa (meaning Pizigir), that is subtle Pizigarols: whose shape is this.
If it comes out with Geisa, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a fine blunt hook few times.
If it does not come out through that, then make a tube from iron and introduce the end of the tube into the ear opening a lot and apply opium around the tube with softened wax so that only the way is open to the wind; then extract it with your strong pull of the wind.
Often it comes out with what we have said. If it does not come out in this way: then take some helkalimbate or distilled water, that is wheat gluten prepared with which birds are caught, a small amount; and place it on the end of the radius after you have placed a suitable lid over it well; then introduce it into the ear opening with ease, when you remove the ear from moisture.
If it does not come out with all that I have mentioned, then hurry to cut, before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
The method of lancing is to first use the lancet on the weak, in the head region: and draw out from his blood according to its power. Then make the weak person sit between your hands, and turn his ear upward, and make a small lancing wound at the base of the ear near its fatty tissue in the depressed place: and let the wound be in the shape of the moon until you reach the stone: then remove it with whatever is possible for you using the instruments.
Then let the lancing wound heal from your own time and care until it heals.
If a grain falling into the ear is one that grows and swells, then administer its removal.
But if it does not obey you for evacuation, then take a thin, delicate probe of this shape.
And administer with it the removal of that type from grains which fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think that the grain is already moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you put many fragments on it: then remove them with forceps, or with a subtle probe, or with suction, as we have said, for the removal of it is relieved.
In water which enters the ear, the weak should use sneezing with it in the first place: and already the ear has filled itself with some hot water: and it lies on top of that ear where the water is. If it comes out through this, it is good.
And if not: then take many small, soft, warm stones according to the length of a finger and heat them slightly: and the weak person should insert one from these into the ear canal of his: and sprinkle one foot with it on that side, and strike with another stone against the stone in the ear. "Therefore, it should not cease to be done with a stone and a stone, until all the water comes out.
"And now the water flows out in such a way that you take one from balsam or reed, and insert its tip into the ear; and light the other end with fire until it burns as much of it as possible. "Then take another reed and do this repeatedly until all the water comes out; and draw it out with a cannula as described earlier using the stone.
"In the extraction of an animal that has entered it, if it is of small body size, like a louse, and similar to what was said in the division, care should be taken for it as I have stated.
"But if it is of large body size, which can be perceived by the sense: then administer the extraction of it with tweezers and hooks; and its removal is easier for all who hold in the ear.
"In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when care for it is not effective as I have said in division and in the treatment of distillations, then you should look at the ear in sunlight. "Therefore, if something appears there from worms, then draw it out with tweezers or delicate hooks.
"But if nothing appears there, then take a cannula with this shape: narrow at the bottom and wide at the top; insert its fine tip into the ear according to the size that the sick person can tolerate; then suck it with strong suction. "Do this repeatedly until all worms come out.
"But if they do not obey your command to leave, then wrap the tip of a cannula with wax as I have said using the stone.
"If they do not come out as I have said, then administer the distillations that the ancients have been experienced with in the treatment of worms; and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your flow (be) that which you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or bronze, narrow below, where there should be a small hole, wide above.
Therefore, let the thing (that is) pressed within the hollow of the cannula be made of bronze properly. And if you wish, take radium (a mixture of copper and zinc), and wrap its end with a wrapping properly; then pour oil, or juice, or whatever medicine you want into the cannula; and let it be in the ear; then insert radium with the wrapper on top, and press it with your hand moderately, until the oil is pressed out in the hollow of the ear, and the sick person feels it inside: and whatever is poured into the ear, let it be already heated slightly; and take care that there is no substance that distills excessively cold into it; medicines cannot tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
Chapter on the treatment of auricular impaction (ear blockage).
Whenever some infants emerge from their mother's womb without perforated eardrums.
And it also happens to some people that ear impaction occurs due to a wound or tissue born in the ear.
And this impaction sometimes occurs in the deep ear canal, which is not visible; and sometimes it occurs near the outer ear canal, which can be seen.
Therefore, that which occurs in the deep ear and is not perceptible by sight, is difficult to cure in many dispositions (positions).
And in the one which is visible by sight, it is necessary that you place the sick person's ear on the sun and look at it; then if you see the impaction appearing, open it with a thin spatula whose shape is as follows, its end should have a small hollow, part of which should be sharp: and the rest of the spatula should be two sides that are gentle so as not to harm the ear.
If therefore an abscess is born from the flesh within the ear: then hold it with a subtle hook, and cut it easily and powerfully until all the flesh is removed.
If therefore an abscess has gone deep into the ear: then take a thin probe, warm it slightly with fire: then put it into the ear.
If you should feel an abscess which is accompanied by weakness and difficulty of hearing, try to open it gently: and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Then put linen in the ear according to the size of the hole you made, wrapped in Egyptian ointment: do this for several days until you are certain that the wound has healed.
Or take linen and soak it in rose water, powderize on it ground alum, and use it.
If you see that the ear is beginning to decay: then it is necessary to extract the linen, and allow it to remain with another piece of linen which you have wrapped in a pot made with rose oil, until the decaying matter becomes warm: then take care of it until it heals.
If there is bleeding, immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear: and use the rest of the treatment that removes the described bleeding in the section on distillation.
Chapter on the care of Althelia's Eyes (Eyelids).
Chapter VIII.
Those Altheli that occur on the eyelids of the eyes are sometimes wet and sometimes dry.
Therefore it is necessary to hold them with tweezers or with a hook, and cut them from their roots. Then apply powdered alum.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautionery.
To cauterize them is better after the incision. Often they return when something remains from their roots. And when cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter on the treatment of inflammation of the eyelids of the eye.
Section IX.
Often something happens on the eyelids resembling Grandinosity in its firmness and hardness, and it is called a Grandino; it is an accumulation of thick humidity on the upper eyelid and lower eyelid.
Therefore the operation is to determine if it is a Grandino that appears on the eyelid and moves in all directions; its matter is easy to remove.
Make an incision above it with sufficient width. Then scrape it from all sides easily until it comes out. Then hold it with a hook and cut it off.
If the removal of it is not prepared for you unless after you have penetrated the eyelid with a small incision, then it harms the weak in some way.
If the incision is large: then gather it up with stitching; and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from that. Ointment restores and fills it in.
And if the Grandino is inclined towards the inner part of the ear and the surface turns inwards, then turn the eyelid over, hold the Grandino with a hook; apart from that you will need an incision, and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is stretched by the incision, it does not harm the weak in any way.
Then wash the eye after snow-blowing incision with salted water; and take care of the place until it heals when the patient is sick.
On the cure of the Eyelids.
Chapter X.
The axirnath is a boil that arises in the upper eyelid; and it mostly happens to children; and it weighs down their eyes, and they get cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot see the light of the sun, because tears run towards them, and for this reason you see them lying on their faces constantly, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are always moist under the eyebrows, which have already been swollen; and the appearance of the axirnath is visible to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the axirnath between them.
And the method of treatment is for the patient to put his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth, and prepare on it a linen square according to the size of what contains axirnath from all sides. Then put it on top and press with your fingers from all sides, so that axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the center of that moisture with a thin-bladed knife-like instrument, and let the incision not be larger than the one made during venesection in depth.
Or it is necessary that you make an incision of the entire skin until you reach axirnath, because axirnath proceeds from the incision in various dispositions, for axirnath comes out from the incision like the shape of a white grease ball.
Then remove it with a cloth that you have infused between your fingers towards the outside; and you turn your hand to right and left until it is dispersed; and be careful not to add to the incision so as not to reach with the knife-like instrument to the eye, and damage it.
If however the Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the split, you shall add a little into the split with ease, until the Axirnath comes out. Then extract it, as we have said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the site, and bind it with threads.
And among men there are those who grind salt and place it in the hollow of the split to dissolve what remains from that moisture.
Then care for it until it heals.
If however an abscess occurs at the site which is hot, then care for it with soothing plasters until it heals.
\*\*Methods of Ataxmira for the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft so that it weeps as it should not.\*\*
Chapter XI.
When hairs appear in the eyelids beyond the natural course of hair growth and turn grey, then they harm the eye and cause diseases such as constant weeping, softening of the eyelid, and clouding, until it causes the destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmira for the eye is treated according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire. (This means using a hot instrument to burn away the excess hair.) Or with sharp medicine, according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery. (The "sharp medicine" refers to chemicals or agents that can burn away the excess hair.) Ataxmir is treated by incision and suture. By reeds, as I shall say.
You must place the head of the sick man on your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is turned, that is good. And if not: insert the point into it, where there is a thread from below the eyelid; let the point penetrate with the thread from above, and let this be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and draw the thread upward along with the eyelid, and turn it with a spatula.
Then find on the inside of the eyelid below the added hairs, with the probe inserted from the greater lacrimal sac to the lesser lacrimal sac.
Then draw out the thread, and place under the eyelid a small piece of cotton or cloth; then mark the eyelid with wax, so that it resembles the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid; because it varies greatly among humans.
For there are those who require that the incision be made according to a large size of the eyelid, according to the amount that is softened by the eyelid.
Then with the probe find on top of the two lines you marked, and start from the greater lacrimal sac to the lesser lacrimal sac; let there be one fissure near the natural hairs, like a thick vein.
Then insert the hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then scrape the whole thing. Then join together with a suture the two lips, using a sharp needle and fine wool; wipe away the blood, and let the excess from the threads adhere to the eyebrows, if you wish to do this: and if not, do nothing.
Then release the suture and the threads for three or four days; afterwards, take care of it.
And if you wish, release the wound without suture, and take care of it, so that it dries out and contracts. For the eyelid is elevated during the sealing of a wound and its adhesion; but it will be better later on.
This method of healing was taught by the ancient Ataxmires.
However, there is concern for the sick person in this, and it comes from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is in the Ataxmires also: it is to mark signs on the eyelid with a figure like that of the leaf of the myrtle, as we have said.
Then lift the eyelid with three separated or joined combs in the following shape, then cut off what is excessive with small scissors according to this shape with equal incisions.
If it is not possible for you to hold the comb and it does not fit, then take a needle with thread, and insert it into the middle of the figure; and insert another thread near the greater tear duct, and a third thread near the smaller tear duct; and gather the threads with equal tension between your fingers.
Then lift your hand evenly with an elevation; and lift the skin over which is marked the wound, as we have said.
Then gather together two edges of the wound with a suture; and take care of it until it heals.
If an abscess occurs at your incision or your wound, use wool to soothe it with pitch and similar substances from soothing ointments.
And sometimes the eyelashes also turn over.
Therefore, it is necessary to use what we have said for an incision; but a suture is more artificial for both. Treatment for Ataxmir with dogs.
It is to turn the eyelid and cut the cleft that is inside, as I have said before. Then, using art, make two dogs or two thin sticks of wood, their length being the same as the eyelid's length and their width narrower than that of the spatula's; and you have already cut on both ends at the places where you hold the thread from each side.
Then gather one of them with a spatula on that which overhangs from the eyelid of the eye and tie the two dogs from each side with strong binding, and release it after several days. For the tightened skin will die, darken, and rot until it falls off by itself.
If it slows down (the dead skin), then cut it with scissors. Then take care of it until it heals.
When it hardens, lift the eyelid and do not pluck the hairs.
And this is the shape of the two dogs that you will make according to this form and its size (dimensions).
Chapter 12.
Treatment for plucking hairs from the eye with a needle.
The procedure is to take a fine needle and insert a thin silk thread into it gently. Then gather its ends and tie them both with a very thin knot; and the length of the threads should be one palm (of the hand).
Then prepare another thin thread called Alinxotati underneath it briefly and knot its ends if you wish.
Then place the sick person's head on your lap and bring it close to the sun so that the operation may be visible; because this is a delicate or minor operation.
Then insert the needle with Alinxotati into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you pull out the natural hair from above.
Then draw out the needle above the incision: and insert the needle into the incision; if it is one, or two, or three, not more than that.
Then draw your hand along with it, until the needle comes out of the incision together with the hair and the surrounding skin along with its natural hair.
If the incision is drawn and no hair comes out with it, draw the incision downward with the thread you have prepared in it, until the incision comes out of the upper opening, and you see it with your eyes; then you draw out the incision and the thread, and extract both, and close the eye, and leave the closed one for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then tie a long hair from the natural hairs to it and pull them out together; or leave it alone until it grows out, and then pull it out.
Chapter XIII.
When this xanthelasma occurs in the eye, it is called "Leporina.
And this xanthelasma is either natural or acquired.
Therefore the acquired one arises from the consolidation of a wound, or a cut, or a cauterization, and similar things.
And the method of operation in it is to open the consolidation and separate its edges, and put a piece of cotton from flax in it, and tie it until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use in the treatment of this xanthelasma things that dry and tighten; for if you do so, the xanthelasma becomes worse than before; rather use things that soften, such as fenugreek: and embrocation with water, in which althea has been boiled, along with flax seed; and unguent of dyaquilon, which has been melted with some oil; and apply cotton soaked with it, and treat with it.
Thy treasure of care is that thou should endeavor with all thy skill, so as not to heal in its former shape.
This operation which we have said, is indeed a correction of the Alexis, so that not the shape of the place should return as it was altogether.
Of the care of Alexis which is done on the lower eyelid, and it is a thickening or contraction upwards towards right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This which is done below [on the lower eyelid], is indeed what is truly named Alexis. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental [Alexis] is made from a wound, or a split, or cautery, and similar things.
And the way of operation in this is that thou takest a needle with double thread, and dost dip it into flesh, and maketh it pass from tear-duct on the left unto tear-duct on the right, until the thread reach the ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upwards with a needle, and cut it with a broad knife. If therefore the shape of the eyelid return as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take a burnisher, and put it in the split, and turn with it the eyelid; and make two splits on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two splits be from the corners of the incision, until they meet and make an angle: until when they gather together this shape is made, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh to its sharp lower part from what follows the eyelid. Then gather together the separated parts; or it with a yarn thread.
Then care for them [the splits] with what we said, from softening medicaments and linen, until they heal.
If Alxatrati occurs from a fissure, either by suturing or cauterizing: then it is necessary to explore the fissure flat under the eyelashes, as before. Then separate between two lips with a linen cloth, as we said before.
The summary of the treatment for Alxatrati, whether it is above or below, is that the operation should be performed on it, according to the preparation as described for Alxatrati.
Indeed it (Alxatrati) is full of many diversities in shape: and the skillful artisan prepares his art with whatever means is possible to him, so that he makes it return to a natural or nearly natural figure, and himself who is sick, according to what is suitable for him from the operation and instruments in various dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Chapter on the adherence of the eyelid with the conjunctiva, or cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid adheres with the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, it is necessary that you introduce the tip of a radius under the eyelid and pull it up; or extend it with a hook; then cut the adherence with a thin spatula, which should not be sharp like a spatula's edge, but rather dull slightly; so that the sick person is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is removed, and it does not harm the eye with its sharpness; and your incision should be as if you are scraping off the adherence with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural shape, and the adherence is completely healed.
Then pour salted water into the eye, and rinse it with water; or drip it onto him from a syringe made of sheep's horn with water mixed.
Then separate with a linen thread between the eyelid and the eye: and place on the eye wool soaked with egg white: and after three days use it or with solidified ointments, until it heals.
On the Incision of the Toenail and the Protrusion of Skin around the Eyes.
Chapter XVI.
Know that a toenail is according to two modes. Or it is horny and resembles the hoof of an ox, being hard but fine. Or it is not horny, resembling the consistency of frozen white moisture, which when touched with iron or attempted to be picked up with a nail, is torn off and cannot be gripped by the nail.
And neither of these types begins, except from the greater tear duct, until it gradually reaches the eye, covers the vision, and prevents light and movement of the eye.
And the method of operation in the incision is: that the sick person places his head in your lap. Then open the eyes of the patient and pull back the eyelid with your hand. Then gather the toenail with a small nail, and extend it upward. Then take the awl and insert a hair from the horse, ox or sheep into it, let it be a thread, and bend the end of the awl slightly, and fix it in the middle of the toenail: and pierce it with the awl, and tie the toenail with the thread, and extend it upward: and scrape with the hair the side of the toenail that follows the pupil, as if you were holding it with the hair until its end.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a sharp small knife or tweezers: and let out the natural skin of the tear duct so that there is not a persistent flow of tears from the incision.
And sometimes the nail is extended with a spatula alone; or with thread, as we have said. Then it is scraped with a soft spatula, whose form is this.
Be careful, lest the spatula touches the horny coat and causes a break there, and the pupil is pierced through.
Then after the incision, cast into the eye something crushed salt or made from cumin and leave it for another day. Then care for it as necessary until it heals.
If the nail is not nerve-connected and you cannot insert an awl into it nor does a spatula fit there, then this type of nail is repeatedly treated with medicines until it heals as I narrated in the division.
If you wish to cut it (the nail), then open the eye of the sick person, and take a thin, soft, delicate, blunt spatula according to this shape: And grind the nail from above with a sharp razor. If you see that it is becoming rarefied and crushed, and the razor presses upon it, then distill from your hour into the eye from cumin made of zinziber, or red cumin, or crushed salt; and close the eye until another day.
Then repeat this procedure until the whole thing is removed. Unless it should be a hot abscess in your eye, then leave the former and care for the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat this procedure on it with the razor until it heals.
However, a growth of flesh near the tear-duct, if it causes great harm in the eye, is suspended with a spatula and cut from that part of it; not to the end, so as not to interrupt the flow of tears.
Then milk, whether white or red, or made from cheese, should be applied until it heals.
On incision of the eyelid, and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
There sometimes arises in certain human eyes red flesh composed or laid over, until it covers the pupil, approaches, or contracts upon the eyelids and perhaps turns the eyelids towards the outside; and it resembles a rosebush.
And the treatment for it is that the weak one should place his head in your lap. Then open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh together with appropriate forceps; and hold it with one forceps or scissors.
Then make an incision in the flesh first, until you have finished cutting it all off with a knife. Be careful not to harm the eye during the operation; and let your cut be such as we described in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps, as are used for extracting an asebel [a kind of cyst], according to what its form will be after this chapter.
When your incision is completed and the entire alguardenic [the red flesh] is removed, then fill the eye with ground salt or pour in a reddish powder and similar substances from corrosive medicines; and place on the outside of the eye a warm cloth with egg white to protect it from infection.
If any part of the alguardenic remains or if a hot blood flows and you fear a hot infection, then leave the eye alone and treat that which cures an abscess.
Then repeat the procedure until it heals.
And do similarly with the added flesh that occurs in the eye of this kind.
It is necessary that every weak eye of an alien, whether by natural or accidental way, be treated with iron; and you shall not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can endure such operation.
On collecting Sibel from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Chapters on Sibel (red veins over the eye that hinder vision and weaken the eye over days).
Therefore it is necessary that first you consider if the eye with Sibel is strong and there is no other disease except Sibel; then collect Sibel from it.
And it is to command the weak person to place his head on your chest.
Then suspend those veins with a single hook or two according to your judgment; and let the hook be subtle and double, in this shape, or there should be two hooks in one body, in this shape.
Then collect with subtle forceps those veins and remove blood hour by hour until you see the veins are removed from the eye and resolved; and beware not to harm the eye with the points of the forceps.
And let your operation be at midday facing the sun, and be very firm during your operation so as not to cut except the veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye either green or red; so that it burns what remains from Sibel with its own acidity.
If it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then plaster the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye; and leave it for several days until the pain subsides; then cover it warmly; afterward apply it again in the same way until it heals.
This is the form of a pair of forceps.
On reducing an Ariessus (nasal polyp) to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
The surgeon named Arisset cures a fistula with cautionery or sharp medicine burning, according to the narrative that precedes it.
If it is not cured, then there is no skill in it, unless to find upon the abscess at its birth and draw out all the moisture that is in it and pus, until the bone appears.
When the bone appears, and you see corruption or blackness in it, then file it with an instrument whose shape is this.
It is called the rasping of the skull.
Make it from iron and its head should be round like an azir (a type of file), pierced with the punctations of a rasp or a fine, subtle rasp; and place it on the corrupted bone.
Then move it back and forth with your fingers, and press your hand gently on it until you know that the corruption is now filed away; do this repeatedly.
Then restore the place with most powerful astringents.
If the place consolidates and flesh grows there, and the course of pus is cut off; and it remains for forty days without recurring, without abscessing, and no incident occurs in it; then you know that it has been cured.
If not, then there is no skill in it, unless to reduce the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this shape:
It is to expose the second bone with iron or sharp medicine; and when the bone is exposed, then take a trepan (a surgical instrument for boring a hole in the skull) according to this shape: its tip should be iron, triangular; and its handle should be a pyramid extended to the tip, as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself; and let it be close to the lacrimal (eye tear duct); and extend your hand slightly from the eye. Then turn your hand with the lancet until it penetrates the bone and feels weak; by this, when you hold your hand over his nose, you will know that wind is coming out from it.
Therefore, restore the place with cauterizing medicines, as I have taught you.
When the flesh is born and the place hardens; then the matter that was flowing outwards returns to the nose; it is therefore lighter above the weak one.
Chapter on Reducing Protrusions of the Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes completely and there is no damage to vision nor decrease; then it is necessary to loosen the weak one. Then apply leeches. Afterwards, place poultices on the neck without scarification but with suction.
Then place over the eye a liniment made from acacia, aloes, frankincense and gum Arabic. Then bind the eye on top with plasters full of many fleas.
And the method of fleas is: that you take soft cloths, many, and fold each one four times; make many from them; then place one on top of another according to the size that the eye needs; then bind them together with a strong bandage.
And repeat the poultices without scarification but with suction.
Then remove the poultices and let the eye be bound day and night.
If the binding becomes soft again, then it is necessary to bind it tightly; then remove the binding after a day and night, as said before.
If you see that the eye has returned to its usual color; it is good; and if not, then repeat the poultices, fleas, bindings, and poultices until it heals.
On the incision of the tunica vaginae.
Concerning the extraction of the stone from the bladder
When the bladder is ruptured, then the stone comes out like a grain of the vagina and stains the human form because of it, and there is a desire to incise it: then the operation should be performed on it, as I have told you before; it is to insert a pointed instrument from the root of the bladder, from the lower part to the upper part.
Then insert another pointed instrument with a double thread from the lachrymal side and make it penetrate; then release the first needle according to its position.
Then cut the place of the double thread and tie a part of the bladder around the needle; and pull it tightly.
Then take out the needle and place wool soaked in oil on the eye; and release it until the thread comes out with the bladder.
Then take care of the eye, because it is comforting to itself, until the wound heals.
And sometimes the bladder is tightened from all sides with a bandage made of cloth until the eye protrudes greatly.
Then it should be pierced with a sharp instrument so that it reaches the depth of the eye and the moisture of the eyeball is let out, and the eye descends and enters immediately; then tighten it until it heals.
On the treatment of ulcers.
Concerning the operation for removing a piece from a malignant
This disease called Alcomnati is nothing but pus that accumulates in the eye, similar to water descending and it itself is not.
And the way of operating on it is for the sick person to sit on a prepared chair or directly.
Then take the head with both your hands from two sides and move it until you see pus reaching the lower part of your eyes. Then it figures and does not descend, and the light is freed: and let the sick one see as he saw before: and if it does not descend lower, know that there is water.
If the descent of pus is not prepared with what I have said, then make the sick one sit between your hands. Then take a subtle spathule and bore with it on the cornified cushion near the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal layer at the crown, until pus comes out.
When it comes out, then pour warm water mixed with honey into the eye, or warm water in which you have already cooked barley and honey; then treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
Chapter on the treatment of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have said the type of water in division, and what suits for perforating with a declaring and explaining speech, then take it according to health.
Then it is necessary that you make the sick one sit between your hands with a square position facing the light and near the sun; tie his healthy eye, and squeeze it very hard; then close the eye of the water with your right hand, if the eye in which there is water is the left eye; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right.
Then take your right hand (if the affected eye is the left) or your left hand (if the affected eye is the right).
Then place the tip of your thumb near the crown and the thickness of a radish on the white part of the eye visible as the smaller lachrymal; then push with power; and you revolve your hand together, until it penetrates into the cornea of the eye; and feel that your thumb has reached an empty place.
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey (of an instrument) be large enough for depth, the measurement of the space from the pupil to the end of blackness; and it is the eye's corona. You will see (the line) in the very pupil of the eye, on account of the clarity of the cornea layer.
Then place (the instrument) large enough to reach where there is water. Then press it downward once after another.
If therefore water flows out immediately, then the sick one sees (the object) above what opens his vision immediately, and large enough in his own eye.
Then rest for a while. If water flows out again, then remove it (the instrument) after it has flowed out large enough.
When it is stuck and does not rise up: then remove large enough with ease; and you turn your hand slowly.
Then dissolve something from clear salt in water, and clean the eye within with it. Then place outside the eye the whole of wool soaked in rose oil and white egg yolk; and bind with it the healthy eye.
We and those who are of our time place over him (the affected part) crushed cumin with egg white.
If large enough does not obey you in entering the eye because of its hardness, since it is a man whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you take a spatula, which is called Alberid, and this is its shape.
Therefore bore only the conjunctiva with it (the instrument), and do not push your hand into the hole; and there is no other purpose but to make a subtle way to the large enough place.
Then insert large enough, as we said.
On the completion of your work, prepare for the sick one a bed well-made, in which he may sleep on his back in a dark house; and prohibit from all movements, and from coughing: and place food for him such as soothes his nature; and do not move his head to right or left at all.
And let the suture be according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark dwelling, and test its sight: make it see things. Then bring the suture back until the seventh day.
It is not proper for him to do it during the hour of cure, or immediately after incision; rather, let a stranger do it: therefore, because water rises quickly through a violent wound.
If however a hot abscess occurs: then it is necessary that you dissolve the eye before the seventh day; and correct it with what soothes the abscess, until the abscess subsides; then remove its sight, and place over his oral cavity what regulates his vision for some days, while he remains in that dark dwelling.
Then let him go out of the house gradually, and convert himself to his cases (bandages).
And know that in the case of lancets, the student is not permitted to look away from the sight often; then he dares upon the operation.
And indeed, one of them who are from Aleppo has reached us, who said that a large cistern was made in Aleppo, through which water is drawn.
Therefore, I have not seen anyone in your land who made that; nor have I read it in any ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
These are the forms of the species from the large cistern, to stand over him who does not know them.
Make them of bronze; and let their ends be with this same triangular subtlety, and the end sharp.
Chapter XXIII.
Chapter on the care of born flesh in the nose.
Whenever diverse fleshes are born in the nose, among which there is something resembling a scorpion of many feet; and from that is the cancerous flesh, stone-like, dark colored; and from that is the soft flesh, not dark colored.
Therefore, for the soft flesh among these, not fraudulent, nor cancerous, it is necessary that you make the patient sit opposite the sun with his nose open, and throw a hook into those fleshes; then draw them out towards the exterior, and cut what you have grasped from them with a thin subtle spatula on one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
If something remains of that which cannot be removed: then shave it with one subtle instrument with ease until nothing is left from it. If blood dominates you or a hot abscess occurs: then oppose it with what is necessary; or if it is from malignant abscesses, then hasten to cauterize him until the blood is separated and all fleshes are removed.
Then vinegar, or water, or wine should be thrown into the nose after the incision. If the nose opens and moisture proceeds to the palate, then you know that he is already well.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should be, then you know that within him there is flesh born in the upper bones of the nose, which was not reached by the incision instrument.
Then it is necessary to insert a linen thread with some thickness and many knots; and place between each knot an amount equal to or less than a finger: and make the patient do it so that he sends one end of the thread into the nose with a rod, or with whatever is possible for him after he has made himself similar to an azer [a surgical instrument]; and draw out the smell until it reaches the back, and come out on his throat.
And indeed often do boys in schools make this like that of Attotus; and it is a matter easy to him who wishes.
Then place two ends of the string, one which comes out on the nose, and the other which remains inside the nose. Then, as an assistant, the skin incision with the knots that are in the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with the thread knots.
Then withdraw the thread; and place on the nose after bleeding linen which you have soaked in Egyptian ointment; do this for three days or more until the ointment has completely dissolved all that remains of the flesh.
Then place at the end of the procedure a lead cannula into the nose for some days until it heals.
If however it requires drying treatment, use that.
For making the head-pouring when olive oil and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it from silver or brass; which is similar to a small lantern, open like a snail's shell; and the channel should be similarly shaped.
And if you wish to make a closed cannula, do so like a reed.
And the snail-shell instrument for head-pouring should be full and perforated; which has a handle at the end, with which you hold it when heating oil or whatever you wish in it, and liquids that flow easily.
Chapter XXV.
Often a Thelul is born at the end of the nose and grows and increases with days until it becomes unsightly to look at it.
And for this reason, it is necessary to cut it off at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. Then place on the spot, either a cautery or a medicine burning in its place.
If the incision does not progress as expected until it is enlarged, then consider if it is hard, of a dark color and few senses; then do not touch it with iron, because it is a cancerous ulcer.
For often I have seen that one who has cut an abscess has encountered great evil upon the one who possessed it.
And if the abscess is soft when touched and not dark in color, and you see that it is possible to cut through it entirely, then evacuate the weakened part, and cut it without fear or hesitation; and care for the place with it so that it drains and constricts until it heals.
Chapter 26.
Chapter on stitching the nose, lip, and ear.
Know that when continuity of one of these cartilages is disrupted, the operation does little good, unless in some men.
Therefore when something happens to anyone from one of these, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood; and then join together the edges of the wound with stitching; then care for it until it heals.
And if continuity of the lips has been separated and each part has become healthy, then it is necessary to scrape off all the part appearing from its own skin until it bleeds. Then join together the two lips with stitching and bind them, and sprinkle over it powder of dragon's blood and pulverized olibanum; and place on top of the powders a fragment of plaster called diaphyton, and of another consolidating plaster; and leave it bound for two or three days. Then dissolve it, and change the medicine; and leave it until the stitches are dissolved by themselves. Then care for yourself with an ointment until you are healed.
The method of suturing is to gather the solution of continuity, or with needles as we have mentioned in the abdomen suturing; or gather the solution with thread, as I told you before.
Chapter XXVII [of Albucasis's book].
Chapter on the removal of lip nodes.
Many people often have hard ulcers on the inside of their lips similar to the seeds of a plant; and some of them are smaller, and others larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to turn the lip and search for every node on it; and hang it with a hook and cut it in all directions.
Then fill the place after the incision with boiled vinegar until blood is separated.
Then clean with vinegar, and care for the place where there is stiffness until the wounds heal.
Chapter XXVIII [of Albucasis's book].\]  Mult
Chapter on incising the skin of a newborn baby over the gum.
Many times flesh is born above the gum, which the ancients called ablus.
Therefore, it is necessary to hang it with a hook; or hold it with forceps and cut it at the root and let pus run out or blood.
Then place on top of it boiled vinegar or other stiffening powders, dried.
If that flesh returns after treatment, many times it returns, then cut it a second time and burn it; for it does not return after burning.
Chapter XXIX [of Albucasis's book].\]
Chapter on tooth shaving with iron.
Sometimes cavity forms on the surfaces of teeth from inside and outside and between gums with rough cortex; and sometimes they turn yellow and green, and when corruption reaches to the gum, and they become foul teeth through that.
Therefore it is necessary that you make the sick man sit between your hands, and his head in your bosom, and scrape the mole and tooth, where the bark appears to you, like sand: until nothing remains of them, and similarly do with blackness, and greenness, and citron-color, and others until they are cleaned.
If what is in them is removed at the beginning of the reasoning, it is good: if not, then repeat the reasoning upon them on another day, on the second, and on the third, until finally the study comes to that which you desire.
And know that the tooth requires scapellers of various shapes and forms, according to which it is prepared for your operation: because the scapeller with which the tooth is scraped from below is different from the scapeller with which the tooth is scraped between the teeth, according to other shapes.
And these shapes of the scapellers be prepared by you, which you see.
Chapter 30.
Chapter on the extraction of tooth pain.
It is necessary that you cure the tooth from its pain with all your skill, and you are slow in its extraction. For there is no substitute for it when it is extracted, since it is a lofty substance: until there is no excuse for the extraction of it, then if the sick man is compelled to extract it himself, he must be made firm and certain by you that the painful tooth is to be extracted.
For often pain deceives the sick man and he believes that there is wormwood in the tooth and extracts it himself: then the pain does not subside until the sick tooth is extracted.
We have already seen this from the operation of phlebotomists.
And when the sick man is made certain by you that the painful tooth is to be extracted, then it is necessary that you make an incision around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is something of virtue, until the gums are loosened from all sides: then move it with your fingers, or with subtle forceps firstly gently, until you shake it.
Then place the large forceps well in those places [of the patient], and hold the head of the weak [patient] between your knees so that it does not move; then pull out the tooth along the straight path, so that you do not break it.
If it does not come out [the tooth], then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary to fill that hole with a cloth and bind it with the end of a thin radius so that it does not break during your hour of extraction with forceps.
And you should take great care with the incision around the gums from all sides.
And keep your strength so that you do not break it [the tooth] and leave a part of it, and return over the weak one with that greater pain which was first there.
And be careful not to make the same mistake as ignorant bloodletters do in haste and their audacity with its removal, besides what I have told you [about administering something].
For many times they bring great weaknesses upon men, which are difficult to break and leave all of its roots, or some of them; or they extract it with certain bones of the jaw, as we have often testified.
Then it is washed after its removal [of the tooth] with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If there should be bleeding from the place (for it often happens), then rub something with wax and fill the place; if not, cauterize it [the area] if you do not have wax.
The tips of the fine forceps by which a tooth is moved should be long in length, short in handle, thick, so that they do not split when pressed upon the tooth; they should resemble the handles of large forceps, until when you tighten them, they do not bite themselves, nor split; the handles should be short, and made of iron or brass well-made, straight tips; and in their tips there should be teeth, some of which enter into certain places and tighten with a decent constriction, strong.
And sometimes they (the veins) become like the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia, and are very constricted.
Chapter 31.
On the extraction of teeth, and the removal of broken jaw bones.
When a piece remains in the socket of the tooth that is fractured, then it should be covered with lard on the spot for one or two days until the place softens; subsequently introduce into it algasti, or forceps: whose extremities are similar to the mouth of the bird named ciconia. The form of this is as follows (for the forceps):
The extremities are made as if with a rasp from within: or as if with an aliskilfegi.
If, therefore, it does not obey you with these forceps, then it is necessary that you be cautious on the root and separate the entire flesh and introduce an instrument called a Small Palanca, whose shape is as follows.
Let the end of it be short, somewhat thicker: and let it not be swollen so as not to break.
If, therefore, the root comes out through it, that is good; and if not, help with other instruments whose shapes are as follows.
The first shape is a triangle, in which there is some thickness.
The shape of the fine triangle.
And with other instruments and tools which preceded in the ratio of teeth.
And also helps with this instrument resembling a large nail, whose form is a twisted triangle, having some thickness to avoid breaking and not swollen.
And know that there are many instruments for teeth: and similarly the other instruments are not counted, and the skilled craftsman, skillful in his art, finds himself an instrument according to what the operation signifies and the illnesses themselves.
Because of the variety in the types of ailments for which the ancients did not make an instrument.
If the bone breaks from the jaw, or from other bones of the face, or rots: then examine it on its own place with that which is suitable for it from the instruments and forceps I mentioned for root extraction, and help with this gesture, whose shape is as follows.
Let there be some thickness in it gradually, so that the bone can be held or tightened with it and not escape and move away until the bone comes out; and restore the place with suitable medicines for this.
If there is a little rottenness in the bone, then scrape it off from its rottenness, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter XXXII.
On the lock of projecting teeth over others.
When teeth project not according to their natural course, the form becomes ugly because of it; and this is especially true when it happens in women and girls, namely in those who are menstruating.
Therefore, one must consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth, and it does not fit or its locking mechanism or grinding mechanism is possible, then pull it out; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this tool, the shape of which is as follows:
It resembles a small beak and is made from hard iron with a very sharp tip.
And your cut should be such that you cut it over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, so as not to disturb any other teeth.
If it is a projecting tooth exposed to grinding, then grind it with a file made from iron, the shape of which is as follows:
The entire instrument is made of ivory, and its handle is small, full of large holes, like a file with which points are made: with which the hard tooth is gradually filed down over many days with ease, so that it is not disturbed, and falls out: then smooth it gently at the end, polish it with some files.
If it is a tooth that breaks and injures the tongue, then it must be filed with a file until the roughness of the fracture is removed and it is made smooth; and it should not injure the tongue nor corrupt speech.
Chapter XXXIII.
On filing teeth with gold filaments.
When there is concussion and agitation of the front teeth due to a blow or accident, and a weak person cannot hold what he eats so that it does not fall out; and if you have treated them with medicinal adhesives, but the treatment has not helped: then it is appropriate for them to be bound with a gold filament, because silver turns green and decomposes after days, but gold never changes.
And let the filament be of intermediate thickness and coarseness according to its quantity that it may hold between the teeth.
And the shape of filing is that you take the filament and insert its double between two healthy teeth; then wrap it with its ends around the mobile teeth, whether one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side with the needle. Then return the wrapping to the starting point; and bind your hand with delicacy and wisdom until it is not completely removed; and let your binding, which you bind the filament, be near the roots of the teeth so that it does not come off.
Then cut off the excess ends of the filament with scissors; and bring together both, and fold them back with a twist; and hide these in between the healthy tooth and the mobile tooth so as not to injure the tongue; then release it when it is bound tight enough.
If it is opened or cut open, bind them with another thread and let it remain in that state for the entire time.
This is the form of teeth, and the figure of the interlocking of two healthy teeth, and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that a tooth returns to its place after the loss of one or two in their respective locations, and remains as we have said; this is not done except by an artist, wise, and experienced.
And sometimes a piece is prepared from the bones of a calf; and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the position where it is protected and bound, as we have said; and it remains, and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already healed.
The operation in it is to open the mouth of the sick person at the head of his neck in your bosom, and lift out his tongue; then cut that nerve-ligament across its width until the tongue is released from its constraint.
If there is something hard and knotty, and it is from the consolidation of a wound; then throw a hook into it and pierce it across its width until you cut the ligament, and the knot is released.
And be careful that there is no tear in deep flesh, and do not cut an artery there, and let blood flow out.
Then it is cleaned in the trace of the incision with rose water, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place a cloth made from flax under the tongue that the sick person holds all night; so that it does not consolidate again.
If however there occurs a bleeding, then place upon the place zagi crushed. If it is cut (by a knife), then cauterize the place with a lentiginous cautery that suits the wound; afterwards take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter XXXV. (Chapter 35)
Sometimes there occurs under the tongue an aposteme resembling a small Ranula which hinders the natural movement of the tongue and perhaps becomes swollen to the point of filling the bone.
And the operation on this is that you open the sick person's mouth facing the sun; and examine the aposteme.
If you see it of a dark or black colour, hard and insensitive to the touch; then do not touch it, as it is cancer.
And if it is sloping towards whiteness, where there is moisture; then plunge a hook into it and cut it with a thin spatula, and release it from all sides. If it bleeds during your operation, then place upon it crushed zagi until the bleeding stops; afterwards return to your operation until you extract it with its contents.
Then wash it with vinegar and salt; afterwards take care of it with the rest of the treatment that suits the wound until it heals.
Chapter on the treatment of two Aphthae (aphtha is an ancient term for a canker sore).
Chapter XXXVI. (Chapter 36)
Sometimes there appear in the throat nodes which resemble glands that appear externally and are called two Aphthae; when you treat them with what I have said above and they do not heal, then examine them.
If it is a hard aposteme of dark colour, with little sensation; then do not touch it with iron.
If it is red in color and the root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing bleeding, rather leave it alone until it matures. Then either you will pierce it yourself or it will burst by itself.
If it is white in color and round and the root is subtle: then it must be cut.
And the operation on it is that you consider before its operation whether its aposteme is quiet and warmly completed, or if it decreases in some way: then therefore make the sick person sit facing the sun, and his head should be in your lap; and open his mouth, and let a servant hold him by hand, and press his tongue downwards with an instrument, whose form this is.
Let it be made from silver or brass, which is as subtle as a scalpel.
When therefore you press his tongue with it and the aposteme is shown to you and falls upon him: then take a hook, and fix it in a pea-sized lump, and extract it as far as possible, apart from pulling something out of the tunics along with it.
Then cut it with an instrument, whose form is as follows: It resembles forceps; however its extremities should be rounded, so that the opening of each of them is directly opposite another's point: therefore it should be made of steel or alum treated with oil.
If this tool is not available, then cut it with a spatula, whose form is as follows: One part should be sharp, not the other.
And after you have cut one pea-sized lump, cut another according to this same cutting pattern.
Then the sick person should rinse his throat with cold water or vinegar and water.
If bleeding occurs, let him gargle with water in which the bark of pomegranates has been boiled; or with myrtle leaves and similar ones from other plants, until the bleeding stops; then take care of him until he is healed.
And sometimes boils appear in the throat besides the two tonsils. Cut them equally according to what I said in the incision of the two tonsils.
I myself have already cured a woman from a boil that had been born in her throat, which was dragging toward swelling, few senses, which almost closed her throat; and the woman was breathing through a narrow opening, and she had already prohibited food for herself, and water; and by then, if it had remained for one or two days, death would have occurred.
The boil had risen only so much that it had released two branches until they came out through the two nasal openings.
I rushed quickly and fixed one of its hooks. Then I pulled it, and a large piece was drawn out from it.
Then I cut it off where it could be taken from the nasal opening.
Then I did what came out from the other nasal opening.
Then I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue; then I fixed a hook in the boil; then I cut off a piece of it, and nothing but a little blood came out from it; so the woman's throat was healed, and she immediately began to drink water, and then she started eating.
Therefore, I did not stop cutting from that boil for a long time; and the boil succeeded in place of what I was cutting, until it became too prolonged and with that [something else].
So, I made an incision, and burned the boil in the throat.
Therefore it stood after addition: then I walked on the side, and I did not know what God had done with it after me.
On the Incision of an Apostemat in the Uvula.
Chapter XXXVII.
When a catarrh descends to the uvula, and is excised when it is long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, then it is called a nodule.
When it is cured along with what has been said in the division, and cure does not help; and you see that the apostemat is warm and has subsided from there, and is soft; then one should incise it.
And what has been gathered round from it, and is not long, and is bloody or of a dark or black color, and has no sensation; then one should cut an incision into it. For in it there is fear for the weak.
Therefore when you see it according to the way I have said in its whiteness and length, you should make the weak sit before the sun; and press his tongue with the instrument whose description has been given earlier; then insert a hook into the uvula, and pull it downwards; and incise it with one of the two instruments that were mentioned in the incision of the two amygdalae.
And one should not incise from it unless what is added exceeds the natural limit without addition.
For if you incise more than this, you will damage the voice and speech.
Then after the incision use what has been said regarding the incision of the two amygdalae; and care for it until it is healed.
If, however, the weak is afraid of the incision; then one should use art in its cauterization without fear or dread.
The method of cauterization in that case is not except with sharp water: and it is, that you place the head of the sick person in your armpit. Then press his tongue with the instrument mentioned before. Then take water as I said in the chapter on cauterization and make a non-extinguished mortar with it, and do not fill it thick or too thin, and fill the depression of this instrument with it, which has this form:
Let the end of the instrument where the medicine is placed be concave like a conch shell's radius.
Place the instrument with the medicine on the wound itself: and let the sick person lie on his side so that the saliva from his mouth runs out through the intrinsic medicine, so that nothing from it falls into his throat and harms him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you apply it on the wound by handfuls for half an hour until you see it darkened and the biting of the medicine ceased.
And if you want to take a cataplasm, and wrap it around the end of the radius, and pour the cataplasm with medicine over it, and insert the radius with the cataplasm into the tube above until the cataplasm adheres to the wound.
Do that repeatedly until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the vein. Then release it: for indeed it will char and fall off after three or four days.
If you need to repeat the medicine, do so: and after cauterization clean it around the vein with cataplasm soaked in butter, and clean it with that which is in the vicinity of it from the medicine: and rinse it with cold water.
Externally it will be treated with ointments, and internally with emetics, until it is healed.
This therefore is a more beneficial treatment by incising (cutting) and at a greater distance from fear.
And sometimes the ulcer is also cured with a method that is more subtle than cautery and incision; it is cured by suffumigation (suffocating), according to this method. Take camomile, hyssop, origanum (wild marjoram), rutum (rue), sseah (probably an error or misspelling), chamomilla (chamomile), abrotanum (meadowsweet), and similar herbs from plants; gather all of these together, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and boil; let the pot be well-coated with mortar; and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which an instrument is placed according to this method.
Make it from silver or brass; insert the end, where the grain is, into the sick man's mouth, until the vapor reaches the ulcer through the cannula (a thin tube), until the ulcer is covered a great deal.
Then repeat this many times, until it burns (or heals).
And be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of an abscess. Usually, however, you should add (something) in an abscess; and it is not appropriate to do this unless near the opening of the abscess at its warm point.
If this instrument is not present with you, then take a cannula and prepare its end with the rind of an ox's horn; so that the bone of the sick man is not burned; because the ox's horn rind prevents the vapor from burning the bone; and this is part of good treatment with benefit.
§ On the extraction of thorns and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Multitiimes an bone adheres to the throat, or a fish spine, or something else.
Therefore, it should be extracted whatever appears visible over which the sight falls after pressing the tongue with the instrument in the sun, and it becomes clear to you that it is in the throat.
And what is not apparent to you and hidden in the throat, it should be done with a purgative before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the thing attached will come out through vomiting.
Or the sick person may swallow a piece of ginger, or the root of lettuce, or a mouthful of dry bread; or he may take a piece of soft dried sea sponge; and tie it up in thread, then swallow it. When it reaches the place where the spine or bone is located, and it is extracted, then it comes out.
If it does not come out as we said; then use an instrument made of lead in this shape.
Make it thicker than the radius a little, and at its end have a bend so that it may be introduced into the throat with ease; and let it have its head raised upward.
And let him beware of touching his epiglottis, lest he coughs, and pushes with it the bone or spine, or the doctor may insert it by hand.
Indeed, what the sick person introduces is better; because of his knowledge of the place of the attached thing; and he pushes downward or draws his hand with the instrument upward, all that according to its quantity which is prepared for him until it comes out.
Chapter on the Extraction of Leeches.
Chapter XXXIX.
When the leech is treated with what I said in the division of cure with medicines, and it does not work; then consider in the throat of the sick person in the sun or after pressing his tongue with the instrument that I told you, whether anything appears visible over which the sight falls.
If therefore your sight falls upon a leech, remove it with a small hook or with finely pointed tweezers.
If it is not possible with them (the hook or tweezers): then take a concave tube and insert it into the throat of the patient as far as the throat; then insert into the hollow of the tube hot iron with fire. Do this frequently: and let the patient abstain from water for the whole day.
Then let him take a mouthwash full of cold water, and open his mouth in it; and rinse his mouth with it, and do not swallow anything from it; and move the water one hour after another with his hand. For the leech immediately drops (falls out) when it feels water.
If it does not come out with what we have said, then fumigate the patient with bedbugs or with an asa (fumigantium instrument) that I mentioned for fumigating the ear.
Do this frequently, because it will drop (fall out) by itself.
And the method of operation in fumigating is that you take a pot with live prunes and fire; and let the pot be covered with a cover, in the middle of which there should be a hole; and place the end of the instrument in this hole.
Then throw the fumigation, and let the patient place his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth, so that the fumigation does not escape, until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech. For the leech will immediately fall out.
If it does not fall out, then repeat the fumigation frequently.
Let the patient endure thirst, and eat salt and other things, but do not let him drink water.
Therefore it is necessary for it to come out with this regimen (treatment).
And this is the form of the instrument with which a leech is drawn from the throat, when it falls upon it.
It resembles forceps as you see, except that it has a curve which is introduced into the throat. And its tip resembles the beak of a bird called ciconia (cormorant), which has the roughness of a file; when it captures something, it does not release it completely.
Chapter on the opening of abscesses, and their cutting and treatment in general.
Chapter 40.
The species of abscesses are numerous, various according to their remembrance, that is, one and one in this book; and they are different in perforating them, and cutting them from two ways.
One of them is the species of abscess within itself, and that which it encloses due to moistures.
And the second mode is because of places where it happens from the body.
Since an abscess happening on the head is different from an abscess happening in the anus; and an abscess happening in a fleshy place is different from an abscess happening in joints: and each of them has its own judgment according to the operation.
And from abscesses there are some that should not be perforated unless the pus in them has matured and completed; and from these there are some that should be perforated while they are raw, and do not mature according to completion.
As abscesses which are near joints.
Since when an abscess happens near a joint and prolongs to be there until it putrefies what is around it perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, therefore it is the cause of the closer contraction of that member.
The boil is an aposteme in the main member: because if you delay its opening until it matures, it will harm either him or the principal member.
It is near the anus; therefore perforate it while still immature: it is not necessary to perforate a raw aposteme before complete digestion, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not rot deeply and extend towards the interior of the anus, becoming a fistula or one that will not heal at its end.
You must know the hour of perforating the boil, when it is mature according to its completion; and this is in sedation of pain, withdrawal of fever, decrease of redness, and pulsations, and acuteness of the head of the boil; and the rest of the signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same opening in a lower place of the boil and of greater protrusion: and the perforation should run along the length of the body, if the boils are in parts of the hands and feet, and places of shoulders, and necks, and tendons, and nerves, and finally in all places where there is no reflection.
In those which are reflected, go with the perforation according to that member.
When the boil is in fleshy places: then it is better to delay the opening of it until its digestion has consolidated, as we have said according to its completion.
Because if you perforate it before that, the course of the virus from it is prolonged and there are many dirt and dirty places, and perhaps its lips harden and its depth.
And some boils are opened according to the length of the body for necessity, or according to that which the member needs.
And it is necessary to administer a small opening for small boils and a large opening for large boils; or many sections according to the similarity of the size of the boils.
And there are among the tumors, where the skin should be concave: and it is to be cut when already made like a cloth, and it has become at its end, what is already dead: as that which happens frequently with many, to shrink, and with buboes.
And there are those which are to be cut by a section having three angles. And there is one of them, where it is to be cut like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
As an inguinal tumor.
And there are those in which a circular section and crescent-shaped section is administered, and similar ones from sections.
What is without a head, such as superficial tumors, it is necessary to pierce through it with a surface perforation, or only flat one.
And it is necessary, when the tumor is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, so that it does not burst out and extract all the pus in that hour: instead, extract a part of it from it. Then, open the tumor until another day (for further treatment). Then, extract something again from the pus.
Do this many times according to the degree, until it comes out: especially if he is weak in strength, or a woman pregnant, or a small child, or an old man worn out: for the animal spirit is often resolved with the discharge of pus; and perhaps the sick one dies, and you do not perceive.
Be careful of this chapter, with great caution.
And after your perforation, where you pierce the tumors, it is necessary to clean the wound: and examine. If therefore the wound of the tumor is small, or the section is flat, then administer a linen cloth, or an old copper sheet. If there is a large abscess and many openings of the perforation, then it is necessary to insert linen into every opening until they meet each other.
If you have removed a part of the skin from an abscess or if you have hollowed it out around it, then it is necessary to fill it with old cloth, or as when a fabric is sewn, or shorn with linen wool without wetness; and tighten it for three days.
Then remove it (the cloth or dressing), and care for that place with whatever is necessary from an ointment until it heals.
If there is bleeding during your operation hour, then administer cold water and vinegar; after it has been soaked in them, place a cloth on the site of bleeding multiple times.
If the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer a treatment and cure, and powders which I have mentioned in many places of this our book and from division (of the body).
If it is winter time and the abscess site involves many nerves, then it is necessary to pour powders with warm wine and oil on them; and place them on the locations.
And if it is summer and the sites are fleshy, then it is necessary to place powders soaked in water, oil, or with wine and oil, and make everything cold. Until the third day, as we have said, it is necessary to solve the abscess, remove it, and administer whatever is appropriate for its cure until it heals.
This is therefore what is generally necessary for the knowledge of treating abscesses universally.
According to the method of division (of the body), I have already said about every abscess, how is the way to treat it individually and chapter by chapter.
Cirurgia de baculo manibus et pedibus
On the sectioning of skin tumors that occur on the head.
In the head small tumors called nodules occur, which are contained by sacs of the skin that resemble pouches of a hen's egg.
And their types are many.
Among them are the fat ones; among them are those that contain moisture like mud; among them are those that contain moisture like ointments and powders; and similar to these, and among them are hard stone-like ones.
And in the section of all, and in their extraction there is no fear, as long as their section does not oppose an artery.
The operation in their section is to test it with the instrument, whose form comes after these, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if that which it contains is wetness, then cut it with a section according to its length with a surface section: according to this shape.
And begin with a section from line b to line g. For when the wetness escapes, then scrape off the bladder which contains that wetness, and do not leave anything inside of it.
For many times it returns if something remains from it.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt; fill the wound with it, and leave it until another day. For it corrodes what remains from the bladder.
Then repeat over the wound with second Egyptian ointment, and third, and if necessary, until you are confident that nothing remains from the bladder, then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If an abscess contains a thick knot: then cut it according to this shape, with a section having the shape of a cross; and throw the hooks between the two parts of the section, and scrape off the entire thing from every part; and try your strength in the extraction of the covering that contains it.
If, however, it opposes an artery for you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And the same applies to an abscess if it is stone-like, by section and the same treatment, as we have said.
The section on a stone-like abscess is easier: because there is little blood and wetness. And sometimes there are some of these abscesses that are in the head in certain men, in whom there is not deep moistness.
I have cut over an abscess on an old woman's head, and I found the abscess to be as hard and solid as a stone, rough, white, which could not be broken: and if anyone struck it with something, he would wound himself.
In other cases of abscesses in the head (except for these abscesses that happen on children's heads and at the roots of the ears), the cutting of all of them should be a superficial cut.
Or, make a perforation in them always from the lower part, so that the course of pus may be directed downward.
Then care for it with what is suitable to it from the cure.
Chapter on the incision of goiter (enlarged thyroid gland) in the neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, and under the shoulders, and groins; and sometimes they occur elsewhere in the body.
And on those that occur in the neck, there is one and many; they originate from opposite sides; and every goiter arising from them is within its own layer, like a knot or abscess of the head, as we have said.
And the types of these goiters are many. For they are hard (lapideae): and there are those that contain moistness: and there are evil ones, which do not obey the cure.
Therefore, when you see a good disposition in the touch of one of them (which is evident by its proximity to the skin color and moves in all directions and is not attached to the neck muscles, groin or artery, and is shallow): it should be cut off with a superficial incision from the top to the lower part of the body along the line, b. to the line, g. And remove the scab from all sides: and spread two layers of skin with an uncured or with many uncured, if necessary, as we have said in abscesses of the head, and slowly extract it.
And it is above the cautery, that a vein or nerve should not be cut.
And the blade should not be very sharp: so that it does not injure your hand during the incision or distress the sick person, and you cut what is not necessary.
If, however, you cut a vein or artery, then stop the operation, place on the wound some crushed antimony or certain powders that dissolve blood, and tighten the wound, and leave it alone until the sharpness of the cautery subsides and the wound becomes soft: or it begins to putrefy.
For blood is drained through the ligature, therefore go back to your operation when you have finished.
Then ask your index finger if anything remains of the stylets or other small things: therefore cut them and clean them.
If there is a large vein at the root of the stylet, then it should not be cut from its root: rather, it should be tied with strong doubled thread and left to fall by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with a lining of old cloth that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then care for him (the patient).
If the stylet is completely cut through, then join together the lips of the wound: and suture it immediately, after you see that there remains no excess.
If, however, you see that there remains an excess due to the size of the stylet, then you should aim at cutting its root and pulling it out: and apply the suture as we have said.
And what contains humidity from the stylets, pierce it through a superficial perforation: so that you can see the maturity of its place: and position the perforation below the following part of the body, as we have said.
After perforation, administer linseed with ointment, and similar substances, to consume what remains from corruption, until you see the wound already clean: then care for it with regenerative flesh ointment, until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
On the trachea cut due to an ulcer within the throat.
The ancients said this trachea cut, and I did not see anyone in our land who has done it; and this is their writing.
In those with synangiosis (tongue-swallowing), it is necessary to avoid trachea cut; for there is no advantage in doing so because all the veins and lungs are weak.
In those who have a hot ulcer in the mouth, throat, or both tonsils, when there is no sickness in the channel, it is necessary to use trachea cut to prevent death from suffocation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the trachea, it should be cut under three or four circles of the trachea, with a small cut across its width, in that which is between two circles, and the cut should be in the cartilage, not in the bone: this place is suitable for cutting because it is without meat, and blood vessels are far away from it.
If the doctor is afraid, then it is necessary that he stretch the throat skin with a hook. Then he should cut the skin until he reaches the channel; he should avoid blood vessels if he sees any of them.
Then he should cut the cartilage as we said; it is indicated by the phlegm that comes out from the channel when it is ruptured, and by the voice being lost.
And leave the open wound for some time.
When therefore the hour is removed in which perforation is feared, join together two lips of the wound's skin, and its own sole without cartilage.
Then administer medications that make flesh grow, until it heals.
Says Albucasis. The conclusion of the story we have told is as follows: Albucasis says that if any one of these abscesses has already opened the throat of a sick person, and he is raised up above death and wants to cut his breath, they go to cut the Epiglottis so that the sick person may breathe over the place of the wound with some breathing, and thus be saved from death. And for this reason they commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed, and its malice lasts three days, as if it were itself. Then, therefore, they commanded to close the wound and take care of it until it heals.
And that which I have seen with my own eyes is the following: a maidservant seized a knife and sent it into her own throat, and cut a piece of the windpipe of the lungs.
And I was summoned to heal her, and found her moaning, as is the moan of the dead.
Therefore, I looked at the wound, and found that blood had come out from the wound, albeit in small quantity. Consequently, I was convinced that she had not severed the vein or the windpipe, and air was coming out from the wound.
I approached therefore, and closed the wound, and healed it until it was well; and nothing happened to the maidservant, except hoarseness of voice; and she returned after some days to a better condition.
From this I say that there is no fear in cutting the Epiglottis.
On the section of hernia of the throat.
Title XLIV.
This swelling named hernia of the throat is a large swelling, according to the color of the body; and it occurs much in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural; or it is accidental.
Certainly, in the natural one, there is no birth defect.
Accidental is, according to two modes: one of which is similar to fatty nodes. And the other mode, is similar to an abscess that occurs due to a knot in an artery. And in the same (accidental or abscess), there is fear, and it should not be presumed with iron unless it is small: and you examine it and investigate it with a probe. If you find it similar to a fatty node and it is not suspended by any veins: then cut it, as knots are cut; and remove it with the surrounding tissue from a chest, if it is in a chest: and if not, then examine the entire area thoroughly. Then care for the place with what is necessary for treatment, until it heals.
Chapter XLV.
Chapter on the Surgical Treatment of Knots.
Chapter XLV: There are many kinds of knots, and I have already said all their species in the division: it is necessary that here I explain the difference between a knot and an abscess, when there is doubt.
Therefore, when an abscess is hot, and fever, and violent pains, until the boiling of the excess subsides and the rotting is completed: then the fever and heat subside.
However, when there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain in a knot, and it contains them within a chest or sac that is proper to it: and it is closed like a pea, and made like a bun, and larger or smaller.
And they are of two kinds: either fatty; or containing moisture. And the colors of moistures are many, according to what I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you approach the treatment of a knot, it is necessary to examine and investigate it first with an instrument called a probe, according to what its form will be, as it will come in the chapter that follows this one.
The method of investigation for boils and all nodes is to receive this tool and insert it into the moist place you find in the boil: and you rotate your fingers with it gradually until you know that the tool has already penetrated the skin. Then, lay your hand according to the measure of the size of the boil.
Then remove what has been inserted and observe what comes out as its trace.
If therefore moisture running out comes forth, whatever its color is: then cut it off with a superficial incision, according to what I said in the other boils.
And if moisture does not come out as a trace of what has been inserted, then you know it is greasy: so cut above it with an incision in the shape of a cross, according to this form, just as I taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and scrape off the skin from all sides easily: and keep a box if possible over it, so that you extract the healthy one along with the node.
But if it bursts open in the box during the operation and it is not possible to extract the healthy one, then remove it fragmentarily until there remains something of it.
For if something remains little or much, the node returns to a great extent.
If it overpowers you and something remains little: then fill the wound up to your completion with some corrosive sharp powders: and bind the wound, and place on it what sits the boil warm, and care for it with the rest of the cure until it heals.
If therefore the node is large, then cut open two lips of it and care for it with that which fills in.
But if it is pulsating vein for you or not pulsating, then hurry and fill the place with lime powder: and leave it compressed for two or three days until the wound putrefies and the boiling of blood quiets down: then return to cut what remains from the node.
De Instrumentis que ad Sondandum & Lavandum Ventrem
External instruments for cutting and piercing.
Primus est Canulum: et hic fit de argento aut auro aut de ligno durum, vel de ossibus ductilibus. Et iste habet in cauda parte unguic
Magnum est cum capite rotundo, cuius latitudo non sit minus decem lineas, et altitudo non sit minor septem linearum. Et in cauda parte habet unguiculum, qui non sit
Media est cum capite rotundo et unguiculo ad modum magni, sed latitudo eius non sit decem lineas, nec altitudo septem linearum. Et ista habet ferreum unguiculum, qui fieri debet decenter ut
Primum est beris rotundus: cuius latitudo non sit minus decem lineas, et altitudo non sit minor quinque linearum: in cauda parte habet unguiculum, qui fieri debet quadratarum extremitatum decenter ut festinent introitum.
From these there is a great one, and a middle one, and a small one.
They come together so that they may be incised with lancets and cut through for abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and boils which are among the bones.
And others are made round, polished, soft, like the large needle heads which have handles made from citron [wood], or brass, iron, silver.
Better among these are those made of citron wood.
Moreover, lead pipes are also made, which come together to test fistulas that have concave shapes, where the reflection takes place with their smoothness along with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. Because among them there are long ones, medium-sized ones, and short ones, according to the size of the fistula and its narrowness.
The shape of the cupping glasses, and they are of many kinds.
Because among them there are simple ones, those with a single curve: and they are of three kinds as you see, Large, Medium-sized, and Small.
And among them there are blind cupping glasses: and they are of three kinds.
And among them there are cupping glasses with two curves: and they are of three kinds; and among them there are cupping glasses with three curves: and they are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their places.
And these are the shapes of knives with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped: and they are of three kinds; because among them there is a large one, a medium-sized one, and a small one.
The ends of those with which the cut is made are sharp, and the other ends are not sharp: they are not placed thus except for assistance in scraping nodes on account of fear of incising a vein or nerve; and so that he who is ill may be healed through them, and may find temporary relief from pain as he finds when scraping abscesses.
They are made of copper and are similar to a radio; at the end is a hole called Spatumilis, hidden inside, which runs both towards the interior and exterior as you see.
The form of Spatumiliums hidden among the fingers near the opening of abscesses; the weak do not feel them. They come in three kinds, large, medium and small.
The forms of Ventosariums for cutting blood flow; they come in three kinds, large, medium and small.
Make them of copper or citron, round and slightly shorter than what you see, fine in texture.
These forms of Ventosarium should be large and small with you so that in necessity you can cut blood quickly through them, and when there is no medicine present for you at hand.
However, do not use them for bleeding in any part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places such as the arms, thighs, shoulders, breasts, stomach, groin, and similar areas with moist flesh.
Sometimes they are made into small instruments similar to the coverings of a fist, according to their shape; with which blood is cut when it flows from the place of phlebotomy or incision of vein or artery; and sometimes they are round in this way.
Chapter LIV.
Chapter on the care of human breasts resembling women's breasts.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell during sleep (that is, when they begin to defile during sleep), becoming like women's breasts and remaining abscessed with a foul smell.
Who, therefore, recoils from it (the procedure), should cut across the mammary gland according to the shape of a crescent moon, following this form from line b to line g. Then scrape off the entire fat. Fill the wound with an ointment made of incarnated matter. Then attach two lips of the wound together with a stitch, and take care of it until it heals.
If the mammary gland sinks downward due to its size, as happens with women: then it should be cut in two on each side of the uppermost part into two similar lunar-shaped sections, one contained within the other at their edges so that the larger line contains the smaller one, according to this form from line b to line g. Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat and administer what I said about stitching and powders necessary for treatment until it heals.
If you cannot complete the incision as required because of the restlessness of the sick person or due to bleeding: then fill the wound with a tightly packed corrosive ointment and leave it until it consumes what remains of the fat. Then take care of it until it heals.
On the perforation of an abscess which occurs under the titillicus (a part of the cheek or jaw).
Chapter XLVIII.
These abscesses which occur under the titillicus are of the types of stubborn boils that contain pus, and there are those that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to the shape of a crescent moon, following this form from line b to line g. When everything that is in the abscess has been evacuated by pus, then fill it with an old dressing and leave it until another day.
Then the wound shall be cleaned, and it shall be treated with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the tumor is of the kind of knots of strawberries (boils), then cut it over as we said when cutting strawberries equally.
If the wound spreads so as to discharge pus, then apply a cautery, according to what was said in that which was mentioned earlier.
Chapter 49.
Chapter on the section of tumors due to an artery or vein.
When an artery ruptures and the skin above it consolidates, there often occurs a tumor; similarly, this happens with veins so that a tumor and swelling occur in them.
And the signs by which it is known that a tumor and swelling are due to an artery or vein are as follows: because when the tumor is due to an artery, it is long, aggregated in the depth of the body; and when you press the tumor with your fingers, it feels like there is a grating sensation.
What concerns the vein is round in evident body.
And the incision upon this boil is an error, especially if it is under armpits, groins, neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great. Therefore, its care must be avoided with the iron, and what is also from them in the extremities or head, it must be avoided.
Therefore, above that which arises from the swelling of the orifice of the Artery, find incision in the skin's length. Then open the incision with scissors, then the Artery; and release it from tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle beneath it and make it penetrate to the other side; and tie the Artery with double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in extracting two Arteries which are in temples.
Then pierce the place between two ligaments with a lancet until all the blood comes out, and the boil is dissolved.
Then administer a treatment that produces pus, until the ligaments fall; then care for it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the boil is from the incision of a vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what possible for you from the boil along with the skin. Then insert a needle beneath the place which you held with your hand; and make it penetrate; and let there be double thread in it until you draw it out from the other side. Then bind with the same boil a good ligament; according to what I told you in ligating a vein, with two parts and two ends of thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be drawn out, then insert another needle with a different thread beneath the entire boil near the incision; press and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut the boil in the middle of it, until when it comes out what is inside: then cut the excess skin and release what was bound from it.
Then place on top of the boil that you have immersed in wine, and oil. Then administer the cure, which is made with lints and oils, until it is healed.
Title: L. (Presumably "Libellus
Chapter on boil occurring from twisting of nerves.
As it happens with boil on the Artery and Vein, similarly it happens with boil on Nerves: which occurs from strike or excessive labor or similar: it mostly occurs at places of joints, ankles or any place where joints are moved: and the boil is heavy.
It resembles the color of the rest of the body, and is in many positions without pain: and when it is squeezed with great force, one feels weak like faintness in it.
And the boil is not gathered deep within the body, rather it is under the skin, and itself moves to every part, and does not reach forward or anterior nor backward to posterior areas.
Therefore, what is in joints should not be penetrated with iron. For perhaps it may be a contraction.
However, in that which is in the head or forehead, puncture the skin with a lancet. If the boil is small, then hold it with forceps and remove it from the root.
And if it is large, then hang it with a hook and remove the covering: afterwards remove it, and close the wound with suture: then treat it until it is healed.
Title: LII (presumably "Libellus
Chapter on incision of boil occurring in abdomen.
Occur frequently to some men in their bellies, and in the remaining parts of their bodies, a growth called "Fungalia," resembling fungi.
Its root is subtle, and its head is thick, and they have turned lips. And there is something small from them, and there is something from them that is greatly increased.
I myself have already seen a man, and in his belly there were two growths, which resembled fungi more than anything else; there was no difference between them, white, with small roots, and their lips were turned back, and they were swollen, and liquid flowed from them constantly.
I cut them, and found that one weighed approximately 10 ⅜ ounces and the other approximately 6 ounces. And the operation for cutting these is, when you consider whether the sick person is weak and wet, and the growth is white, wet, with a subtle root; then cut it with a broad lancet, and have cauterization tools ready in your presence.
For many times blood is expelled during the cutting of it; therefore, if blood overpowers you, then cauterize it.
If you see a weak, fearful, and timid person from the cutting with iron, then take a well-made lead thread, and bind it with it to the athelul; whose method is as we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the narrowing of the lead. Therefore do not cease to bind the lead, as long as it presses into the growth, until it is cut off and falls out by itself without effort.
If the growth is thick-rooted, then there is fear and dread in its cutting; especially since it is in the belly.
It is possible to cut through its middle. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then care for it until the wound heals.
And beware not to cut that which is black in color, with few senses and a foul appearance; for it is a cancerous aposteme; and I will come again with the reminder of Cancer after this.
Chapter LII.
Chapter on the care of umbilical hernia.
A protrusion of the umbilicus occurs for many reasons. It arises either from hernias of the sciatic vein, which is above the abdomen, and exits through the anus, or it is intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. It arises either from blood flowing from a vein, or from an artery, as was mentioned before. It arises from a constricted wind there.
But if it is due to a hernia of the sciatic vein and the passage of worms: then it has the color of an abscess, similar to the body's color; it is soft, without pain; and its position appears to be diverse. And if it is due to the exit of intestine: then its position, as we have said, has a more violent diversity. When you press it with your fingers, it is hidden; then it returns and perhaps there is a sound; and it swells greatly at the opening of the bath and causes strong pain.
If it is due to moisture: then it is soft; it does not hide when pressed with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it swell.
If it is due to blood: then with these signs appears an abscess turning black from the navel.
But if it is due to fleshy matter: then the abscess is heavy, large, hard, and heals in one portion.
If it is due to windiness: then when touched, it is soft.
The operation in this case is to determine whether the protrusion of the umbilicus is due to blood from an artery or vein, windiness, or moisture. Then it is necessary to prevent treatment of it. For there is fear and terror, as I taught you in the chapter where I said abscesses due to an artery and vein.
If the protrusion of the umbilicus is due to the intestine or hernia: then it is necessary that you instruct the sick one, so that he holds his breath and stands extended. Then mark with the hot iron around the entire umbilicus. Then instruct him to lie down beneath your hands on his back. Then circle with a broad spatula around the umbilicus over the place you marked with the hot iron. Then stretch out the midriff of the incision upward with a large hook. Then bind him around with strong thread or silk cord, and the knot should be the knot of an embroiderer's knot.
Then open up the extended midriff incision above the ligament. If indeed you find it already seized by the ligament: then extract it (the hernia), and insert your index finger into it and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen; and if you find a hernia, then take it with a hook and cut off the excess of it.
But if it is an artery or vein against you: then tie it (the hernia) tightly. Then return to your operation. And take two needles and insert strong threads into them; and insert two needles into the circle you made around the abscess in the form of a cross, which you pierce through.
Then stitch the abscess in four places over the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the rotten flesh extends and falls off by itself; or cut it when it becomes soft and rots.
Then take care of him with the things he needs from unguents until he is healed.
If the protrusion of the umbilicus is from a tumor in him or due to moisture: then make a hollow in the abscess, as we have said. And draw out blood or moisture which you find there.
Then care for it with what solidifies the place.
Chapter LIII.
Chapter on the Care of Cancer.
We have already said in the division of species of Cancer, and how the way to its treatment with medicines; and it must be cautioned against using iron for its treatment lest it is wounded; we have also said that Cancer is generated in the matrix, and warned against cauterization in its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes Cancer is at a place where it can be eradicated; such as cancer which is in breasts or hips and similar limbs, which are situated to extract its entirety; especially when it begins small.
But when it becomes old and large, one should not approach it closely.
For I was unable to heal anyone from that; nor did I see anyone before me reach that point.
And the operation on it, when it is situated as we have said, is to precede and dissolve a weak person from black cholera several times. Then phlebotomy that person if you find him with manifest congestion.
Then prepare the sick person with a preparation in which the operation is performed.
Then thrust awls into the Cancer which fit it. Then hollow out the person from all sides with skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots; and let the blood flow, and do not cut or tear it quickly, rather press on the places, and remove the thick blood entirely with your hand, or as much as possible with instruments there.
If, however, the flow of thick blood from an incision of an artery or vein opposes you; then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then, take care of yourself with the rest of the treatment until you are healed.
On the treatment of Hydrophysis.
Chapter LIV. We now narrate on the division of types of Hydropsis, and how water accumulates; and the signs of all its species, and its cure along with medicines.
And the one that is to be cured with iron, is not but the sole species of ascites; it does not approach with iron the species of tympana; neither deeply the species of hypoascia, for that is fatal.
When you are already treated with medicines for this species of hydropsis of the tympana and your treatment has not helped; then consider. For if the patient has already been weakened or there is another ailment apart from hydropsis such as cough, bowel looseness, and similar; then beware of treating him with iron, for it is dangerous.
But if you see the patient overflowing with strength and no other ailment except hydropsis alone; and he is neither a child nor an old man; then there is a method of operation in him, that you raise the weakened one standing between your hands, and a servant after him presses out his abdomen with his hand forcing the water down towards the lower part of the chest.
Then take a thorny catheter (spathulum spinosum), shaped like this. It should have two pointed parts, long, with sharp tips like a catheter. However, there should be something shortening it slightly, so as not to penetrate with it up to the intestines during the operation and harm it.
Then consider. For if the hydropsis is generated from the intestines, then you should extend with a section of three fingers' length below the navel towards the lower part beyond the chest.
But if the hydropsis is generated from a liver ailment; then your section should be on the left side, three fingers' length below the navel.
If the generation is due to the spleen, then let the section be on the right side: and it is not necessary that the section also be on the side towards which the sick man lies, lest excess fluids flow towards the weak location.
Then pierce the skin completely with the instrument. Then insert your hand into that incision, and push the Spatula-like instrument under the skin, as if you are scraping it; and let the quantity scraped off be equal to a fingernail or about that much.
Then pierce the Spatula until it reaches the empty place; and that is the watery location. Then remove it (the organ), and insert the instrument into the opening, which has this form. And it resembles a cannula: made of silver, copper or gold, cleaned; at its lower part there is a small hole, and on both sides there are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other side; its end is cut in the manner of a incision of a reed, as you see; at the upper end of it there is a strap.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then the water immediately descends upon the instrument, therefore evacuate from the water a middle amount (of urine).
Because if you evacuate more than necessary from it (the water), perhaps the sick man will die from resolution of his animal spirit; or he may have a fainting spell approaching death.
But evacuate from it (the water) according to its potency, and according to what the dispositions of the sick man indicate through his pulse, and the quality of it.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
This is because it is immediately retained due to the skin that holds the hole above the Spatula; which I told you to pierce in this manner.
Then on the second day, if you see that the patient can bear it, repeat the operation; and extract also a small amount from water.
Be careful in the days to come, and avoid error; until there remains in water only a little.
If you fear for the patient, and let much out from water; then take care of him with hot sand and much sweating in a bath and sun, and watch over his thirst; and take care of him with the most powerful medicines, until he is cured; and cauterize above the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the removal of water; according to what I told you in that which preceded.
Chapter on the care of infants who are born where their urinary passages have not been perforated.
Chapter LV.
When a child is born from a mother's womb and its head is not pierced (or has a narrow opening), or it is in an incorrect position.
Therefore, one must immediately pierce (or enlarge) it with a thin spatula when the child is born, according to this shape.
Then place a fine key (or nail) made of lead into the opening and tie it; hold it for three or four days.
When it wishes to emit urine, remove it, and mix it (with something). Then return it.
And if you do not place the lead, now it is possible that the urine flowing over the place does not allow it to close.
However, if its opening is narrow, it is treated with lead, as we said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
Those in whom the opening is in an incorrect position are injured. This is because the opening is at the end of the spinal column of the child that is born; therefore, it cannot mix (the urine) toward the front, until it raises the spinal column with its own hand to a higher position. There is no generation in it (the child), because semen cannot reach the mother correctly; and it is a very foul illness.
The method of treatment in this case is for the sick person to lie on his back. Then extend the head of the spinal column with your left hand and make an incision at the location of priapus (a condition in which the penis is persistently erect) on the head of the spinal column with a sharp blade or spatula, similar to the incision of a reed, or as if you were rooting something, so that the medium comes out like the head of the spinal column and the opening falls in the middle as required.
And be careful during your operation to avoid bleeding. It happens often that this occurs. (This could refer to the bleeding.) Apply pressure against it when cutting blood vessels, and take care of the wound until it heals.
§ On Albathar that occurs in the foreskin and the head of the penis, as well as decay, darkening, and adherence.
Chapter LVI. (LVI is Roman numeral for sixty-
It often occurs that these Albathars happen in the penis, and it is a swelling of foul flesh.
And from this one (the swelling) there is one malignant and one not malignant.
Therefore, the non-malignant one should be suspended with a fine hook and cut off completely until it is cleaned. Then place on it a heated plate immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it with dafinicon ointment until it heals. (Dafinicon is an antiseptic.)
If the Albathar is malignant and foul-colored, then it is necessary to administer a cautery after the incision and removal of it.
But if the Albathar is in a circumcised or uncircumcised foreskin, and part of it is inside and part outside: then you must remove the inner Albathar first, until it consolidates, then take care of the exterior; because when you take care of it at the same time, the foreskin will not heal and will ulcerate.
Also, these Albathars occur even in testicles, and blackening and decay of the foreskin. Therefore, it is necessary to excavate everything that has blackened and is about to decay or has already decayed.
Then apply a linen cloth soaked in honey that has been pounded with flour of walnuts and sieved herbs. (This is to treat the blackened or decaying area.)
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If there is a flow of blood, then administer cautery with lunar cautery in this form.
For cautery is beneficial for two conditions at once, namely a flow of blood and a wound when it is damaged.
If the head of a splinter is corroded and destroyed within an hour, then it is necessary to introduce a copper cannula into the urine, so that the weak urine flows over it.
However, in the adherence of the foreskin with the head of the splinter, and this adherence does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy and circumcision is not required for it; sometimes it occurs due to a wound or an abscess. Therefore, it is necessary to remove the adhered part with a spatula until the ligament dissolves and the head of the splinter is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish [the adhered part] accurately, then it is necessary to remove something from the head of the splinter and from the foreskin. Because when the foreskin is thin, it may be perforated quickly due to its delicacy.
Then separate the foreskin and the head of the splinter with a fine linen cloth that has already been soaked in cold water to prevent them from adhering again.
Then it is treated with wine until it solidifies.
Chapter LVII.
Section on the cleansing of infants and treatment due to an error occurring in them.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity, as are other wounds; nevertheless, since it comes from our operation, our will, and its use is proper to boys, it is necessary that we mark in it an improvement in the operation and an easier way leading to health.
I say, therefore, that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have learned through experience.
I have found that most artists and blood-letterers use cleaning by circumcising with a knife and with forceps: they employ the application of ointment, binding with thread, and cutting with a nail.
And indeed I have already proven all those methods, and I did not find a better cleaning method with forceps, or binding with thread.
Because in circumcision with a knife, the skin is often missed. Because the foreskin has two layers of skin: perhaps the outer layer is cut and the inner layer is torn: it is therefore necessary to make an incision to cut the other one, and pain will result. And when cleaning is done with the application of ointment, that is, digitally (as surgeons do), it is not cut off at the tip of the male organ: because perhaps it enters its opening.
But in circumcision with a nail, perhaps the iron will enter and ruin your operation: and indeed the skin of children is naturally short, and often such cases occur that do not require cleaning: I have already seen this.
But the cleaning with forceps and binding with thread showed me a good experiment: because the forceps are proportionate to the incision: therefore, the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. And since you press your hand together, the two sharpnesses are proportionate, and they cut according to one operation in one time: and a compression is made in a similar shape, containing the skin of the penis from all sides, with which there is no possible mistake at all.
The method of the operation is that you shall make him estimate, primarily a boy if he understands slightly, which you do not do except that you tie a thread on his rod alone; and you shall release him until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy in every way as much as possible for you, from the fact that he receives understanding with himself. Then make him stand among your prepared hands, and let him not be sitting; and conceal the scissors in your hand or underfoot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his rod, and blow on the skin, and pull it upwards until the head of the rod appears. Then clean it yourself from the fact that it collects dirt upon it.
Then tie the marked place with a double thread. Then tie below it a little ligament in second. Then hold with your index finger and good pressure of the thumb, and cut between two ligaments. Then peel off the skin quickly upward, and extract the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow slowly (for it is better), and place powder on top; and on the powder place a cloth in which a boiled lamb's wool has been spread out, mashed with fresh rose oil; and leave him on this until another day; and take care of the rest of his healing until he is healed.
The form of the scissors for cleaning is as follows.
Let them have two sharp points, and let them be concave; let no branch of the nail come out on them; and let the length of two cutting edges be equal to the length of two handles equally.
However, if an error occurs in cleaning, it is because perhaps the inner skin escapes completely or a part of it near the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary to stretch it from your hour with your nail before the excision of the place and to cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with a forceps and cut it.
But if it exceeds three days and there remains what is under the navel inflated, it should be cut out; then let it sit until the abscess becomes hot, and scrape off the abscess easily, and cut it according to what is prepared for you; and take care of the head of the vein. It will not harm him that.
Therefore take care of it with that which consolidates the wound with the powders, as we have said in the treatment of powders; and if it is cut through the skin beyond measure, and it reaches the surface, it does not harm him even then.
Therefore take care of it with that which we have said until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
Chapter on the extraction of a retained bladder stone.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction made of stone, congealed blood, pus, flesh born, and similar things from those which we have said in the treatment methods in division.
And if the urine does not flow and you see that its retention is due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder; then it is necessary for him to be weakened on his knees, bent over. Then arrange his feet on top of him and he should stretch out his abdomen from the upper part of his back and squeeze his breath as much as possible. Therefore, he should be forced with the neck of the bladder towards expelling the stone; why the urine is released.
If it does not flow with what has been said and the strong man is over the weak one; then it is necessary to administer its extraction with an instrument called a syringe, whose form is like this Sit made of silver, and be subtle, soft, concave like a feather cannula in subtleness of radius, long like the palm of one hand and a half; let there be a fine cannula at its head.
The method of exit for the bladder stone is as follows: take a doubled thread, tie it at its end with good ligature: introduce the end of the thread into the lower part of the urethra; and cut it with scissors if there is any excess from the thread, but introduce it forcefully into the catheter like an alazer.
Then anoint the urethra with oil, or butter and white of egg: and have the patient sit on a chair, and warm the bladder, and the penis with moist oils, olive oil, and warm water.
Then introduce the catheter into the penis gently until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then double (it) from above the navel.
Then push the catheter into it until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it has reached an empty place: and this is not done according to this order unless because the passage, through which it goes, is twisted.
Then extend the thread little by little with wool. For a bladder stone follows wool.
Then remove it (the stone) and make the bladder pass urine: and repeat the catheter, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter on the quality of clysters for the bladder with a clepsydrum.
Chapter LIX (Roman numerals, this is the 5
Chapter LIX. When there is an ulcer in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus collects and it needs to distill water and medicines into it: then it should be done with the instrument called a clepsydra, and this is its form.
For it is deaf (or mute), that is, closed. And in it (the bone) are three holes, two from one side and one from the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, where that which drives it is located, should be of a size sufficient to contain it without addition until when something is pulled along with it, it is attracted by humidity: and when it is pushed, when it is expelled to a distance: as the clepsydras do, which project naphtha, i.e., Greek fire, in the warfare of Mars.
When you wish to project the moisture into a bladder, introduce the end of the clepsyra into the moisture and pull along with it what drives it towards the upper part; for the moisture is drawn into the hollow of the clepsyra.
Then introduce its end into the cane (cane being a type of long thin tube), as we mentioned in the syringe. Then push moisture along with what drives it, for the moisture reaches the bladder immediately, so that it feels weakened.
The form of a subtle enema is used to enema the bladder.
Make it from silver or tin (an alloy of copper and tin); its head should be like a funnel with a small depression in the middle for the cord to pass through.
Then take the sheep's bladder and put moisture in it with which you wish to enema the bladder. Then tie the filled bladder between two small pockets (sinuses) with a strong cord and heat the moisture inside it slightly over the fire.
Then introduce the end of the enema into the cane; afterwards, place your hand over the bladder with the moisture and press it firmly until you feel it has reached the bladder.
If there is no bladder present, then take a piece of parchment (animal skin that has been scraped and cleaned), make a circle from it, and pierce a hole through its entire roundness. Then insert a thread into those holes, as they are rolled up. Then join a circle, as it is joined with a hinge: after you place within it what you wish from moist substances, and oils, and waters.
Then tie it up in the instrument, and do with it as you did with the bladder by pressing with your hand until moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX (Roman numeral for sixty)
[Title: Extraction of a Stone]
We have already said about the nature of the Stone and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between the Stone generated in kidneys, bladder, and its signs altogether; we have also said that the operation on the Stone is performed by hand and section; and it is the Stone generated specifically in the bladder that is meant; and he who is formed in the penis; and I am telling this with manifest explanation and abbreviation.
The Stone generated in the bladder happens most often to children.
And among its signs is that urine comes out from the bladder similar to water in thinness; and it appears there white sand, and the sick man rubs his penis, and labors with it, and often hangs down. Then it erects, and comes out together with the anus in many of them.
The cure for children is easy until they reach the age of fourteen. And it is difficult in old people. In young men it is of medium difficulty, because it is between that and its size; and the larger the Stone, the easier the cure; and if it is small, the reverse is true for the cure.
When we arrive at the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the sick man with an enema, which removes all feces that are in his bowels; because sometimes it hinders the discovery of the Stone during the investigation.
Then the sick man is received with his feet, beaten, and moved downward; so that the Stone descends to the bottom of the bladder or sometimes jumps from a high place.
Then make him sit between your hands, and his hands should be under his hips; so that the bladder becomes completely descended towards the lower part.
Then examine him and touch him externally.
If therefore you feel a stone in the space, then hurry immediately with cutting upon it.
If it does not fall under your touch entirely, then you should push aside the finger of the right hand with oil, if the patient is a weak child; or the middle finger if the patient is an adult man; and insert it into its own anus, and inquire about the stone, until it lies beneath your finger; and gradually turn it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it towards the outside against the place where you wish to make an incision; and command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command another attendant to extend the testicles of the right hand upwards; and with the other hand, remove the skin that is under the testicles in the part from the place where the incision is to be made.
Then insert a spatula cutting tool, which has this shape. And find it where it is between the anus and testicles, not in the middle, on the side of the left buttock; and make the incision over the stone, and your finger should be in the anus; and make the incision transverse, so that the incision is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the quantity by which the exit of the stone from it may not be greater.
For perhaps the finger presses the stone that is in the anus at the incision, and comes out without difficulty.
And know that from the stone are its corners and edges, for this reason the exit of it is difficult because of that.
And from it is smooth, like a nut, and round; and the exit of it is easy.
To him who has corners and edges, add them into the incision.
If it does not come out in this way, then you should pierce it; or tighten it over it with pliers, whose end is like the moon, which presses on the stone and does not slip off from it; or insert a sharp tool under it, curved at its tip.
If however you cannot go over it, then widen the opening slightly. If something in the blood opposes you, cut it out with scissors.
If there are more than one stone(s), first drive a large one into the bladder bone. Then cut upon it. Then push in a smaller one after that, and do the same if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then ignorance is to cut through it with a great incision. Since it happens to the sick that either one of two things occurs, namely death or continuous discharge of urine; therefore, because there is no consolidation in the place at all.
But administer its expulsion until it comes out; or bind up the fracture of it with forceps, until you draw it out piece by piece.
When you have therefore completed your operation, then fill the wound with turpentine, aloe, and dragon's blood; bind it up and place upon it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water; that the abscess may settle down warm.
Then turn the sick person on his neck and do not unbind the bindings until the third day. When you unbind it, smear the place with oil and water.
Then treat him with diaphinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until he is healed.
If, however, an abscess hot and corrosive is added to the wound, and similar things occur as if the blood congeals in the bladder, and urine is prevented from coming out of it; and it is known that this occurs through the discharge of blood along with urine. Therefore, insert your finger into the wound and draw out the blood. If it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder, and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and apply any remedy that agrees with its cure until it heals.
It is necessary during the entire period of treatment that bandages be applied to both thighs and joined together, because of the medicaments placed upon the site.
If the stone is small and is in the channel of the spermatic cord, and it obstructs the flow of urine; then treat it with what I have mentioned earlier before reaching the section. For often you are excused from this treatment by means of the operation, for I have already proven that.
And it is to be received the Perforator, made of iron alnifar, whose form is triangular at the end, sharp and fixed in wood.
Then take thread, and tie it around the spermatic cord beneath the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then introduce the perforating iron into the spermatic cord with ease, until the Perforator reaches the stone; and rotate the Perforator in the stone slowly with your hand; and you will make a hole in it, until you cause it to penetrate from the other side.
For urine is immediately released.
Then press your hand upon what remains of the stone from the outside part of the spermatic cord. It breaks and is released with the urine, and the weak man becomes well.
If this treatment is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it from being done; then tie thread beneath the stone and another thread above the stone. Then cut across the spermatic cord above the stone between the two bindings. Then extract it. After that, loosen the ligament, and clean up the frozen blood which is made in the wound.
It is not necessary to tie a thread under the stone, unless it does not return to the bladder: and another ligament on top, unless when the thread is loosened after the stone's departure, the skin returns to its place, and covers the wound: and for this reason, you must do that when you tie a thread above, in order to lift the skin towards the higher parts, so that it returns to its complement, and covers the wound, as we said.
Chapter LXI.
Chapter on the extraction of stones in women.
A small amount of stone is generated in women.
If however a stone should occur to any of them, then the treatment is difficult and it is forbidden because of the many modes.
One of them is: that the woman perhaps is a virgin.
And the second one is, because you will not find a woman who reveals herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or those with husbands.
Thirdly, because you will not find a woman well knowing this art, especially the operation with hand.
And fourthly, distance from the place of the stone: wherefore deep incision is needed, and there is fear.
If necessity forces it, then it is necessary that you receive a woman doctor, well knowing: and there is little to be found.
But if you are not allowed by her, then seek a chaste doctor, subtle, and a present midwife well-trained in women's matters, or a woman who is familiar with this art: make her present, and especially to her, that she does everything which you command her according to the investigation about the stone.
First of all, that it is to look if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary for him to insert his finger into her anus and search for the stone.
If therefore he finds it (the stone), he should grasp it with his finger, and then command the midwife to insert her finger into the weak bladder, and inquire about the stone, after she has placed her left hand on the bladder and compresses it with a good pressure.
If therefore he finds it (the stone), then he must carefully move it from the opening of the bladder to the lower parts with all his strength, until it reaches the root of the hip bone.
Then he cuts it at the opposition of the mid-bladder at the root of the hip bone, from whatever side it is prepared for him, and feels the stone in that place; his finger must not be removed from the stone, pressing on it; and the cut should be small at first. Then insert a probe over that incision.
Then insert a probe over that incision. If he feels the stone then he adds to the incision according to the amount proportional to what the stone comes out from it.
And know that the shapes of stones are many. For it (the stone) may be small or large, smooth or rough, long or round having branches.
Therefore know its shape, so that it is indicated to you about that which you wish.
If blood overcomes (you), then add in the place of the sieve ground up, and hold it for an hour until the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out; and make sure you prepare yourself with the instruments that I have mentioned for the removal of stones in men, so as to assist in your operation.
If the flow of blood overcomes (you) and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery that has been cut; then apply powder on it and bind it with suitable ligatures; do not move that; and let the stone remain, and do not extract it yourself. Perhaps a weak woman may die. Then treat the wound.
When, therefore, the sharpness of the blood subsides after days, and the place rots, then return to your treatment, until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
Chapter on the division of a watery hernia.
A watery tumor is not anything but an accumulation of moisture within the albucocycle, which is situated under the skin of the testicle and is called albucocycle.
And sometimes it is within its own proper pannicle that nature has prepared for it in the part of the testicle until it feels like a different egg; this is the skin of the testicle between the albucocycle, which we have mentioned, and such does not usually occur except rarely.
And indeed the generation of this [tumor] is due to weakness which happens to the testicles; hence this material flows towards them. And sometimes it occurs from a blow upon the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. For it can be of a yellowish-brown color, or blood red, or greenish-black, or watery white, and this is the worst of them all.
And signs by which it can be known where the accumulation of moisture is located are these: If it is in the white flesh as we said, then the aphthae is round and slightly smaller in length, like the figure of an eye: and the testicle does not appear, since moisture keeps it contained from all sides.
If there is moisture within its own flesh, then the aphthae is round like part of an eye, and therefore man consumes it because it is another egg.
If there is moisture between the skin of the testicles and white flesh, then it falls under the sense [of touch].
Whenever one desires to know the color of the moisture, then test the color of the moisture in an aphthae with a square probe, whose shape has been described before [in the text]. Accordingly, as it comes out on the track of the probe, judge concerning that which is between [the aphthae] itself.
When we come to the treatment with iron, then you must command the sick man to be bled if it is possible for him, and see his body full [of blood].
Then he lies down on his back on a low bench and places many cloths under himself.
Then you sit on his left side and command the servant to sit at his right, who extends his arm to one side of two layers of skin of the testicles, and to the upper part of the abdomen.
Then take a broad spatula, and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length to almost the comb [of pubic hair]: and make the incision according to the rectitude of an equidistant line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white flesh enclosing [the testicle]: and scrape it off and observe, or be careful not to cut it: and your scraping should be on the side which hangs more with the egg: and subtly examine with the scraping according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then perforate a bladder full of water with a large perforation and remove all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with scissors, and extend the bladder to above and do not touch the skin that covers the testicles holding it: and cut the bladder as you can cut it, either entirely or in pieces, especially the subtle side of it. For if you do not carefully examine, there is no certainty that water will not flow out through the incision.
If however an egg comes out externally from its covering during your operation hour: then when you finish the bladder incision, return it. Then join together the two lips of the scrotal skin with a stitch.
Then care for it as you would any other wound until it heals.
If however you find a rotten egg due to some discoloration, then it is necessary that you tie off the vessels, which are the supports, fearing bleeding.
Then remove the testicle along with its support and extract the egg: afterwards care for it as we have said.
If however water is gathered in two parts, then you know that there are two branches: therefore cut the other part equally as you did with the other one.
And if it seems to you that the operation should be one, then do so: afterwards remove blood. And insert a thread submerged in oil or rose oil into the incisions: and place another thread soaked in wine and oil on the outside and spread it over both testicles, and examine the intestines: and put double cloths on top, and they are pockets: and tie them above with a ligament that has six knots.
Then two pieces of cloth are taken, washed and filled with a carminated linen, as follows: and the ends that are pressed together are made from leather or moist thread: and they are sewn together at the waist: and one end reaches from the anus to the back, and the second reaches to the neck area: and two ends below reach to both thighs, and two other ends above reach to both groins, and the entire stitch is sewn at the waist.
And sometimes artificially this ramie stalk is healed with a cautery at the place of section with iron; and it is that you take a sharp-edged cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles with it; and it is ignited, as we have narrated; until when the sifac (white band) containing water is exposed; then take the cautery in this form.
This phrase translates to "Assimilation of Greek letters.
Then pierce it with that [the cautery], and let it be ignited until all the moisture comes out.
Then stretch the sifac (white band) with the hook, and scrape it off with a sharp-edged cautery that has been ignited, and cut it as far as possible for you, until you have removed everything of it.
And be careful not to let the fire touch the egg (testicle).
And know that this operation is healthier, more distant from bleeding, and better than the operation with section.
If however it happens that it causes an opposition to you in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or a boil (abscess), or bleeding, or something else; then it is necessary for you to treat what causes the opposition from that with a suitable cure, according to what has been mentioned previously.
If however the sick man is afraid and does not await this operation because of its horror; then administer a puncture according to what I narrate below, and it is.
When it is assured to you by what has been said about signs that the ramie stalk is watery; then it is necessary for you to make the sick man sit on an elevated seat.
Then puncture the boil (abscess) at its lower part with a large spatula; and place the puncture in line with the body, and let the opening be wide until all the water runs out.
Then place over the wound a cloth, and tie it, and let it run free to drain the remaining water; then take care of it until the wound heals.
If there is obstruction to the flow of water at the time when you open it [the wound], and this is not for the reason that a white cloth obstructs the opening of the wound and prevents the exit of water, then it is necessary to insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which water from hydropic swellings is removed, whose shape has been described earlier; or add slightly in the operation of the wound.
And know that water returns and accumulates after six months, or about those. When it [the water] accumulates, then it should be drained in the same way and the sick days will pass.
Chapter LXIII.
Chapter on the care of fleshy roots (radishes).
Know that when cutting through this radish, there is danger of leading to death in many ways. Therefore it seems to me that its abandonment [radish] would be saved from it [danger].\]     Et sic de omnibus his, quae scripsi de Ramice carnose et de al
And I recall the operation in her [radish], and the appearance of excisions.
I say that many excisions occur in the body, from which testicles are made; and this is due to many causes, namely.
Or from an excess of sharp or acid fluid that flows towards the testicles. Or from a blow [or injury].\]     Aut ex expositione sol
And the color of an excision is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it; and it is a serious excision.
And perhaps it is a stone-like excision, whose color is black, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it occurs from the knotting and swelling of arteries, and its inflammation; as I have already mentioned its recall; or from the inflammation of veins.
What is from them due to inflammation of the arteries, is recognized by the arrangement of an abscess, when you compress it with your fingers. It is not necessary for you to touch it completely.
However, that which comes from the inflammation of veins, does not spread out anything when compressed with fingers.
And now it is possible to make an incision on this kind and on the remaining flesh; and there is a custom to cut the skin of testicles. Then stretch the egg upward, and extract it with a white swab; and free the suspending ligaments from the vessels, and tie the vessels; and cut the suspending ligament after you have freed it from all parts of the egg.
If the egg has hardened with those born flesh, then you must draw out the egg and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion between something from the swab or in what is between the vessels; then you must free the whole adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
If there is a growth of flesh at the place of the adhesion that is behind; then you must cut the whole of it and extract the egg as we said.
When your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
Chapter on the Care of Branches, which is about Vine.
It is an abscess enveloped by a kind of sheath, similar to a botryoidal tumor with softening of the testicles; and it becomes difficult for weak motion, exercise, and walking.
And in the treatment of this illness there is fear due to the memory of what preceded it.
It is necessary that we speak of the operation in it according to what the first ones did.
Therefore I say, it is necessary that you make the sick person sit on an elevated chair. Then push down the suspenders of the testicles to below. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with the bellows that are near the handle: and let another servant hold it, and stretch it with a violent extension.
Then make a cut with a broad sharp transverse saw, until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape off from all sides, as we told you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert into them a hook with double thread and tie it at the first knots where they occur (knots called vites): and tie it again at the end of them. Then cut it through a central straight section according to the length of the body and pull out what accumulates from foul, rotten humors.
Then take care of the wound as you would other wounds that generate pus, so that the vessels supplying one testicle are cut off. It is not bad through it (in the sense of an operation or treatment).
If all the vessels are affected by knots, then they must be removed for this reason, because the testicles will not receive nourishment due to the incision, and it will rot or burn, and not be useful with them.
Chapter LXV (Roman numerals).
Chapter on the care of the intestines.
The passage of the intestines occurs by a cut that happens when the sigmoid colon is extended over the abdomen in the inguinal part of the stomach.
Why do the intestines fall out from that rupture towards one testicle. And this hernia is either through the scrotum (sifach), or by its extension.
These two types of hernia occur through many causes: either by striking, jumping, shouting, lifting heavy objects, and similar things.
The sign is when it is from the extension of the scrotum (sifach). It occurs gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; it is an abscess equal in size to the depth; for this reason, the scrotum compresses the intestine.
The sign of it (hernia) is when it is from the section of the scrotum, because it causes a sudden severe pain at the beginning; and it is an abscess different, appearing near the skin; and this is due to the exit of the intestine, and its flow to the outer parts of the scrotum.
And sometimes it comes out with the intestine (intestines), and this is called an Intestinal Branch, and a worm; and sometimes it happens with diarrhea.
And sometimes feces run into the intestine and are retained there; and it is with this that the danger of illness occurs; because it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of the types of this disease with iron there is fear; therefore, one must be careful about accidents in it.
And the method of operation is to command the sick person to put the intestine back into his own concavity with his own hand, if he obeys the return. Then he lies on his back on top of his neck between your hands; and elevate his legs.
Then extend the skin following the skin to the upper part, and cut the entire skin of the testicles along its length. Then make two hooks at the lips of the incision, according to what is needed for opening the incision with them; and the incision should be according to its quantity so that it can come out from there an egg (ovum).
Then scrape the scrotum, and what is beneath the skin of the testicles, until the scrotum becomes white all over: then insert your index finger into the area following the testicle, into that which is between the white part of the scrotum, which is under the skin of the eye, and between the second part of the scrotum, and without any adherence to it from the posterior part of the eye.
Then with your right hand move towards the inner skin of the testicles: and as you do this, stretch the white part of the scrotum upward, with your left hand: and lift the egg with the scrotum to the cutting part: and command the servant to extend the egg upward: and you separate the adherence that is behind the complete separation.
And examine your fingers whether there is nothing there from the rolled-up intestine in the hard white scrotum. If, however, you find anything from it [the egg]: then push it down to the lower belly.
Then take a sharp instrument with a thick thread made of linen from ten threads, and insert it into the last part of the scrotum, that is, the covering which follows the skin of the testicles: then cut the ends protruding from the thread until there are four threads. Then make some of them [the four threads] crosswise with a figure in the form of a cross and tie the scrotum that we spoke of, which is the covering of the testicles with a strong ligament, so that no juices that nourish them can pass to it: lest there be a hot abscess. And place another ligament outside the first one at least two fingers' length away from it. And after these two ligaments, release from the scrotum, which is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity equivalent to the size of a finger: and cut the rest all around in a round shape and remove the egg.
Then cut off the lower part of the scrotal skin with a section where blood and pus run, as we said in what was mentioned before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the bandage as we said. And sometimes cauterize the white pus of leprosy (sifach) which we mentioned, after making an incision, fearing blood flow. It often happens this way. And remove the bandage until it falls off by itself.
If the case lingers, then foment with warm water; and place on top of it what we said, until it falls off.
Then care for the wound with the rest of the treatment for wounds, until it heals.
Chapter 66.
Chapter on Bloated Abdomen.
In this swollen abdomen, I have not seen anyone who dared to cure it with iron.
And indeed, the first ones said that it happens as we described in swollen abdomen which is associated with worms (Vite).\] That is to say, to tie the vessels after cutting them below, then cut in the middle; and finally treat it with what opens it until the vessels fall out; and care for the wound as we said, until it heals.
Chapter 67.
Chapter on Dislocation that happens in the thighs.
When dislocation occurs in the thighs as we said, and a place appears and something from the intestines does not come out towards the testicles; and if it comes out, it is little and returns to its place every hour; but if it persists for a time, a fissure is added in leprosy (sifach), until the intestines descend into sifach.
And this happens due to the extension of leprosy (sifach) in the thighs as we said. That is, because it is extended, then it is softened, and the place is excised, and it protrudes.
And its care is with the cautery, as its previous narrative has said.
And at times it is cured with iron, in this manner: and it is that it lies weak on its back between your hands. Then cut the place of Rupture and protrusion, with a cut in width, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then bind the sifak and what is under the skin until when the white sifak appears, which is under the skin following it.
Then take a probe, and put it on the protruding place from the sifak, and press it to the depth of the intestines.
Then two places protrude at the end of the radius from the sifak, and connect them with a suture one to another: then extract the end of the radius.
And do not cut the sifak at all, nor stretch the egg, nor anything else, as I have taught you in the cure of intestinal branches.
Then take care of that with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut threads, clean it, and restore the wound, until it is consolidated.
Indeed, sifak contracts and no protrusion of rupture is added.
And the cautery is better in this place: because it is closer to health.
Chapter LXXVIII.
Chapter on the softening of the scrotum skin.
Many times the scrotum skin is softened in certain men, on account of which the meat that is between them is softened, and its appearance becomes foul.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked about its cure to make it lie weak on his back, and to cut the entire skin that has been softened over the natural skin.
Then gather the two lips together with a stitch; and if you wish, or rather to remove excess skin softened, use three or four stitches, and make a firm one.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then take care of the treatment of the remaining wounds until they heal and the threads fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
Chapter on Castration.
Know that castration is forbidden by our law; and on account of this, it was permissible for me not to mention it in my book; and it is unnecessary to remember it except for two reasons.
One reason is that it should be known by the physician when he is asked about it; and so that he knows its treatment when it happens to someone.
And the second reason is that we often need castration of certain animals for our benefit through it, such as sheep, goats, and cats and similar animals from among the animals.
I therefore say that castration is done in two ways. Or by attrition (castrating with a rough cloth).\]  Aut Or by making a cut and sectioning (surgical castration).\]  Ubi prius amputatum
In the case of castration by attrition, the method of operation is that we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and become relaxed and hang down; then you rub them with your hand until they resolve and are no longer noticeable when touched.
In the case of surgical castration, it is necessary to hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then bind the suspension, and cut through everything above the egg with one section until when two eggs come out; then cut that part after you scrape off the scrotum of both, and do not leave anything on top of it except the thin sifaket, which is over vessels.
This method of castration is better than the one done by grinding: because grinding perhaps leaves something from the testicles, therefore the animal desires copulation.
Then, care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter LXX.
Chapter on the care of Hermaphrodite in two ways.
Hermaphrodite is from men according to two modes. One of them is that it appears in him what follows the space or in the skin of the testicles, between the two testicles, in the form similar to a female vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine flows out of it from the skin of the testicles.
But in women there is one form and it is a female vulva on top of the comb-like structure like those of small male testicles protruding to the outside; of which one is like a priapus of man, and two like two male testicles.
And the care of three forms, two from men and one from women, is: because it is necessary that you cut the added flesh, until the impression of them disappears. Then, care for them with the care of other wounds.
But in the second form of men, from which urine comes out, which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation and no care at all for it.
Chapter LXXI.
Chapter on the incision of warts and protruding flesh in female sores.
Warts are added over the natural thing, until it becomes ugly and its appearance is disfigured; and sometimes they become enlarged so much in some women that they spread like in men, and they reach copulation.
Therefore, it is necessary that you hold the surplus of warts with your hand or a hook and cut it; and do not go to the end in cutting, especially in deep roots: so that blood flow does not occur.
Then care for it with wound treatment until it heals.
A boil that arises is the flesh which is born in the opening of the matrix, until it fills itself up; and perhaps it goes out to the outside similar to the tail; and because of this some call the illness 'tailed'. Therefore, it is necessary that we cut it like we would cut a boil, and treat it until it heals.
On the treatment of an Alratic ulcer, which is an unperforated woman's ulcer.
Chapter LXXII.
An Alratic ulcer is when it is a woman's unperforated ulcer or there is a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
An accidental Alratic ulcer is due to an illness that has preceded; and it forms either from flesh born added to it, or from subcutaneous tissue, or from the skin; and it forms either in the depth of the matrix, or in its sides, or above it, or below it; and it prevents coitus, impregnation, parturition, and perhaps menstruation.
Its recognition is made through the examination of an obstetrician if the opening appears near.
If it is not visible, then search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
If the opening is from subcutaneous tissue and is near two lips, then apply pressure and break it open.
It is, so that you place poultices on top of two lips.
Then place your fingers of both hands together and the woman should be over her back with her legs spread out. Then separate the two lips with force until the subcutaneous tissue is broken and the opening is opened.
Then take wool, wet it in oil and place it on the location; and let the woman sit there every day so that the location does not harden due to another illness.
If however the boil is large and thick: then it is necessary that you cut it with a broad lancet, similar to a myrtle leaf.
If the boil is born from flesh, then suspend it with hooks and cut it; have medicines that stop the flow of blood without causing pain, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and frankincense mixed with egg white.
Then administer a wide cannula made of lead to prevent the wound from closing quickly; hold it for several days; then apply linen cloth, followed by the usual treatment until it heals.
And sometimes a birth of flesh from the matrix occurs for others: it is therefore necessary to cut it according to this method: until there is no abscess; because an abscess that is cancerous should not be opposed to iron in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
Chapter on the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athehelil and Bothor for women with red wounds.
Hemorrhoids indeed are the opening of vein orifices until blood continuously runs out in large amounts.
When hemorrhoids have become chronic, they turn into thrombus; and I have already said about their kinds, and the signs of them; and here I will say what receives treatment from them and what does not.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids that are in the opening of the matrix and do not appear to the senses: then there is no treatment with iron.
But those from them that are in the opening of the matrix over which sensation falls can be treated.
It is therefore necessary to introduce a woman into a cold house. Then stretch out Athehelil with hooks or with rough cloth and cut them from their roots.
Then pulverize it over them at the flow of blood from one incision without biting: as acacia, and dragon's blood, and asafoetida, and similar ones.
Then push his feet against the wall at one hour. Then put her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and of pomegranate bark, and of tannins, and similar ones.
Then take barley flour, and knead it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on his back.
If the blood is cut off along with it, that is good: and if not, make adhesive bladders or breasts, without scarification.
Then take wool, and dip it in the juice of thistle, or the juice of argol, or the juice of alaoult leaves, that is, aglant root, wine from Pontus, and make it stick to the wound.
When the abscess is quiet, then take care of the place with ointments until it heals.
Albarth however is red and resembles the heads of alhassa, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore it is necessary to cut what appears from it, as I said in thelil equally: and care for it until it heals.
Chapter LXXIIII.
Section on the Perforation that occurs in the womb (uterus).
Various appearances of abscesses occur in the matrix, such as cancer, stone abscess, ulcers, adubelati, alekilati (herpes), fistulae, hemorrhoids, ragadiae, thelil, and warm abscess.
And indeed I have already said all these diseases and their species, and the signs of them, and their cures are divided: it is necessary that in this treatise I say about the warm abscess that occurs in the matrix, when it is from the abscesses that gather pus, and to know how its opening with iron.
Therefore, one should consider. Then if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with striking and flame, and fever, and you see it redden, if it falls upon the sense, then do not press with piercing, and cure it with that which helps for maturation until when the acuteness of the incidents ceases.
Then one should make the woman sit on a seat that has two arms, and recline or lie upon her back, and bring her feet to the lower part of her belly: and let her thighs be open, and put her arms under her knees, and bind each with a bandage fittingly to that.
Then let the midwife sit on the right side, and administer the instrument for opening the matrix's orifice.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you strike with a long rod the matrix of the woman, so that what enters from the instrument is not greater than the depth of the matrix, and does not harm the weak.
If the instrument is too deep, then one should place feathers on the cover of the matrix depth: to prevent the entry of the entire instrument into the depth of the matrix: and one should hold the instrument and turn the worker's reel, until the depth of the matrix opens up.
When it appears to be excised and touched with the hand, and it is soft and tender, then it is necessary to cut it off at its head with a broad lancet.
When pus is discharged from it, then put linen soaked in rose oil or green oil containing some styptic substance into the wound; place the linen and extract the incision deep within the matrix.
Put it (the wound) externally on the matrix and on the comb a clean fleece soaked in water where molasses have been boiled.
Then it should be treated with an ointment suitable for that after two days until it heals.
And sometimes the matrix and the wound are washed so that it is cleansed with water and honey; then with water in which the root of the lily or long aristolochia has been boiled, and then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden internally within the matrix, then it is necessary to prevent any treatment with iron for that one; rather treat it with what I said in the section on incisions.
Chapter LXXX.
Section on obstetrics: how to treat living embryos that have exited in an unnatural way (according to their figure).
It is necessary for the obstetrician to first know the shape of a natural birth.
Therefore, among the signs of it (the unnatural birth) is that when you see a woman pressing towards the lower parts and yearning to smell the air, and a strong urge comes over her for the exit of the embryo; then know that this birth is in accordance with its natural shape, and it is an exit above its head and secondary (membrane) with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press the woman's abdomen so that the embryo descends quickly.
When it descends upon his head, the second one descends with it, and it is to be cleaned from those excesses with good cleansing.
But that which follows this birth is unnatural, not to be praised.
For at times the fetus comes forth upon its feet and its body comes out before its head; and the feet of it, and the hands of it come out one or only one foot: or the head of it and the hands of it: or the belly comes out: and perhaps it turns over on its neck, and similar unnatural shapes.
Therefore it is necessary that the midwife be prudent, skillful in these matters, and take care to avoid error and deception; and I show every figure of them, and what is the meaning of it, and it will be made clear through that, and it shall stand upon him.
When the fetus comes forth upon its head with its natural exit, and it becomes vigorous on the woman, and childbirth is difficult for her, and you see its strength already weakened; then make her sit on a chair, or women hold her: and warm her vagina with a decoction of fennel and with moist oils.
Then the midwife introduces a small spatula between her fingers, and scrapes it with it, and cuts the second one with her nail, until what is in it runs out from its wetness; and press the woman's womb, until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with a decoction of fennel mucilage, with sesame oil.
Then command her after the cleansing to be pressed: and make her sneeze with pepper, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. The fetus shall come out immediately.
If two hands emerge from the fetus first, it is necessary that you draw them back gently. If it does not obey during the delivery, then place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet upward; then strike the chair on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall during the striking.
If the hands do not come out and the fetus dies; then cut them and remove the remaining fetus; and tie her hand with a cloth, and remove it with equal effort; for it will also come out.
The emergence of an embryo is above its feet. When the fetus comes out above its feet, then push them upward; then gradually turn it over; finally straighten it.
Then take one of his feet and stretch it gently.
When they come out as far as the hips, then command him to press and make her sneeze with powder; it will come out if God wills it.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then gradually pull the fetus back until you place it in its natural position. It will then come out easily with an easy delivery.
If you are forbidden to do everything as we have said; then take althea mucilage, sesame oil, and dissolved gum; grind it well in a pestle; then smear the woman's vulva with it and below her belly. Then make her sit in warm water until she feels relief in her womb.
When you see that the lower parts are already warmed up, then give her something to sniff from myrrh and place it beneath her nose. When an hour has passed, then make her sit on a chair. Then make it sneeze: and tighten its own bone and nose: and press the lower part of the abdomen with easy compression. The feces will exit immediately.
The birth takes place above the knees and hands. When it exits in this manner, then he should introduce his hands gradually. Then the woman lies on her back on her neck and let her feet hang downwards; and she should lie on the bed and fold her hands. Then press above her abdomen gradually. Then extract what is below her feet from the anus until it is ready at the lower part. If the fetus does not exit, then seize his feet and move them with strong movement. Then press what is above the pubis gradually until the fetus rises to the upper part. Then introduce his hands and equalize the fetus gradually; and command the woman to press herself until the fetus exits.
The birth takes place laterally hanging from the hands. He should introduce his hand for reduction (reducing a prolapsed organ). If it cannot be reduced, then lift the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then let her lie on the bed and strike her legs with strong impact.
Then apply the liniment you have prepared from mucilage (a gummy substance made from various plants).
If it receives her in childbirth, then let her sit on a chair. Then strive to reduce the hand, and equalize the fetus according to its natural form; and make the woman sneeze and command her to press herself until it exits.
The birth takes place on the back of the neck with spread hands and the face of the fetus is towards the back of the mother. The obstetrician must hold the fetus and then gradually turn it, and equalize it with ease.
When it is evened out, place it on the opening we have mentioned, with oil and mucilage.
Then command him to move it slowly. When you have done that, then make her sit on a chair, and command her to lean towards the right side. Then command him to press: and make her sneeze with powder.
The preparation of the fetus is on the side. When it descends to the opening of the matrix in this manner with the second one, then divide the second one with your nail until it is evacuated due to moisture.
If the fetus is suspended over the face and its neck, then cut it from the navel so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus towards the inside until you place it as necessary: and command the woman to press herself several times; for it will come out with an easy exit.
The birth of twins or many children. Know that twins are born frequently: and sometimes three, and even four. However, this is unusual and rarely occurs.
Five are indeed outside nature and do not live long: and they contain one second only, which separates them through a siphac, distinguishing between them bound at the navel of each of them.
And sometimes they come out just as a single fetus comes out with a natural and easy exit: and they come out with an unaccountable exit, as we have mentioned.
If some of them are difficult at birth and reach what I have said in unnatural positions, then care for them as we have mentioned: let the midwife be skillful, and do what she does with ease and slowness, and proceed according to every position with him who is prepared for it by his intelligence leading towards health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos, and they miscarry.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it is confirmed by me that a woman, while miscarrying, has emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
What was done by measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore this whole matter should be in the knowledge of Obstetrics. Perhaps it will reach a similar case; therefore let him compare with it what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you take care of a dead fetus, along with what I said in the division and it does not come out, and you will be compelled to use an operation by hand, then you should consider the following.
If the woman is healthy and there are no accidents that cause fear of loss for her: then she should lie down on the bed on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs elevated; and a nurse should hold her from both sides or tie her to the bed so that her body does not be pulled out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with moist oils such as olive oil, mucilage from althea, fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then the obstetrician wets his hand with these oils and mucilages; then he introduces it into the womb with ease. Then he seeks out a place to insert hooks from the fetus, and places that correspond to it.
Therefore consider whether the fetus is prepared to descend upon its head: then insert hooks into its eyes, neck, mouth, palate itself, beneath its beard, in its armpits, or near its ribs, and under its navel.
If it is a descent below his feet, then on the breastbone and his middle ribs.
And it is necessary that he holds the hook with his right hand: and places the sore in that which is between the fingers of the left hand: and introduces with his hand easily, and pierces the hook in one of those places which we said, until it reaches the hollow place.
Then pierce another or third hook, if necessary: so that the contraction is equal, and it does not lean to one side.
Then it is extended with an equal extension, and it should not be an extension only along the straight, but rather move to all parts, so that the opening is relieved: as it is done with a tooth in its extraction.
And it is necessary in what is between them, that the extension is softened. If a part remains in it, then it is necessary that the midwife binds certain fingers with oil, and introduces them from that side, to turn with them what remains.
If then a part of the fetus comes out, then the hooks are changed to another higher place: do this until the whole fetus comes out.
If then a hand comes out before the others, and it is not possible to return it because of its contracture: then a cloth should be wrapped around it. Then extract it until when the whole comes out, cut it at the ankle or elbow: and thus you should do in the other hand, and in both feet.
If the fetal head is large or there is a contracture at exit, or water has accumulated in its head: then a sharp pointed spatula should be introduced between the fingers and pierce the head, and extract the water; or it should be broken with the instrument called Almisdac, whose shape comes with the shapes of the remaining instruments in the chapter that follows this.
Similarly, do as follows if the fetus is large-headed by nature, then it is necessary to cut off the membranes around the head; or else pull it out with forceps, as we have said. Then draw out the bones with forceps.
If the head emerges and becomes stuck at the neck, then it is broken open to release the moisture that is in the chest.
If it does not twist or yield to exit, then the head is cut open piece by piece, as far as possible for you.
If there is an abscess or hydrops below the abdomen, then it is necessary to pierce it until the moisture runs out of it.
If the fetus is above its feet, then its extraction is easy and its direction towards the birth canal is light.
If it is stuck at the abdomen or chest, then it is necessary to pull it out with the cloth that you have wrapped over your hand; and break open the abdomen or chest until what is inside runs out of them.
If the other limbs are removed and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the birth canal is open, then the hand should be inserted deep into the birth canal and searched for the head, and pulled it with the fingers as far as the birth canal; then a hook can be inserted into it, or two hooks, and pulled out along with them.
If the birth canal is stuck due to a hot abscess that has occurred there, then it is not necessary to exert force on it; instead, administer bloodletting of moist substances and ointment, and apply plasters; and sit in warm water that softens and moistens.
If the fetus is on its side, then it may be possible to turn it; then what was said about a living fetus should be administered.
If it is not possible to do that, then make a shallow cut and extract it.
And you must absolutely not leave anything from the second layer inside at all.
When you have completed your procedure, then give what we said about warm cauterizations that occur in the wombs.
If bleeding occurs, let it go into cold water and give the rest of the treatment.
I myself have already seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus; then she became pregnant again on top of that, and another dead fetus was also born. So after a long time, she had an abscess at her navel that became swollen until it opened and began to emit pus.
I was therefore summoned for her treatment, and I treated her over a long period of time; but the wound did not heal.
So I placed some strong adhesive plasters on it, and the bone came out from that place. Then several days passed, and another bone came out. I was amazed then, since there was no bone in the womb.
So I thought, because the dead fetuses were from bones.
I therefore asked about the wound, and extracted many bones from it, while the woman was in good condition; and she lived thus for a long time, but emitted little pus from that place.
I did not fix this foreign object here unless there was knowledge about it and help for that, which the medical craftsman administers with his hand in treatment.
Chapter LXXVII.
Chapter on the shapes of necessary instruments for the extraction of a fetus.
The form of the Spindle which opens the Matrix.
Here below is the form of the Stricture Instrument, where books are evened, which have equally two spindles at the ends of two woods. Nevertheless, this Spindle should be more delicate than the Stricture Instrument: and to make it so, either from Ebony, or from Wood of Box.
And let the width of all the wood be as two fingers: and the edge of each of both is like one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and half, or more: and in the middle of two woods there are two additions of the same type of wood, which are already firmly fixed in each, whose length is half a palm, and less: and the width of each is as two fingers, or less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the Matrix, so that it opens with them when you turn the two Spindles.
Another form similar to it, more delicate and lighter.
Make it from Ebony wood, or Boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps. Nevertheless, at the end of it there should be two additions, as you see here above: and the length of each addition is as a palm: and the width of each is as two fingers.
When therefore you wish to open the Matrix with it, then make the woman sit on a bed, with her legs apart, opening what is between her thighs. Then insert these two additions together into the Matrix: and you are holding the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity you want from the opening of the Matrix, until the Midwife does what she wants.
Form of Dizziness Other Than That Which the Ancients Called Form of Pushing, by Which the Fetus is Pushed.
The form that crushes the large head: and it resembles a pair of forceps, which have teeth at the end, as you can see.
And sometimes it becomes oblique, as forceps according to this form, as you can see, which have teeth like the teeth of a saw, with which it cuts and crushes.
The form of a Scissor having one spine.
The form of a Scissor having two spines.
The form of a Spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
The form also of two wide Spatulas.
These instruments are all operated with the fingers, and as more of their forms multiply and are prepared by the craftsman, it is quicker for its operation, and higher among people, because of their quantity.
Therefore, do not disregard an instrument from among them, as if it were not prepared by you. Indeed, their necessity is inexcusable.
Chapter LXXVIII.
Chapter on the Second Extraction (C-Section).
When the Second Extraction (C-Section) is retained during labor, then it should be ordered that the weak ones (midwives) hold their breath. Then make her sneeze with a spoon and press your hand over her mouth and her own nostrils. If it (the baby) exits through this, that is good.
If not: then take a pot and make a hole in the mattress; put in there opening herbs for the womb, such as calamint, rutabaga, anise, chamomile, sesame, cassia wood, centaury, immerse all these herbs or some of them with water, and place them over the fire.
Then place the plunger of reed upon the opening of the pot's cover, and hold the other end against the bone of the matrix; and hold it until the vapor reaches the concavity of the matrix.
Then make her sneeze, as we have said. For secondarily, it will come out easily.
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then command the midwife to immerse her hand in sesame oil or marshmallow root juice. Then insert into the vagina, and search for the Secondary one (baby). When she finds it, then take it, and slowly stretch it out.
If it is attached deeply in the matrix, then insert the hand as we have said, until when she finds the Secondary one, and pulls it out slowly along with right and left movement to avoid falling of the matrix due to strong attraction; indeed, it must be changed easily to the right and left side; then add more for the strength of the attraction. It (the baby) then yields itself, is preserved, and comes out from the attachment.
If the bone of the matrix is crooked, as we have already said: treat it with sneezing and with medicine from the pot with herbs.
If it does not come out as we have said, then be careful not to tire yourself by repeated attempts at extraction.
It is necessary that what comes out from the bone of the matrix, you tie it to the woman's hip (afterbirth). Then purge her with the ointment four-powder (purgative). It will rot it after days, and dissolve, and come out.
However, when it rots, raise the foul smell from her stomach and head, and injure that weak place. Therefore, it is necessary that suitable fumigations are administered for that purpose.
Some of the ancients have already tried fumigations with nasturtium and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate a woman during retention for afterbirth and menstruation.
Make an instrument similar to an alembic or a jar, and place the wide end over the fire; let the fumigation be placed on plums; hold it until the fumigation is consumed; then another one should be held.
Chapter LXXIX.
[Chapter] On the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many male children are born whose anuses are not perforated, which the sharp flint has already cauterized. Therefore, the midwife should perforate it with her finger; and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp spatula; and be careful not to touch him [the child] with her arm.
Then place linen soaked in wine and oil on top of him [the child]. Then care for him with unguents until he is healed.
If one fears that it may perforate [the anus], then place a lead pipe in the hole for many days, and remove it when the child wishes to defecate.
And now it happens that perforation of the anus also occurs from the consolidation of a wound or boils. Therefore, it is necessary to cut off that consolidation, then care for it as we have said in the treatment and with lead.
Chapter LXXX.
[Chapter] On the treatment of fistulas occurring in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are those that are nodose and swollen that occur near the anus outside; or in a space of one part; and there is one fistula, or more than one.
When therefore that ancient Nodation is opened, there runs out from it moist watery whiteness or subtle pus.
At times there are penetrating ones among these fistulas. Therefore, the penetrating ones are recognized by what comes out from the discharge, and by wind, when the sick person uses the discharge; perhaps a worm may come out of them.
These fistulas are among them when they penetrate into the space and reach the bladder, and the muscle of the penis. There are also penetrating ones among these that penetrate until the junction of the hips and as far as the node of the tail.
From that which is recognized as the penetrating fistula until the anus, even from the non-penetrating one, it is to insert your little finger into the anus and insert a thin probe into the fistula made of metal or iron; provided there is no twisting.
If there is twisting in it, then insert a thin probe made of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe, or the hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it fully, nor does anything come out from the discharge, nor wind, nor worm as I said; then you will know that it is not penetrating - approach for treatment.
When the fistula is penetrating to the bladder or the urinary muscle, then its sign is the outflow of urine from it; and its prohibition is that the location should not be made firm with medicines.
If it is penetrating to the junction of the hips or the hip bone; then its sign is that the probe reaches there, if there is no twisting up to the bone; and the pain appears around the area and that pus always comes out from it; also, treatment cannot be administered in it nor should it be made firm with an ointment.
In these fistulas penetrating there is no cure at all: and the cure of them is labor and vanity to him, on whom it is formed by foolish physicians.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing is hoped for with a lance: as I tell you, and I have already proven it: and it is so that the sick one lies on his back under your hands upon his back: and the legs are raised up to above his hips: and the hips of his are inclined towards his stomach. Then insert lead or air, if there is a winding in the fistula, until you know where the probe has reached.
If, however, the sick one feels it around the anus, then it is necessary that you insert your thumb into the anus.
If therefore you feel the probe itself has already penetrated through the one found by itself, besides what you feel between your thumb and there or the flesh: then you know certainly that it is penetrating: do not labor in it because its healing does not exist, as we have said.
They say that the flesh heals in certain men, and the help expected from the medication is that small cautery iron be heated to the size of the fistula, as I have said earlier, and then it is inserted into the fistula while burning until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those added fleshes filtered, which are similar to a feathered pipe, have been burned.
Then treat it with linen wrapped in butter until the burnt flesh comes out: then treat it with ointments producing and consolidating the flesh.
If therefore it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it will never be healed with any other treatment.
If it [the probing] goes out [of the anus], but does not reach your finger, which is inside, and there is a thick membrane of flesh between it and the probe, or if you see that there is a fistula following the skin surface - then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula. And you proceed to cutting with the probe that is in the fistula until you reach where the tip of the probe ends, and the probe is released and falls out.
Then clean those fleshy parts resembling the quill of a bird's feather, so that nothing remains from them.
If blood defeats you and dissolves the bond between you and your operation so that the flesh should be separated - then it is better to burn it with fire or sharp medicine.
Because the cautery with fire produces good conditions, burning of those fleshy parts is added, as well as the coagulation of blood and drying of moisture.
Then treat it with linen strips wrapped in butter or heated earthenware vessels until the place produces pus, and those burned fleshy parts are expelled into the pus.
Then treat the wound with ointments that harden the flesh, producing tough skin; and there are medications containing astringents and drying agents.
For when it [the wound] is repaired, then it is healed; do not fear repetition.
If the fistula has already reached the deep part of the anus and is prolonged from the body - then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
Therefore, if you feel a probe, and between it and yourself is a membrane of flesh or skin, and it is approaching perforation - then there should be no operation on it, except according to the way of faith and hope.
That is because it is administered in him one of three methods: either to cauterize it itself, as we have said; or to excise it, until you reach its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert the linen, and cure it from nearby. And do not proceed much with the excision, lest you cut the flesh containing the anus, and an unwanted evacuation occur. Then treat that with what I have said.
Perhaps it will heal: or stretch the membrane and clean it after you cut it up to near the anus, as we have said, or with a probe, or with another sharp-tipped instrument. Then clean those flesh particles that are in the incision, as far as you can with examination.
Then try the healing of the whole wound with the incision, and with the upper opening where it heals; and a fistula remains open in the interior part of the anus, and it will be easier on the sick.
And sometimes a fistula is drained in this manner: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula; and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and edge of the anus; then take a perforated probe tip, which is like an awl point, that is prepared ox hide, in this shape. And insert into it a thread wound around five strands and about that [size]. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula, until you reach its concavity.
If it is penetrating into the edge of the anus internally, then pull out the thread from that hole; so that you insert your finger into the anus, and pull out the tip of the thread, and bind both ends together; and tighten each one, and leave it for one or two days; and the more the thread cuts into the flesh, the better tighten it, until those tissues between the two ends of the thread fall off and drop out; then treat the wound, until it heals and recovers.
If, however, the opening of the Fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrable in any way prepared for you, unless it is in a very deep place. You have no need to do so (that action), lest you cut the arm itself.
Then proceed as we said, until it heals.
Make a beak-shaped spatula, sharp on the part that enters the Fistula, whose edge is very sharp; and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter LXXXI.
On stitching Piles (Hemorroids), from which blood flows when they are cut; and on the treatment of cracks.
There are Hemorroids in two ways. Or they are inside the anus, similar to coal blisters or prune stones; or as if they were like grains of wheat. And among them are small ones and large ones; and blood always flows from them, and there is one and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are mostly few in moisture, from which yellow water or a small amount of blood flows continually; and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is inside the anus, is to command the patient to sit in hot water, and it is squeezed out until it appears at the anus, and you see it. Therefore also hang them with hooks; or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
If they are not held in by hooks due to their moisture and softening; then grasp them with a rough cloth or a double-layered woolen fabric, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them (the vessels) and sprinkle some warm powders over them after the incision as a substitute for cautery. Cauterize them according to what has been described in the previous chapter on cauterization. Then care for them with the rest of the treatment until they heal.
If the anus does not obey the enema, then administer a gentle enema with an emetic substance to cleanse what is in the anus and make it quickly obey the evacuation when it discharges.
If they are external ulcers from the anus, then their condition is light and easy: and it is to seize them with your nail or with a pair of forceps and cut them. Then care for them as we have said, until they heal.
And if the incision is resisted by iron, then it is necessary to administer a suture for them in this way. Take thread wound around a needle and insert it into the point (of the ulcer). Then draw out the ulcers towards the top and make it penetrate with the needle into the root of the other side: and wind up the two ends of the thread, on the lower part of the needle, and let them be wide: and tighten the ulcer with a strong ligature. Then tie the thread and pull out the needle.
Do the same with all the ulcers, and leave one of them: do not seize it to avoid excess bleeding from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch on the anus and put it on the anus: and tell the patient to rest. Then dismiss him until he falls asleep.
When the ulcers fall off, care for them with ointments and the rest of the treatment, until they heal.
Treatment of Fissures. For they often occur from evacuation of feces and constriction of nature.
When they have grown old and medicine is of no avail: then it is necessary to shave with spatula or nail, until they become moist and the superficial layer which prevents their healing is removed. Then care for them until they are healed as required.
If they do not heal: then treat them again with a stronger reason than before, until they bleed much, and then care for them until they are healed.
On the treatment of Almirmar ulcers, and not ulcers: and Athelil sores, and Formicae.
Chapter LXXXII.
Know that Almirmar is not anything but a round nodule similar to the color of the body, like the head of a nail: and it occurs throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers: and pain occurs during walking from them.
Therefore it must be cut that which is on the edge of the nail, and held with forceps or tweezers, and uprooted from its root.
Then care for that, and if you wish to cauterize it as mentioned in the previous chapter.
Athelil is one of the dry sores: and there is a small projection that is rough, filtered, round on the surface of the body. And they often occur in the hands of children.
And its treatment is to stretch Athelil, and cut it itself: or sew it with silk thread: or with wool, until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it as mentioned before with fire or sharp medicine: and now Athelil ulcers, and not ulcers are uprooted with the tool that I will say.
Formica is also a small, filtered projection, coarse on the surface of the body, penetrating very deep: and when it is found cold, it feels like biting by an ant, and occurs throughout the body: and most often it occurs in the hands.
And its treatment is to take a reed from the goose feather or strong vulture feather: and place the reed on Formica until it holds the circle of the reed from its parts. Then turn your hand with the cannula until you reach what is around the Ant (Formica). Place it into the depth of the flesh and root out the Ant from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a metal or iron cannula in this manner.
Place the cannula on top with a pull towards its highest point to loosen the deaf person's swelling around the finger and its subsequent rotation.
And if you wish, cauterize the Ant according to what has been said before in the chapter on cauterization of Athelil.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Chapter on the shapes of instruments used for administering enemas in diseases of the anus, and of the solution of the abdomen, and colics.
Sometimes an enema is made of silver, or gold plated, or brass melted, or hammered.
And sometimes these instruments are small, and large, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore, the enema given for the treatment of small children should be small. And those for weak or painful anuses should also be small.
Large enema.
The cannula of this (enema), that is the upper part where the uterus is tied, should be wide according to this method: and it should have a division so that the uterus can be tied as you see, and its lower end which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt, not open, soft, very thin, extending to subtlety. And on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And the size of the hole should be according to the thickness of a ray, and somewhat coarse but not too much. The uterus in which the medicines are placed should be that of an animal's bladder or a sheep's parchment, shaped like a small asafoetida bag, whose root should be one palm.
The incisions should be made in numerous holes as is customary, and the space between each hole should be of the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a thread made of raw silk, which should be about ten threads, or approximately that, and wrap it around with wool as one does with asafetida. When the uterus is placed inside, it should be tied at the top with a strong constriction using a clyster. Then administer a clyster to it.
And this is the shape of the circle and the holes as depicted here.
The quality of administering a clyster to it is as follows: fill the wool or bladder with medicine that has been heated to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and be careful not for it to be excessively hot or excessively cold.
Then the patient lies down on his back, and raises his legs towards the top; and place under him a bed, that is to say, a skin or cloth upon which people lie.
Then anoint the end of the clyster with olive oil, or with lard, or with mucilage from fenugreek, or similar things. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then receive the assistant with both hands, and squeeze it out with force, until all that is in the clyster is expelled into the intestine.
Then remove the clyster and raise the patient's legs towards the wall.
If the medicine forces him to evacuate, then hold him as much as possible. And if he sleeps through the entire night with this, it is more beneficial for his recovery.
If you administer the clyster to him in cases of abdominal illness and he evacuates quickly: then repeat the clyster until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or wounds in the anus, then let the clyster be very subtle and gentle, from the clysters with which children are clystered.
Let this be the form of the subtle clyster upon which the skin is tightened.
Head, number LXXXIV.
I have already said in the division on the treatment of wounds that it was appropriate for a book, and here I will speak of their treatment by hand, and with medications as a supplement.
Therefore, wounds are differentiated according to the cause by which they occur, and according to the place upon which the wound falls.
Thus, the causes of wounds are as numerous as the throw of a stone: or a cut by a sword, or a knife: or a thrust with a spear, or wood, or arrow, and similar things from many other things.
Wounds that occur according to the body parts are as follows: a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or back, and similar things from those members.
And I am telling the treatment of certain wounds, so that I may present the reasoning and rule for the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, since the account of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore. When there is a simple wound on the head and no bone fracture has occurred: consider then if it was caused by the throw of a stone or something similar, and only the skin has been broken, and the wound is large and you fear that warm abscesses may occur: then hurry, and perform phlebotomy cephalic immediately: do not delay this, and draw out from him according to the amount of its virtue as much blood as possible, unless something prohibits phlebotomy, especially if little blood is exiting from the wound. Phlebotomy should be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
Phlebotomy should be from the opposite side of the wounded part. Let the sick person avoid self-indulgence, wine and heavy foods.
If something forbids reduction, then it should be reduced from food, not from flesh nor wine.
Place over the wound if it happens to be a hot abscess, boiled cotton soaked in warm rose oil alone, or with wine containing saltpeter.
If you are free from a hot abscess, then place over the wound if it is recent with its own blood and has not changed the air around it. And if the air around it has already changed, then place some ointments over it until it heals. (Followed by a statement about the powder to be used if the air changes.)
If the wound is large or from a sword cut and similar, do not bring the edges together by stitches through holes, but bring them together with sutures as I shall tell you about in wounds of the abdomen regarding their suturing.
If the wound is already from bone and hangs and there is no holding of it except with a small hook, then cut it. Then care for the wound with medicines and restore the hard flesh to its place in the skin, and advise the sick person to eat foods with heaviness, such as bread and cooked wheat, until it is soft; and similar things.
If you find corruption in the skin that is not attached to bone, then cut out the rotten part and throw it away; then care for it afterwards.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and it cannot be separated by medicine, then look for the artery. If you find it uncut, then cut it with a Spatula, or tie it. If necessity compels and it does not yield what has been said, then cauterize it until the blood is cut off.
If these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy and light; thus, scatter this powder over them, because it consolidates them before the air changes them.
Method of Powder for Healing. Take one part of olibanum, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburnt lime; grind it all thoroughly, then sift it; fill the wound with it, bind it tightly until it adheres well to it, and let it coagulate with the blood.
Then bind it on top with small bindings and leave it alone, do not loosen it until it does not separate. For the medicine will not be pulled out of him until he is healed.
Sometimes lime alone does it when olibanum and dragon's blood are not available to you at present; moreover, lime performs the same operation in many large wounds when it is to be placed upon them and they are bound, and the wounds are recent with their own blood, which has not been changed by air.
If the air has already changed them by some change, especially during summertime, then this powder is not suitable; therefore, treat it with what I have said, placing some digestive ointments on them or putting on them poultices made from barley flour, prepared with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then treat the rest of it with the remaining cure until they are healed.
But if it happens that there is a fracture of the bone with a wound and it is small, then extract it with Gui (Gesti); I will soon say the cure for fractures of the skull in what follows.
On wounds of the neck.
If a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple wound of the head.
If the nerve or artery of the neck is already cut: then, if it is a nerve, there is no skill in treating it except to avoid treatment for the strong stiffness it causes, like the ziniar and zegi and similar ones. Because they are harmful and contract them.
And do not place anything cold at all on the wound: because the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is above the organs; and let what is used to treat it be made from soft medicines, like limestone mixed with sweet water several times infused with oil, or rose oil, and turpentine, when it is washed even with sweet water; and the remaining mineral stones, in this manner, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then administer suture; or strip the edges of its lips with pulpilles. Then take care of it until it heals.
If the wound is deep or occurs in it a cavity on its lower part, where already pus collects, then pierce it at a more depressed place in it.
If the artery is already cut in the wound and there follows a flow of blood from it: then separate it, or cut it off and tie it; or cauterize it, if necessity requires that.
If the windpipe (spondiles) has already been split open, entirely, and the trachea has been saved: then join together the lips of the skin with suture over a reed for the throat, and do not touch the throat, but rather equalize it, and bring it back to its natural shape. Then tie the wound with a suitable suture and let it be for some days. Then treat it with ointments containing astringents and drying agents until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it. If there are pieces of bone inside, remove them all or as many as possible. And whatever cannot be prepared at that time, leave it until the wound rots, separates and heals over.
If the wound is recent, then dust it with the powder I mentioned. If a bone appears in the wound and a fistula is formed: then treat it as described in its respective chapter.
Chapter on wounds using probes.
If it is a wound caused by a spear or knife, and you can see its depth: then examine it. If a gas escapes from the wound when the person is weakly breathing, then you know that the wound is mortal.
If the depth of the wound is not visible and it is recent with blood: then do not apply powder to it immediately nor tie it up, so that the blood does not remain in its depth and returns to the heart and kills the weakened person; instead apply an attracting ointment and dissolve it twice a day.
If the ointment is not available to you, then place on the wound's opening an old piece of cotton to absorb what escapes from it due to moisture; and let the weakened person sleep over the wound so that it runs together and heals.
If three or more days have passed since the wound occurred, and there is no spasm, no bad heart tremor, no shortness of breath constriction, and you can see that its other signs are good: then know that the wound is healthy. Cure yourself and with liniments, and with the remaining treatment, until you are healed.
If it is excised (the affected part), and healing begins again, then you will know that it has become a Fistula. Cure it from its own chapter (part).
And if it is a wound from sword or knife cut, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then cure it with that which preceded (first aid), if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already made an impression on the bone and cut off fragments from it: then search for the wound, and rush to extract those fragments, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them until the wound putsrefies; for extraction of them is deodorized.
For other wounds due to accidents on the remaining members, the judgment in treatment is the same as what we have said.
Chapter on abdominal wounds and the expulsion of the intestines, and their return.
A rupture that occurs in the abdomen is great, middle, or small.
From a great rupture, intestines or their number sometimes come out.
Therefore, their insertion and stitching is made more difficult and forceful.
A small rupture is also difficult in another way. Therefore, its return is more difficult if you do not rush to the site for its insertion immediately; because it swells, opens up and enlarges; hence the entry is difficult.
Therefore, a medium rupture is more beneficial because with it the return of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in these two types (great and small).
You should know that stitching of veins is according to four modes.
Two types of stitches commonly join in stitching the vein, and in stitching other wounds of the body; and two other types of stitches specifically communicate with other wounds. However, they are more suitable for stitching the vein; and I tell you one by one with explanation and clarification.
Therefore, when the wound is small and something comes out of it from the intestine, and it becomes difficult to return it; then this is due to one of the two modes. Or because of the smallness of the rupture, as we said; or because there is inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
When this is so, then it is necessary to heat it so that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in warm water only. Or cook in water with squill, cyperus, pepper, and myrrh with the intestine until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes it makes wine that contains strychnos; and this is better than water alone in resolving the inflation.
When you see that the inflation has already been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which asphodel or mallow was boiled. For this reason, the entrance is anaesthetized with it when the wound is small.
If however the return of it occurs after this treatment, then sew up the rupture with a tool used to cut hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared than when it is cut; and there should not be a forced action to cut when necessary and lack of tools.
Let one part of it be twisted, sharp, and another part not sharp, and the tip should not be fine with the fineness of a spatula, but rather somewhat blunt; and this is like a scabbard, as you see.
When a wound is extended and enters the bowel, then it should be reduced to its natural shape at its proper place, if possible on top of it: because it is better.
When the wound is wide at the lower part of the belly: then it should be made to lie on its back, and place the legs higher than the head. And if it is at the upper part of the belly, then raise its head and chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if the wound is on one of two parts of the belly, then direct your attention and consider always that the part with the wound should be higher than the other part.
In this way it is necessary to introduce this into large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
And in small wounds place it according to what you are prepared for.
Then make the devoted servant be present between your hands who holds the whole wound with his hand and press its lips together. Then take something from that which follows to bind, this is the common method of sewing one part.
And it is to take a needle or the number of needles according to the size of the wound. Then remove from the end of the wound a finger's breadth, that is, of the doctor; and sew the needle one time into the skin at both ends, with the ends of the sinew that is beneath the skin from inside, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and by this time you have joined the two edges of the skin and the two ends of the sinew; and four rows are made.
Then sew with double thread around the needle several times at both sides together until the lips of the wound are joined by appropriate stitching.
Then release the thickness of the digit and also tie another thread: afterwards straighten it with thread, as you did with the first thread. Do not cease to do that with the necessary needles until you complete the closure of the whole wound.
Let the needles be of a medium size between thickness and delicacy; because fine needles easily pierce the flesh, and thick ones have difficulty entering the skin; therefore, it is necessary for them to be medium in delicacy and thickness.
And it is not appropriate that the needle should be folded at both ends of the skin close by; so as not to pierce the flesh quickly and open the wound before its consolidation, nor lengthen even when sewing, so as not to prevent the consolidation of the wound.
Then cut the end of the needle so as not to injure the weak person in his sleep; and place small pieces of cloth from all sides around its ends, which hold the end of the needle; and release them when you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of sewing with needles in such a way is more suitable for small wounds. Because only one needle or two, or about that number, are sufficient for sewing them.
The second sewing is common, to join together the ends of four with sewing; the four ends, two of skin and two of sifac in place of one, with a needle in which there is thread wound equally in delicacy and thickness.
Then, when you penetrate with the needle these four ends, draw back the needle from the side where you entered so that the thread falls down from the upper part of the wound; so that it is sewing as sewing of cloth when they fasten cloth, and place between every stitch a quantity equal to the thickness of a little finger.
Men know this suture.
And with this suture, I stitched the wound that had happened to a man in his abdomen, who was wounded with a knife, and the wound's breakage was greater than one palm; and about two palms of intestines had come out from the middle intestine, and there was a rupture in the middle stomach.
I therefore returned it after the intestine stayed outside the wound for 24 hours.
The wound was therefore healed in the space that was about 15 days; and I cured it, and it got well; and he lived after that for many years, converted to his own ways.
And the physicians had judged that it would not get well.
And by a miracle, I did not cure it with ointment. Because I was in a place where no ointment was found, nor anything from the medicines. I therefore put old bread twice a day on the wound, and I attended to its cleansing with water of honey until it got well.
I will now speak about two types of sutures according to the report of the speech.
And it starts with a sharp suture: and you insert the needle from the outside to the inside part.
When the needle goes through the skin and advances according to the length and width of the entire body: release the end of the suture on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate to the end of another from the inside to the outside at the opposite extreme.
When you make it penetrate as described above on the same side, then make it penetrate from the outside to the inside at the same end: release the end of the suture, which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate to the end on the other side from the inside to the outside; and make it penetrate together with your penetration that you make it penetrate in the suture end, which is at this part, until it goes through entirely.
Then also start from the same side, and take it along with its extremity which is on the other side of sifac, and draw out the point that has penetrated the skin.
Then return it to the same skin, and take sifac's extremity on the other side with this extremity of mirach; draw it out from the skin that is on its part, and do the same for both sides; then do it again after the first time, until you withdraw all of it according to the example given.
The sum of this suture is that the skin of sutures should be smoother than the skins; so that you close sifac with one part of the skin's extremity, and release it with another part from the other side until you complete it.
The second type of suture proper, as Galen said.
This speech is told in a way similar to those who heal, so that they gather all parts together which naturally fit by themselves; and apply the extremity of sifac to its other extremity, and the extremity of mirach to another one of its extremities. And this is done as I am telling you.
You must place the point on the extremity of mirach close to you from the outside part, and make it penetrate to the inside only; then release both extremities of sifac. Then turn the point and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside in both sides of sifac.
Then turn both sides and make both penetrate from the inside to the outside, in the two extremities of mirach which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common and easy one, and it is the suture whose previous reminder has been given.
This is therefore a saying (or discourse) of Galen as well.
And they said something. The stitching of the abdomen should be made with two needles (or points). That is, so that you insert one thread into each of them (the abdomen): and begin with the introduction of the needle, from what is at hand with you, and make it pass through to the other side according to the stitching of those who sew hide equally.
And know that when the rupture (or tear) is in the middle of the abdomen: then the stitching of it is more difficult than the rest of the places in the abdomen.
The judgment (or decision) of the dressing of a wound is the judgment of other wounds as well.
That is, because when you will conquer a fresh wound with its own blood before it becomes altered by the air: and you reduce (or put back) the intestine, and close (or suture) the wound itself, then place it on a powder of ashes.
If the air has already altered the wound: then place some unguents on it that are present with you, so that they cause pus: and let threads fall and settle, and bandage (or wrap) it with linen cloth and mullein leaves. Then take care of that in the same way as the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
If there are no remedies present with you: then immediately place on it a warm old cloth: and change it twice a day as I have taught you until it is healed.
For you do not need any other remedy in more complicated situations: when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound communicates with the main limbs due to injury: then it is necessary that you immerse a warm wool in oil tempered to a moderate heat, or in rose oil: and place it in the surrounding area of places that are between the groin, and under the armpits.
If he feels pain or punctures or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often occurs), then clisterize him with warm, black, stirrup wine: particularly if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and an exit has been made penetrating to its concavity.
And know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal, and what is from the small intestine is more difficult to heal.
The intestine that is called the Jejunum does not accept healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is from veins, and their size, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of the proximity of its nature to nerves.
If what proceeds from the wound is pus and you take it fresh: lead it back as you lead the intestines equally.
But if time has passed and it has become green or black: then you must tie it with thread above the place that has been darkened from it, so that blood flow does not occur. For in pus there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament and place two ends of thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so as to relieve you from its attraction towards you and the extraction of the pus at the site of the wound, and the emission of pus from the wound.
Reminder of a wound that occurs in the Intestine.
When there is a rupture in the Intestine and it is small: then it is possible for some people to be restored: because I have seen one who was wounded in his abdomen with a spear strike, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old: and a fistula was made, and excrement and gases came out of it.
I therefore administered treatment, until I was not confident in its healing; neither did I cease to investigate it, until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
When I saw the place already consolidated, I feared an accident happening to the sick man, that an accidental evil might occur in his stomach; and it did not happen to him from that accidental evil. And he remained in better conditions for himself, eating and drinking, urinating and defecating, and entering the bath, and exercising in his own regimen.
And some of the experimenters said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied according to this method. It is, to receive large-headed ants. Then join two lips of the wound, and place one ant with an open mouth on top of the two lips of the wound. When its head is on top of them, and it closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it will stick, and it will not be loosened.
Then place another ant next to the first, and do not cease doing that with an ant according to the quantity of the wound in its entirety.
Then reduce it, and close the wound. For those heads remain attached to the intestine until it is eaten, and healed, and no harm occurs to the sick man in his entirety.
And it is now possible to tie the intestine even with a thin thread; which I removed from the animal's intestine, attached to it when introduced into the point.
It is, to take the end of this thread from the intestine and remove much of the flesh. Then tie a thin linen thread at the end of it. Then insert that thread into the point, and suck out the intestine with it. Then lead it back to the incision.
And this method of suture with worms and intestine is not except by way of trust and hope.
Know that a large wound, wide, especially if it is on one of the slender intestines: then there is no artistry except refinement, nor is its healing altogether.
§ On the care of the rectum, and fistulas.
Know that every wound or boil when it becomes old and hardens and turns into an ulcer and does not consolidate and always emits pus and is not cut off: then it is called universally in whatever member it may be a fistula, and we call it the rectum.
And a fistula indeed is according to the truth a filtered knot, hard and white: with which there is no pain, which has a hollow of a bird's feather: and for this reason some call it Rata, that is, feather.
And it is sometimes moist, which emits pus. And perhaps moisture is cut off in some hours. And sometimes this moisture is much and is little; and it is thick and is refined.
And I have already said in the division, when I spoke of wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal and is not born in it flesh, is not this because of one of nine causes.
One of them is because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or because it is bad; or because there is hard flesh between it and its edges, preventing the growth of flesh; or because there are many filths and dirtiness; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter that is sent to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for its healing; or because corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence, as happens in Caesaraugusta: where digestion of illnesses becomes difficult, and healing of boils is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone or number of bones in it.
I have now shown you all those causes and their signs, and the treatments of them with medicines in division. Here it is necessary for me to make you know the treatment for a Fistula and a Hernia, which is made through the way of operation by hand.
Therefore, you should know that a Fistula occurs in all the members of the body. For of these are Fistulae which reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or bladders; or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs: or to any of the spine bones, or to any of the joints composed; such as the hands and feet: and of these are those which approach the proximity of the main member, and similar ones.
Which of these Fistulas is so according to this manner, is difficult for cure, and does not receive treatment, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If it is of any Fistulas whose depth does not reach to the places which I said: and you hope, and trust in its cure, and wish to reach the knowledge of it, then take a probe made of brass or iron, if the Fistula tends according to straightness, and explore it with that.
If, however, there is a twisting in the Fistula, then investigate it with a probe made of thin lead. Because lead, with its own softness, is softened and bent around the twisting.
If the Fistula has many openings, it will not be possible for you to indicate over it with a probe. Clysterize therefore from those openings of its own openings.
For moisture which you clysterize with itself goes backwards through the other openings and runs out from them.
Then carefully inquire in whatever way is possible for you: so that you may know whether there is a bone or nerve there, and it is a long deep-set fistula or a nearby one: or it is a fistula with multiple openings, which covers the entire area, when you apply your maximum strength: with your questioning of the patient, when you inquire about pain under compression with your hand on the location, and similar signs and causes of inflammation.
When you have stood over all these things, then proceed to treatment according to your confidence: and it is for you to consider at that time whether the fistula is nearby or appearing in a safe remote location, or near a nerve, artery, vein, or single location as I have mentioned to you: then cut the fistula according to what was previously stated in my account, and remove from it what is present due to filtration, and decayed flesh, which grows in its opening from flesh or membrane, or similar things: and treat it until it heals.
If the fistula is deep-set and straight, then it should be cut as deeply as possible for you. Then cleanse it from all corrupted flesh of its surroundings.
Then apply linen folded in medications that are sharp, and insert it into the depth of the fistula opening that you have grasped with an iron: do this several times until the sharp medication corrodes everything remaining in the depth of the fistula due to decay.
Then restore it with unguents that generate healthy flesh, until it heals.
If it does not heal by this, then cauterize it as I have previously described.
If the cause of the fistula is a bone and this is certain to you: then inquire about it and cut the bone as I have told you: if there is nothing preventing you from doing so, according to what we have said, regarding a vein, nerve or major limb.
If therefore a bone is exposed to you and there is something corrupted within it, and blackening: then scrape it, until the entire corruption is removed from it. Then take care of it with that which cures it, until it heals.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as it was doing: then you will know that you did not achieve complete removal of the corruption.
Excavate therefore above it again, and seek out its reason, and clean it with the utmost strength of your skill.
Then restore it. If it heals, that is good; and if not, then you will know that the corruption is in a distant depth of the body, which you were not able to reach. Therefore, it is not your skill in this matter, but rather to let nature take its course.
If the small bone is corrupted, and it is possible for you to do so, draw it out with fine forceps suitable for that purpose.
If there are many bones, then seek to draw out all of them carefully, without leaving anything behind with your strength.
If on the other hand something opposes you from the humidities and there is no fear or mistake in the cuts: then cut those humidities and flesh, if it is there, and free the bones.
If you do not have the preparation for removing bones from your time, then place over the wound something that will corrupt it; and let it go until it corrupts what is around those bones of flesh and humidities.
And keep the wound so that it does not solidify. And the incision which you made during your procedure should be tied up. Or if you fear, place on it a cloth soaked in powdered sulfur with oil; or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or in some green ointment.
When those [humidities] namely rot and bones separate from them, let there be an excision of them, and their attraction.
If there is one large bone, like the thigh bone or hip bone and similar to them, and what has been corrupted from it is a large part: then shave it with the final rasp until that blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
If what is in it has become a large part and corruption of the bone marrow has already occurred, then it is necessary to saw it, and cut it completely to the place where the corruption has reached: then treat it until it heals.
And I tell you this sign which happens to a man in his leg: place it as an example and aid for your surgery.
There was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg, which moved upon him from within the body, that is, from inside, until the matter reached his leg and an abscess was opened with a large incision: and there was no external cause for it.
Then the time passed with the error of the physicians until the abscess was opened, and many matters gathered around it. And the treatment of him was delayed until the leg became fistulous and many openings were made in it: which all emitted pus and humidities of the body.
A multitude of physicians treated him for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hand until I was called upon, and saw his leg, and the matters that were flowing out from those openings with a great flow: even the entire body of the man had become gangrenous, and his complexion was jaundiced.
I inserted my finger into one of the openings and my finger reached a bone.
Then I have examined all the openings and found them to lead into each other from every part of the leg.
I have probed and cut open one of the openings, until I exposed a part of the bone: and I found it corrupted; which had already rotten, decayed, putrefied, and perforated until it penetrated to the marrow.
Then I have sawed what was exposed to me, and prepared it from the corrupted bone.
And I removed whatever was not bone except that corruption which I cut off and sawed. And now I have extracted it.
Then I placed the healing of the wound with strengthening medicines in a long space. And it is not healed.
Then I tried again and exposed on the second bone above the first exposure: and found continuous corruption with the bone; and sawed what appeared to me also from that corruption.
And I made an attempt at healing it. And it is not restored.
Then I exposed it again and did not stop cutting the bone piece by piece and trying to heal it; and it is not restored until I cut from the bone about one palm and extracted that with its marrow.
Then I healed it with medicines and it quickly became consolidated and cured; and this iteration in the operation and section of it was not necessary except for the disposition of the weakness of the patient, and the scarcity of his tolerance, and my fear over him concerning death; because there occurred to him at all hours from excessive evacuation of syncopes bad.
He was therefore completely cured; and new flesh hard grew at the place of the bone, and good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned; and he turned to his dispositions; and no harm at all occurred to him from walking contrary to it.
If, however, the protruding bone in the body's location is already fractured: then it is necessary that you grasp it thus: and it is as follows: to take a ligament, and tie it at the end of the protruding bone: and command someone to stretch it upwards: and place another thicker ligament over the first one. Then tie it on the flesh that is next to the bone: and stretch out its end so as to pull the flesh towards lower parts: and expose the flesh over the place where you wish to cut, so that the knife does not hurt the flesh.
Place a stick or a board under the bone below properly: because when you do that, it is not forbidden to cut corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the knife be above the corrupted place a little, so that there is no corruption in the concavity of the bone: and it does not appear to the sense in its vision, and compels another to perform the cutting instead.
If the bone is corrupted and not protruding, rather it is continuous with another part, and corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it: then expose the flesh from all parts completely. Then place a stick below.
Afterwards cut it from the first part where there is corruption, until the cutting is continuous on the other side: and the knife should be according to the length slightly away from the corruption, as we said.
If corruption is at a joint, cut the corrupted joint itself, and cut the bone where it is continuous on the other side.
But if corruption is at the continuity of two joints, then there is no skill but abrasion.
If corruption is in the beak of the hand or in the beak of the foot: then there is a very difficult matter in that. But it is necessary for you to examine how the corruption appears to you. And file (or remove) it (the lesion), and clean it as well as possible for you, and with whatever skill it is corrected for you: when it does not cause you opposition to the Vein, or Nerve.
And know that many incising (saws) and Serrae for cutting these bones are, according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, and subtlety, their size and smallness, their hardness, and rarity. Therefore, it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrument suitable for each operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you the type of instrument that you need, when your study is prolonged. And the knowledge of the methods of this art is a sign of the nature of diseases; then indeed you will find for yourself what suits it from the instruments for every ailment.
And I am confirming to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments, which you will put examples on for what you cut, and a test for what you try on others.
The form of another saw.
The shape of a rasp for joints. The head of this rasp should be in the shape of a star key head; and its points should be in the shape of the points of an escarbuncle chisel.
It is not suitable unless it scrapes the heads of joints when they are broken, or a large and thick bone.
Form for a larger razor.
Form for a wide razor.
Form for a razor with a hollowed out center.
Form for another fine razor.
Form for a razor with a curved end.
Form for a small, fine, and flexible razor.
This resembles a saw and its end is like a chisel; it is used in many places for bone cutting reasons.
Form for the razor that fits for the purpose of perforating bones.
Its end is triangular and sharp-edged.
It is made from India. And similarly, everything that I have mentioned should be made of razors, knives and saws.
Section on the incision of extremities and the sawing of bones.
Decay occurs at the extremities, either from an external cause or an internal one.
When you are treated for that corruption with medicinal remedies and it does not improve, and you see the corruption advancing into a limb which is not affected by anything else: then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to where the corruption extends so that the weak one may pass through it from death or from the malice which is greater than the defect of the limb.
And the sign that occurs is that the limb darkens until it seems as if it has been burnt, or else it becomes corrupt after turning black: until the corruption extends to that which follows the limb and creeps over the entire body.
Approach then with the incision, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain venomous creatures: such as the marine scorpion, viper, weasel, or similar ones.
If the corruption, or the wound, is at the extremity of a finger, then amputate the finger, and do not leave room for the corruption to spread, so that it may not advance to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it occurs in the hand, then amputate from the root of the wrist, and do not leave room for the corruption to spread, until it takes hold in the arm.
And if it advances to the elbow joint, then amputate the arm at the elbow joint.
If, however, the corruption passes beyond the elbow and you see it as such: then death is imminent for the weak one. And whatever is administered after that for treatment, is the measure of its power.
And similarly do the same with the foot, when corruption advances to a toe: then amputate it at one joint; and if it takes hold in the front part of the foot, then amputate the entire foot. If it rises to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
If corruption has already reached the knee, then there is no skill in that case except for release and leaving the weak to death.
The method of cutting a limb or sewing it is to tighten the ligament below where you wish to cut and tighten another ligament above the place. And extend one minister (assistant) to the lower parts, and extend another minister to the upper parts. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments, with a wide spatula, until the entire flesh is exposed. Then it is cut or sewn.
It is necessary that you place a linen cloth on all parts and the saw not touch a healthy place; and it should happen that an additional injury occurs to the weak and a hot abscess.
If bleeding occurs internally while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly or place some absorbing powders on top of it to stop the bleeding. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligament and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you what happens to a man on his foot; the same thing happens that I told you.
What happened was that there is a blackening on his foot, with a burning similar to fire burning; and the corruption begins first in his toe until it spreads throughout the entire foot.
Therefore the man, seeing the corruption spread in his limb with great pain, which he found from the pain and burning; and he cut it at the joint and was cured.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred in the index finger of his own hand.
Therefore he came to me, and I attempted to regain the excess with what I had placed on his hand from medicines after the cleansing of his body; but the excess was not found, and it began to progress to another finger: until corruption started in the hand.
He called me to cut his hand; but I did not want it, hoping for a recovery of the excess from my side; and I also feared death itself in cutting his hand. Because the man's strength was above his fall.
After he had given up hope in me, he returned to his own land; and he came back to me concerning him, because he rushed, and cut off all his hand; and he was healed.
I did not bring this story except as help for that which falls under the genus of this illness; and as a signification of what is to be understood, and according to how it should be done.
Chapter on the care of sinuses, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When a boil occurs in some fleshly members and the space of the boil extends until it collects pus; then it bursts or perforates and what is inside the boil comes out along with the pus, leaving a void place as if it were a vessel; and the skin that is over it like a cloth that has been worn away; and it does not reach ultimate corruption, nor presses into bone, nor into nerve, nor into ligament: it deserves to be called Sinus; and it is not called Fistula: however, if the space of it extends until corruption presses into one of these members, then it is called Fistula or zukan.
And its care is that you cut the entire skin as it is rolled; and especially when it has been worn away and become like cloth; and trust that it will not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
If however you suspect that it adheres to the skin, and this does not follow from its subsequent corruption: and if there is thickening in the skin from flesh, then treat it with Clisterium; and it is to be considered towards the Sinus.
If it is large and the pus that comes out of it has a foul smell: then clisterize it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and zinnia (mastic) mixed in equal parts, put them together in a vessel; boil over fire until the medicine turns red; and let it reach the consistency of honey.
Then take from it what you need; dissolve it with water and honey, and clisterize the Sinus with it; tie up its opening and let the medicine remain within for two hours.
Then remove it by pressing; do this daily until the sinus is cleansed and the foul smell removed.
And at times it is to be clisterized with water and ashes, when this medicine is not available; and it is to receive ashes of grape wood or ashes from holly trees; throw water over it. Then boil it and clisterize with it until you believe that the sinus has been cleansed.
If the patient is not able to tolerate Egyptian medicine or water and ashes, then clisterize it with water and honey mixed with some crushed zinnia (mastic). Or clisterize it with honey and wine mixed together because the property of honey is to cleanse and purify; and wine makes the sinus sticky especially when there is excess thickening and dryness in the wine.
When you do this often and believe that the sinus corruption has been removed: then clisterize it with that which causes flesh to grow therein.
And it is to receive from the plaster dyafinicon: and dissolve it with rose oil, and stiptic wine; or purge it with certain medicines, and with other ointments, whose properties I wrote in the treatise on ointments.
If the orifice of the Sinus is narrow and cannot receive a cannula for purgation: then expand it slightly with iron; or place upon it linen wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment, until it expands.
And similarly if the orifice is also wide, then gather its lips with stitching; and let out from it as much as the purgation can enter without addition.
And similarly if the orifice from which pus runs is elevated above: then cut it in a lower place that is within it, so that pus can run downwards; since pus when constricted in the depth of the Sinus prevents flesh to grow there.
If it is not possible for you to cut the Sinus below as you wish: then try, so that you prepare a member in such a way that pus can run out from it with ease according to how it is prepared for you. Try, so that nothing from the pus is retained there; and take consolidating medicines which are placed on the mark, suitable for what you wish. Spread them out on a linen cloth. Let the cloth be of such size that there is communication of the entire Sinus. Then cut with scissors a hole in the direct orifice of the Sinus, slightly larger than the orifice of the Sinus. Then spread some gentle ointments over another cloth according to the size of the hole; and place it on top with a long position from the orifice of the Sinus, to ease the exit of pus from there; and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days in one go.
He who is above the opening of the Sinus, is the one to be removed at all times, so that what accumulates in it from pus may exit: and you should know whether what flows out of it is much or little; or digested or undigested.
And again consider the location of the Sinus itself, whether its master feels pain there or not; and whether there is a boil there or not.
When your treatment is performed in this manner and you see the matter that exits from the opening of the Sinus, then know that the Sinus already adheres or approaches adhesion; then therefore dissolve it either on the morning or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change the linen cloth and renew the ointment.
If, however, a subtle venom flows out of the Sinus after a long interval, then do not despair of its adhesion, for healing is approaching; because there are some men who produce slow flesh generation in their wounds, and there are others who act contrary to this.
If, however, undigested pus flows out of the Sinus after many days, then know that the Sinus is not adhering.
If therefore the adhesion of the Sinus is delayed and its matter prolonged; then add in drying medicines, but let the doctors do so that the medicines are humid in substance and dry in potency; such as unguentum dyafinicon when added to it an excess from zegi.
And from the more remote which is cured, it is that you receive unguentum dyafinicon, and dissolve it with rose oil, and rub over it old wine equal in substance.
Then make a paste from it and use it.
And now he performs an action similar to this one, when you do not have the ointment dyafinicon available, honey, when you cook it until it thickens, and use it. Take myrrh, aloes, and frankincense: grind everything into powder and sprinkle it over honey while it is over the fire. Then, lay linen over it and bind it on a bladder: and lay the linen with the cooked honey, until it thickens: and sprinkle its powdery substance over it and bind it again.
And sometimes, in that case, aristolochia longa, celestial lily roots, and the lily itself are administered: along with wheat flour and chamomile. Use them simply or combined, grind them, and sift the powder: sprinkle it over the honey I mentioned and use it.
If the case of the bladder continues and is not cured with this treatment: then you know that there is corruption in its depth: or it already causes impression on bones, or in hard members, or ligaments: then treat it with fistula cure, as previously mentioned.
Chapter on the treatment of pawrot and worn nails, and the incision and amputation of a finger or toe.
Pawrot is an abscess that develops under the nail of the thumb or big toe, perhaps it arises in other fingers.
When the case of pawrot persists and is neglected and treated with warm abscess incision, it ruptures and releases pus until it corrodes the root of the nail: perhaps it corrodes it completely and corruption reaches the bone, so that there is a foul smell: and the tip of the finger becomes wide and its color turns black.
When you heal the self, with what we said in the division, and your treatment does not improve it: then it is necessary that you cut with iron all the excess which remains from the nail. Then, cauterize the wound after that. For indeed cautery is very beneficial.
If the bone is healthy and also the nail is healthy, and empty additions of the nail already press the flesh towards the inside and begin to pierce it, and hurt it: then it is necessary that you place refined Radium under the angle of the nail which pierces the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut the flesh with ease, and place on top of what remains of the flesh from healing medicines, corrosives, until it is removed entirely. Then heal it with ointments, until it heals.
If already corruption is pressing on the bone, then it is necessary that you cut the bone and extract it: for indeed the bone does not heal while a corrupted bone remains in it.
If you see the corrosion and corruption advancing in a finger, then cut it in one knuckle, according to what was mentioned in its description. Then heal it, until it heals.
If however the nail is worn away or struck, and a strong pain occurs, then it is necessary to use leeches first. Then cut the nail with a sharp Spathamelon crosswise from above towards the end.
And keep, that the cut does not reach the flesh which is under the nail, for indeed you will cause a strong pain above the weak, and it will be the cause of the growth of additional flesh at that location.
Then heal the place with what soothes the pains.
A finger that is born in some human hands may be entirely fleshy; and in some of these there are bones, and in one of them there is a nail: and some of those which are born at the root of the joint, or its birth is in the knots of the finger. The one who is born in certain knots of the finger, does not move: and the one who is born at the junction of the finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, for the one who is fleshy [from this condition], the cutting [of the affected part] is easy. This means, to cut it at its root with a broad Spatulili [tool].
But the treatment of the one whose origin is at the junction of the root, is difficult. Therefore, refrain from cutting it [the affected part].
However, in the one who is born in the finger at the end of knots, then it is necessary to cut its flesh with a circular incision up to the bone [first]. Then saw the bone with one of those [appropriate] saws that fit for it. Then treat him until he is healed.
Consolidation, which often occurs in the fingers on the other hand, frequently happens either from human birth, that is, being born with it, or from the consolidation of a wound, or from fire burns, and similar things.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place a linen cloth or absorbent cloth soaked in rose oil between them to prevent them from consolidating quickly and separating them; or place a thin sheet of lead between them until the location is healed as required.
And similarly, if there is consolidation in some fingers with the palm, then cut that consolidation according to what is prepared and fitting for the shape of the member.
[Section] On the Vice of Incision.
The veins are enlarged, thick, and filled with melancholic excesses which occur in many parts of the body; and their most common outcome is in the legs, especially in those who travel and exert themselves, and those who carry loads.
Therefore, it is necessary that you administer a purge of the body from black bile at times with strong purging.
Then perform venesection on the patient's basilic vein.
The treatment of these (issues) with iron is according to two modes. One of them is to cut (the vein), and draw out black blood. And another method is, that it should be lifted up (the vein) and completely drawn out.
The section (operation) of this (vein) is according to this method. Pour a lot of warm water on the leg first, until the thick, foul blood is resolved. Then tie the weak (affected) leg from its upper part of the thigh to its lower part of the knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein at one, or two, or three wide sections.
Then lift and draw out (the blood) from the lower part of the leg by hand towards the upper part, and it is necessary that the leech should be applied first to the affected person. Then cut the fingernail towards the lower part: until a quantity of blood comes out that you see is sufficient, and as much as the strength of the affected person can bear.
Then tie it (the vein): and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile; and repeat the evacuation and leeching when the veins are full, and that is harmful for the affected person.
The elevation (lifting of the blood) is according to this method. Scrape the weak (affected) leg if there are many hairs in it. Then immerse him in the bath; or pour warm water over his leg, until it turns red and the veins swell up; or exercise him with a strong movement (exercise), if there is no bath present for him, until the limb becomes warm.
Then make a longitudinal incision on the skin along the vein section; or at the end of it (the vein) near the knee, or at the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with a scalpel and scrape off all the vein until it is visible to the senses; and at its appearance, when you see it turn from red to black, there is a decline in sensation (the vein has been completely emptied). When it comes out from the flesh, you see it white like a cord.
Then insert a rod under it until when it is raised and comes out of the flesh: hang it with a blind hook, gently.
Then make another incision nearby that incision with three fingers. Then remove the skin from above the vein until it appears. Then raise it with rods as you did before and hang it again with another hook, as you did first.
Then make another incision or multiple incisions if needed. Then remove it and cut the last incision at the heel.
Then draw out that part above it.
And do this until you draw it out from the above incision or any higher incisions, until it comes out completely: then cut it.
If it does not obey you in drawing and raising: then insert a sharp point with a strong thread and tie it and draw it out itself or insert a rod under it: and turn your hand to every part until it comes out. And be careful not to cut it. For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult for you to raise it and it enters into the patient a great harm from it.
When you draw it out completely: then place a wool soaked in wine and rose oil or olive oil on the wound site and take care of it until it heals.
If it is a vein that has a curvature with turns and is not as we have said straight: then you should make an incision over all its parts of the curvature and the places of the turning.
Then hang it with hooks until you raise it completely: and be careful at your incision site not to cut the vein or wound: for it will become difficult for you to raise or draw it out. Preserve therefore your prudence.
The way to heal a wound is shaped like a vine (or grapevine).
The shape of the bandage for a blind man (or blind eye).
It is not a wound as the others are, nor does it have an acute end to injure the vein; and it has a thick and flexible nature because if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein with its subtlety; but rather excessive thickness is superfluous for it, as we said.
On the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is produced in warm lands such as Al-Izegi and the Arabian Peninsula, and in dry, warm areas of little softness (or frailty), that is, where no grass or tree grows.
And perhaps it is produced in other parts of the body apart from the legs.
Its generation indeed is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, such as what happens inside snakes' or tapeworms' bodies and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this vein is that which occurs with a violent inflammation in the leg. Then it (the area) is incised. Then the vein begins to emerge from that incision, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When its end appears from there, then it is necessary to roll a leaden tube (or lead weight) of kilogram-keel weight over it up to two drachms and the knot; and let go of the hanging lead from the leg.
Whenever something comes out of it towards the outside, roll that over in lead and knot it. If it extends for a long time, then cut off part of it, and roll up the rest. Do not cut it root-wise before it has completely come out. Because if you cut (it), it contracts and enters into the flesh; and causes an abscess to occur, and pus in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it should be treated gently and slowly drawn out until it has completely come out and nothing remains in the body; and from this vein comes out in some people what is in its length five palms and ten (fingers). And now it has reached me, because a man has come out from twenty palms.
If however it is cut during your treatment; then insert a probe into its opening and perforate it with a long probe, along with the body, until all that is in it from the matter has been evacuated; and administer pus-treatment to the place with medicines for some days. Then treat it with the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, particularly when it appears at the junction of the foot, or on the foot itself; and many openings occur to it, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Therefore, treat it as we have said in the previous section, and with what has been mentioned before.
§ On the cutting of worms generated under the skin, and it is called Bouin disease.
This disease is called Bouin disease in a certain land among us; because it often occurs to cows and there is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it moves throughout the body, going up and down; and it is perceived by the senses during its movement from limb to limb until it bursts open at any place where it bursts, and comes out.
And its generation is from the corruption of certain humors. As worms and snakes, that is, earthworms and roundworms occur in the belly.
And it is feared from its malice. When it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the place, then perhaps it opens there and exits, and destroys the eye; this happens often.
When one wants to cure it and extract it, this is done only during his walking and the appearance of the same to the sense.
Therefore, one must bind what is above it and what is below it with a strong bandage. Then cut above it, and extract it.
If it goes deep into the flesh, and you cannot find it; then place a cauterization over the spot with fire until it dies.
And the greater fear is its corruption which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind above it with a good brow-band. Then cut above it, and extract it.
And the sick person must use self-cleansing of his body, with medicines that dissolve bad and foul humors.
And let him be careful to avoid foods causing decay.
Section on the disease called Nakir.
This disease is called Nakir in our land; it is pain that occurs in some members, then changes from member to member.
And I myself have already seen this, as I have told you. I was called to a sick woman in some villages. She pulled out her arm, and I saw a swelling smaller than the vein of the arm.
And after staying for an hour, I saw a swelling moving with a worm-like motion, faster than possible, as if silver running from place to place.
The pain therefore withdrew from that place, and it was fixed in the shoulder.
Then, after an hour, it ran through the rest of the body until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that it was being turned throughout its entire body, as I saw it.
I was therefore amazed by the swiftness of its transformation from limb to limb. And indeed, before that, I had not seen this illness appear in my eyes in such a way. Nevertheless, I have seen many who find pain transform from limb to limb; and I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think that it was anything other than because the woman was one of those who are afflicted with dry bodies and congested veins; therefore, it appears that this windiness was transformed.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist bodies, the hidden veins being concealed.
When therefore you wish to cure it, and the patient feels that pain; then if it appears to you with your eyes as we have said, then squeeze above it and below it quickly; cut above it until that windiness is released, compressed; and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your eyes: then cure it with the body's shaking and with that which expels windiness, and crumble them with foul pills, and pills of myrrh, and similar things.
Chapter on the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows are classified according to their shapes and the places where they fall from the body.
The diversity of arrows is that there are some which have large points and small ones; concave or straight. And among them are those which have three angles. And from these are tongues. And among them are stars.
Those that are in regard to limbs where they fall, are according to two modes. Or the limbs are from principal convex members such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar. When it falls in any one of these members and shows you signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, then it is necessary that you devote the extraction of this arrow, for death follows it wherever it is, in various positions. And when these signs are not evident to you, and the arrow is not concealed in the depth of the member, then extract it yourself, and care for the wound.
For the signs of brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the bone, and comes out from what is above the brain, are: because hot flashes occur from it, and scotoma, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and swelling, and redness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of intellect, and vomiting of cholera. And perhaps blood comes out from the nose, or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And from the place of the wound comes out moisture white like plaster. And it comes out similar to meat that has been soaked in water.
If these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not come out.
The signs of the arrow when it falls on the heart are: that it is near the left mammary: and it feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not in an empty one. And perhaps the arrow has motion similar to the pulse: and blood runs from the wound black. And follows that chill of the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore, that death approaches without doubt.
And the sign of an arrow wounding the lung is the flowing out of frothy blood from the wound; and vessels that follow the neck are to be tied off, and the color of the sick person changes. And breathes out a great, deep breath; and seeks attraction of cold air.
If the arrow falls into the pleura, which is in the chest; then it is near to the small ribs; and a great gasping with intense pain occurs, with sighing; and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
If the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested comes out from the wound.
If the arrow falls into the abdomen and is fixed there, then something of feces comes out from the wound, or pus, or an intestine that has already been ruptured. Therefore there is no hope for his cure nor in extracting the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and urine comes out; and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger upon the sick person; then know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, tongue, spatula, aid-hand, dorsal vertebrae, pelvis, leg and similar parts of the body are to be cured in various ways; when the arrow does not hit an artery or a nerve; and the arrow is not poisonous.
And I tell you that I have seen such arrows, which indicate by this concerning your cure.
That is because a man had an arrow fall into his tear duct of the eye, at the root of the nose. Extract it from the other side, beneath the ear fat; and he was cured, and no harm came to his eye.
And extract another arrow from the Jew, which fell upon his eyelid beneath the lower lid; and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not obtain more than its tip, which adhered to the wood of it; and the arrow was large among arrows of Turks, with a soft iron, in which there were no ears.
The Jew was therefore cured, and no further harm came to his eye.
And extract another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And the arrow was Arabian, and it had ears. Cut therefore upon it between two ribs; and already it was immersed in his throat. I became sharp with it, until I extracted it; and the Christian was cured.
And extract another arrow from a man who fell upon his abdomen; and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed, and nothing changed in his condition, I cut upon the arrow; and I became sharp upon it, and extracted it; and he was cured, and no further harm came to him.
And I saw a man upon whom an arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound was consolidated over it. After seven years, the arrow emerged at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman upon whom an arrow had fallen on her abdomen, and the wound was consolidated over it, and the arrow remained within her; and nothing changed in her condition, and the woman did not suffer harm from any of her natural operations.
I saw another man, to whom an arrow fell upon his face; and the wound was sealed, and he remained, not finding him much pain; and similar things many times.
I removed the arrow from the man who was among the King's princes, which had fallen upon his nose in the middle, and it had already turned a little towards the right; and the arrow was completely hidden.
Therefore I was called for his treatment after the fall of the arrow up to three days. I found therefore the wound of the arrow narrowed very much.
I pierced it then with a delicate probe and did not feel it; and himself indeed found the puncture and pain under his right ear. Therefore I hoped that this was the puncture from the end of the arrow.
I plastered therefore the place with a healing ointment containing an attracting and digesting virtue, trusting that the wound would heal, and that the mark of the arrow would appear to me so that I could cut over it; but this did not occur in the place signifying that the arrow had struck.
I remained therefore with the plaster on him for many days; but this did not occur, and the wound healed in the meantime; and he remained weak in extracting it until one day within his nose he felt the arrow. And he told me that.
And he told me that. Therefore I applied on that wound a sharp and corrosive medicine for many days until it opened; and when I pierced it with a probe, I felt the delicate end of the arrow adhering to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound through that sharp medicine until the end of the arrow appeared visibly to us; and it passed by me for about four months with him.
Then, after the wound has been enlarged and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move it, and it did not obey to come out: then I did not cease to refine and contrive over it with methods of ingenuity, until on some day I began with properly made forceps, according to what their form will be at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then, after the wound has been sutured.
And indeed physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be sutured. I therefore sutured it, and the wound was healed, and the weak one recovered with a healthy integrity; nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you the quality of extraction of some arrows: so that you will put that rule and meaning on what I have not said.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions are not understood with a narration; neither does that book comprehend it, and the skilled craftsman compares little to much; and when one is present, on what is absent; and he finds a new operation and a new instrument for descending things foreign to this art, when they occur.
I say therefore that arrows do not come out of the members on which they are fixed, unless according to two modes. Or by being attracted from the place where it entered. Opposite part of another.
And that which comes out from where it entered, or is a projectile going into the fleshly place: and it is drawn, and it goes out.
If it does not obey for exit from the hour at which it falls: then it is necessary that you let it go for some days, until the flesh around it rots: and the attraction of it decreases, and its coming out.
And similarly if it fixes in bone and does not obey for the exit, then let it go also for some days: and apply it every day with pulling and movement, until it comes out.
If it does not obey for the exit after days, then it is necessary that you pierce around the projectile in the same bone from every side with a fine chisel, until the projectile widens. Then pull it and extract it.
If the projectile is already hidden in the body's place and is concealed and hidden from sensation: then search for it with probes. If however you feel it (the tumor), then pull it out with certain instruments that are suitable for its pulling out.
If you cannot pull it (the arrow) on account of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow in depth, and there is no bone, nerve or vein there: then fill it (the wound), until the wound expands, so that it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
If it (the tumor) has ears by which it is held: then cut the fixed flesh from all sides with any means you can manage, and the instruments if the cutting of the flesh cannot be made through breaking of the ears and twisting them, until it comes out.
And when you administer the extraction of an arrow in any place, then use twisting with your hand along with forceps to all parts, until it makes it come out: and carefully with utmost subtlety so that the arrow is not broken, and its pulling becomes difficult for you, and its removal.
If you cannot pull it (the arrow) within an hour, then leave it for some days until what is around it putrefies. Then try it again: for the wound will heal itself if the flow of blood opposes you. But if a counteraction occurs to you in the form of bleeding, then administer what we have said in its treatment chapter: and keep your skill away from cutting a vein or nerve or tendon.
And use any means to extract the arrow with ease, peace, or slowness, and firmness as I have told you.
It is necessary that when you pull the arrow, it should be weakened in the same form as at the time of the arrow wound. Because it is more beneficial. If that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to figures (arrow shapes).
The arrow that emerges from the opposite part of another, or it already advances something towards the exteriors; or it causes a swelling at the tip of the arrow by sensation from the upper part of the skin nearby, and you see it protruding: therefore cut above it, and let the section be according to the quantity that the forceps can grasp.
Then draw it out: for it becomes easy to come out.
If however it is held in the bone, then turn your hand according to its roundness, until the arrow presses into the bone and enlarges itself; then draw it out.
And if not: let it be for some days; then press it again until it comes out.
If wood is in the arrow, then push it out along with it.
If however the wood has fallen out, and you wish to administer a thrust; then insert a concave instrument into it, so that its concavity enters the tail of the arrow: then push it along with it.
If however the arrow is concave, then push it along with the instrument inserted into it. The arrow is relieved by that [cure].
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to excavate all the flesh where the venom is; if you are able to do this. Then heal it with what suits for that.
If the arrow falls in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is close to that which you touch with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut above it; then cut, and be careful not to cut a vein or a nerve, and pull it out.
Then suture the wound, if you see it, and heal it until it heals up.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are pulled out.
Extremities are like the beak of a bird, which have been made as iron: when they take hold of an arrow, they do not release it.
They become various kinds, great and small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, its fineness, and the width and depth of the wound.
The shape of the projectile is hollowed out.
And the shape of the projectile is deaf.
This is a hollowed-out extremity like a radius, so that its entrance may fit into the concave arrow and be propelled with it.
Chapter on Phlebotomy of Veins.
There are thirty veins that are to be bled whose custom it is to flow in the body.
Among them, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins that are after the ears, called the two Herbs; and two arteries that appear in the two temples; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called Aspicents; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the end of the nose. And two Jugular veins, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. These are the veins that are called Algecherich. And two veins that are under the tongue.
But the veins that are bled in the arms, there are five veins in each arm.
One of them is called Cephalic, and it is from a woody side; the common people call it vein of the head. And black [or dark]. And it is the Median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilica vein, and a branch of the Cephalic vein; the common people call it vein of the body. And Basilica, and it is placed on the domestic side; and it is also called Titillicaris. And the common people call it vein of the abdomen. And Brachial artery, and it is placed on the elbow; it is the one that is cut for bleeding, and it is the one that appears above the thumb in a visible manner.
And Savial artery; it is the vein that is between the ankle and the smallest [finger or toe]; and it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot there are three veins. One of them is on the woody side under the thumb's curvature. And the second one is Saphenous; its place is by the heel on the domestic side. And vein of the ankle; its place is by the heel on the woody side.
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to those.
Chapter on bloodletting from two veins after the ears.
In fact, bloodletting of the two veins that are behind the ears is beneficial for old catarrhs, and migraine, and sores on the head, old sores.
And the quality of bloodletting is as I have said. And it is to shave the head of the sick person; rub the back of his head in the place of the two veins with a rough cloth. Then the sick person should tighten his neck with a ligature until the two veins appear. The places [of incision] are after the ears, in two depressed locations on the head. Therefore, seek them with your finger, and where you feel its pulsation under your finger, mark that spot with the hot iron [cautery].
Then take the phlebotomous knife, and it is called "The Cutter". Then introduce it [the knife] under the vein into the skin, until the phlebotomist reaches the bone. Then move your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein along with the skin incision. And let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers joined together, or about that much: and make as much blood flow out as you wish.
Then tie it [the cut vein] with threads, and let it be, until it heals.
And now the incision of them has come to an end, as well as their cauterization, at the beginning of the book.
However, the phlebotomy of the two arteries that are in the two times of bleeding, is an aid to old hemigraine, and sodam prawa, and obtalmia assidua: and to the flow of superfluidity discharged acutely towards the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomy [of these arteries] is as I have told you. Let the sick person tightly wrap his neck until two veins appear to the senses with clear evidence, and their pulse is shown under your finger. Then mark that spot with hot iron [cautery].
Then move the skin above the vein upwards with your finger as an indicator, and introduce the phlebotomous knife [cutting] from below, and move the vein upwards. And cut it [the vein], as you did with the two other veins: and make blood flow out according to your need.
Then release the restriction of the sick person, and place your finger on the vein at the first hour. Then place a ligature and bandages over it, and bind it tightly with a strong binding; release it when it is healed.
And now the recollection of those (operations), and their incision, and their extraction, begins at the beginning of the book.
Indeed, the benefit of venesection in the forehead after cephalic venesection is for ancient facial diseases, and for hemi-cranium, and redness, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of this venesection, as I have told you. The sick man binds his neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "Fossorium".
Place the pointed end that is at the head of the Fossorium on the vein and strike it with a hammer or another tool in the same manner; release the blood to flow according to the quantity you desire. Then release the perforation of the sick person and bind it until it is healed.
And sometimes when the venesection is performed with a wide instrument (such as a vein cutter). However, it is not necessary for the venesection instrument to have a sharp point, unlike the other venesection instruments, but rather one with a wide end. And the venesection should be made across (transversely), because the bone is nearby; and perhaps the venesection instrument may break when it is too sharp.
Indeed, the benefit of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, is for the eye affected by scabies and redness; swelling of the eye, and facial diseases.
The quality of phlebotomy is that it binds a weak neck with a plaster. Then the blood-letting shall be done: and thou shalt stand over his head.
And the blood-letting shall be done across, less than long, with a small phlebotome, narrower but not too much, for there is no flesh in that place. For if the phlebotome is sharp at the tip, it may break.
Then make him run with as much blood as necessary for you. And place upon them a cloth, and bind them at night, and loosen them.
The veins of the nose for blood-letting are useful for acute fever, severe inflammation of the face, and diseases of the face such as hemigraine and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is old.
The quality of phlebotomy in this case is to tighten a weak neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand and take a fine, long lancet. Insert it in the middle of the leprosy itself, between that which separates the nose according to its alignment. Since the vein is not visible there and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that your hand with the lancet be slightly curved; and make the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it (the wound) overnight. For it heals quickly.
The advantage of the two phlebotomies by Guidon is for constriction of the breath, and the onset of leprosy, and melancholic illnesses, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and those that are destructive (or corroding), that is, herpes or scabies.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is to tighten a weak person under both necks with a band; and the operator stands over the head of the sick person, and the sick person sits on a chair.
Then the lancet should be about half the length of a wider phlebotomy (lancet). Then draw out an amount of blood that is weighed according to what you see, or according to the necessity that is at hand. Then do the same with another vein.
Then untie the band and tighten both veins with a strap so that the sick person does not suffocate. And let it be for the morning. The wound heals.
Chapter on the phlebotomy of veins (by Albucasis). The advantage of the veins according to Albugasis is because it contributes to alcohol in the mouth and corruption of the gums; and bad ulcers; and cracks in the lips; and bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy for them is that you make the sick person sit before you: and bind his neck with a bandage. Then roll up his lip and look at the two veins: one of which is from the right side of the lip, and the second from its left side: and the demonstration of both is by their blackness. And that is true because around them there are small, dark veins. Therefore make an incision on both sides.
If there is doubt about it and you do not know which one it is: then direct your attention to the larger of them, and its more visible.
And similarly do with the two veins that are in the upper lip: and most commonly it is done with this one: and make an incision on the two veins which are in the lower lip.
Chapter of Phlebotomy: The Vein under the Tongue after the Phlebotomy of the Head. But the advantage of the two veins that are under the tongue for phlebotomy is because phlebotomy of the head is for afflictions that are in the throat, and the illness of the larynx, and the illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is that the sick person should sit between your hands facing the sun: and lengthen his tongue, and look under the tongue on one side to find a vein, and on its other side to find another vein: and the color of each becomes dark.
Therefore make an incision on both sides: and beware that you do not go too deep when phlebotomizing them. For there are arteries under it, and perhaps bleeding may occur from those arteries.
The three veins that are phlebotomized on the arm, those whose phlebotomy is commonly done in all men.
And phlebotomy [is done] according to two modes. Either by pricking with a broad leech (myrtio largo): or by cupping to the subtlety of the vein (oliuando ad subtilitatem decliuis): or cutting with a surgical knife (secando cum phlebotomo cultellari), and it is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from these [are] the broad and subtle forms according to the width and tightness of the veins. The form of leeching (phlebotomi myrtini) is broad, as you see. It [concerns] opening concave veins, full, protruding, visible, thick ones, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this leech [is] smaller in width and more subtle for veins that are more superficial.
It [concerns] the leeching of subtle veins that contain fine yellow blood.
The basilica, which is one of the three veins for leeching, provides aid. Because it draws blood from the ailments that are below the throat and neck, following the chest and abdomen; it [is] necessary for the leecher to know this vein, so as to be careful about it, because under it is an artery. Therefore, if there is an error and blood is drawn by pricking with a leech, he will cut the artery, and bleeding will occur. Therefore, it is necessary for the leecher not to prick her with a leech; instead, he should cut with a surgical knife (Alnesil).
If the basilica does not appear in a clear manifestation, then it is necessary to search for another or to exchange it for another; or to seek a branch of it; or to use a leech on its place, instead of an arm (Funem brachii). It is indeed apparent; cut it as Phlebotomus Anesil did, as we said.
If you wish to perform phlebotomy (bloodletting) on it, then it is necessary before the tightening of the arm, that you touch the place, until you recognize the location of the pulse. Then mark the place with hot iron, afterwards the arm, and cut the vein with a concave-shaped knife as Phlebotomus Alnesil did, as we said. And beware that the blow does not fall in the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, while tightening the bandage, an inflammation at the place which you marked with hot iron, then that inflation is of the artery; avoid it (the blood vessel) therefore.
If you see blood rising at the site of bloodletting, like the urine of a boy, and it is thin, red; then know that it is from the artery's blood. Therefore advance, and place your finger upon it over a long space, afterwards remove your finger. If blood is cut (for it is often cut), then tighten the arm and leave it alone; let the weak avoid movement of it; and beware of fear of it.
And do not move it for a few days until it is healed.
If blood is not cut and it overwhelms you, and medicine is not present at hand for you in the moment; then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For its extremities contract, and blood is cut off.
Or take the bark of the fig tree, and pound it; take one half, and tie it over the place of the vein tightening with a bandage and small stones until another day.
Then if blood is cut, it is good (meaning the treatment was successful). If not (the case): then treat the same person with whom the one who preceded it is remembered, from the place of the dusts causing blood flow abscission; and the bleeding's abscission is not difficult in many dispositions, due to the small size of the wound, and the possibility of tying (ligament) from the arm.
The phlebotomy of the Green Vein is helpful because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the Basilica vein and the Branch of the Cephalic, as we have said.
It is suitable for the phlebotomist to be aware of this vein, because of fear from its phlebotomy, since there is a nerve beneath it. Therefore, if the phlebotomist adds in piercing and finds a nerve in it, a stupor occurs, and healing becomes difficult, and possibly it is not completely healed.
And this nerve often appears to sensation. If it is hidden in some people and is subtle and not shown, then you must place your phlebotomy where you phlebotomize it, the section with Alnesil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise.
On the Cephalic Vein. The phlebotomy of the Cephalic Vein is helpful because it draws blood from the head, and contributes to eye diseases.
It is appropriate in this vein that the phlebotomist be anointed with oil or myrrh before piercing it, since it is safer than all veins because it is not below an artery nor a nerve.
It is fitting for you when you perform venesection (phlebotomy), to ask the barber-surgeon to take only the head of the vein, and to seek a softer place; it does not harm him if no such place is found with the first blow, that he may repeat over it several times with venesection.
Perhaps some men may have a haematoma when not venesection is performed on the first blow, but it does not harm him if such a haematoma occurs somewhere.
On the utility of Venesection and the precautions to be observed. The qualities and circumstances of Venesection and their correction, which you should consider.
First of all, you should know that venesection is not administered unless for the conservation of health and its continuance, and caution against the approach of diseases.
And that venesection should be performed in one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, the Radial (Fusca), and the Median (Basilic). And that venesection should be performed at the beginning of spring on fasting days, in summer and autumn after food consumption, when signs of overfullness appear.
And that venesection should be performed on the first or third day after three hours have passed.
Venesection that is administered in diseases has no fixed hour; but when it is necessary and suitable for such a purpose, it may be done at night or day, and at any hour, and at any time.
It is not necessary to perform venesection on boys until they reach the age of fourteen. Venesection should not be performed on pregnant women except from the fourth month up to the seventh. Venesection should not be performed on old men who have already passed sixty years of age.
When anyone wishes to be bled for any reason: it is necessary, that he cleans his intestines before bleeding with a mild purge, if there is much fecal matter retained in them: so that no putrid superfluities from the intestines attract at the time of bleeding towards the principal members.
A patient should not be bled when he is afflicted with toctina (or satiety of nausea), nor when he is vomiting or still under the influence of drunkenness, until that has passed. A person suffering from dropsy should not be bled.
Be careful about bleeding again after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, increase in sexual activity, labor, exercise, vigils, fasting, or any substance that weakens the body's strength from either a material or an animal source.
Then take into account the subtlety of humors before doing this, if the blood is thick with food and drinks, and medications; if it is possible for him to do so.
Then let a bath be entered, if nothing prevents it; or exercise with some exercise, to make the blood subtle.
Place the bleeding of this person on his chest, about the third day, as we said earlier; and try to have him evacuate his chest that day from all bad animal conditions such as anxiety, anger, fear; and all bodily conditions such as labor, punishment, superfluities, and similar ones.
And let him have present the things for which customary use among humans is from their aromatics, scents, incenses, and similar ones, according to his ability.
Then let the person who is bleeding sit on a stool (puluinari), which should be higher than the stool for bleeding; then he shall draw out his arm and rub it with his hand by the bleeding person two or three times. Then tie the ligament with a suture and roll it twice.
And let the constriction be moderate, because an unequal constriction, either by excess in constriction, then it prevents the flow of blood; or in softening, then it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then, after the constriction, the one who performs venesection should rub his hands together until the veins swell up and become visible to the touch.
Then the one who performs venesection cleans the lancet with a little oil, using an ancient method.
Then he should place his index finger of the left hand on top of the vein at the location where he wishes to make the venesection, slightly: so that the vein does not run away and the blow is cushioned. Because the veins are like a string escaping during venesection; and some of them are filled with wind; and when you place the lancet on it, it contracts under the lancet, deceiving the one who performs venesection, and he does not open the vein; and if he opens it, it is constricted: therefore for this reason the one who performs venesection should be firm and careful in all these matters.
Then place the lancet down. If one vein is opened by chance, then it is good. And if not, then try again with another vein in the same place slightly, or above it with haste: if the place is not missed.
If the place is missed or if the weak person faints, then let him go home for a day or two; and do not tie the ligament. Perhaps it will attract an abscess that is hot. Do not enter the bath.
Then repeat the venesection, if needed.
If the opening is small, or blood flows finely: fear lest not the quantity of blood that you wish does not exit; then repeat the venesection in the same hole correctly, and add less in the operation.
And do this with haste before the place is opened, because the opened place is dangerous for many people during small operations.
If therefore you see that the place has already been opened, then do not go over it at all; for nothing can be excused by you in this case. And put something of oil paste on top of it, because it alleviates the flow of blood. And oil is better than this place and than any other oil.
And similarly administer oil paste in every venesection of your own, where the flow of blood is forbidden; and do this as the Tyrian alfarach and Sagzenea when it is placed over the place.
Blood becomes thin and dissolves when it is thick.
If by chance a large abscess occurs at the place of venesection, which often happens especially to those who are not venesectionists except for that occasion, or if the opening of the vein is small; then hurry and put on top of it a sponge soaked in water and salt, warmed slightly: and squeeze it for an hour; because it is dissolved.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has left from the vein itself, when its end has been reached, or from another vein.
If something black or green remains at the place after days; it does not hurt it; and if you want, put on top of it something of aloes or myrrh dissolved: or something of mint juice, that is, camphor or similar to it.
And indeed, ulcers and swellings often occur near veins during venesection in the Basilica.
Place your hand upon it (the swelling), then if you find softness under your pressure upon it, then that swelling is evil. Therefore, be careful, lest you place anything on it of what I have said. For perhaps blood from an artery will flow from it.
But make an ointment for it with what is mentioned there (the recipe) to harden the place. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary, that you draw blood from every man according to the amount of its virtue. And what appears as a red color spreading over the blood (disseminated intravascular coagulation).
For if the blood is black, then let it come out until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it go until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp (hematocrit), let it go until its sharpness disappears.
And it is necessary that the one who is full, strong, and requires bloodletting by one vein, amplify venesection of the vein and be a competent bloodletter; and on the contrary, for the one who is weak, the opposite should hold.
And it is necessary, that you draw it (blood) in the intervals (between veins), and that the opening be narrow; and it is better what is administered in venesection of the vein, that it is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is beneficial in preventing the flow of blood and incising a nerve; and it is more commendable and safer than bloodletting by length and width (venesection).
And who is accustomed to faint during bloodletting, it is necessary that he eat before bloodletting a little bread soaked in water of muskmelon or ginger; or if he is heated, let him be cooled; and draw blood from him in three intervals or four.
If it is of cold constitution, then let him receive before phlebotomy bread soaked in syrup of honey and myrrh, or in syrup sweetened with scented honey and spices, or in scented and fragrant syrup.
If syncope occurs during phlebotomy, and the cause of it is excessive bleeding: then it is necessary that he drinks meat broth, and subtle scented syrup; and let him use aromatics with algalia (a plant or seaweed), and let his chest be swabbed with it; and let him use the remedies mentioned in our previous discussion on syncope due to evacuation.
Whoever wishes to dislocate his arm and let out blood in the second way: it is necessary for him, whose phlebotomy is for great evacuation, and the strength of his constitution is weak, to let out blood gradually by amount of strength day after day.
But whoever wishes to dislocate his arm and let out blood in the second way, and his body is strong: then he shall do it after seven or nine hours from his first phlebotomy.
But whoever wishes to attract blood from his body towards the opposite part where it tends: then let it be dislocated for him on the second or third day.
If there is much blood already heated and sharpened, and it causes a fever: then let the blood come out from him once, and a large quantity be extracted; and the opening should be kept as long as syncope occurs; after which you shall conserve all conditions of phlebotomy; and put your hand on his pulse during the flow of blood, to avoid death in place of syncope. For it often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and falls by negligence.
It is not appropriate when you wish to solve the arm, and to release the blood, when already the opening of the vein has been closed, and the exit of blood becomes difficult, that you press strongly upon it and quickly stretch out the cut vein. That is very bad indeed, rather let it be, until it is to be bled again with the lancet.
Either remove with the sharpness of a lancet what has been coagulated from the blood in the opening of the vein and place something dissolved in salt water upon it. And place upon it something from turpentine gum or aloes or sage, and press it gently until the blood comes out.
But if already the vein has become gangrenous, then let it be, and do not cover it up, until the gangrene subsides.
But if necessity calls for the releasing of blood again and there is no excuse, then either bleed that spot or bleed in another vein elsewhere in the arm.
The ligament of the arm is bled in the place of the Fuscus and the Basilicus, when these are not found and hidden because it is composed of these.
And the quality of bleeding from this ligament is that a weak person should insert his hand into warm water until it turns red and the vein appears clearly manifest.
Then, a cord is tied over it with moderately tight tension. Then the lancet is used for second bleeding obliquely gradually, not lengthwise or widthwise; and let the opening be wide, and let your lancing of it be on the junction of the hand slightly.
But if the exit of blood is forbidden, then insert your hand into warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you meet your need.
If you are in the days of summer, then you excuse from the repetition of hands in hot water. Much is placed on the course of blood in hot water during winter.
And this vein's phlebotomy is safer than all other veins because it is not under a pulsating vein nor a nerve.
Indeed, the phlebotomy of the right hand's little finger is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that you tie a leash to the hand with a ligature or with your hand after you insert it into hot water, until the vein swells and becomes very noticeable. Then the phlebotomy of it is made by crossing it (the cut). And if you cut it completely, it will not hurt him at all.
Preserve (it), lest you cut off your hand with the phlebotomy. For under that are the nerves of the fingers exposed from the flesh.
Then repeat the hand to hot water and let the blood run in it. For if you do not repeat it in hot water, the blood coagulates in the vein's opening and prevents its flow.
Since when you remove blood in the required quantity, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not coagulate quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary to do this with every constricted branch.
But the aid of this vein's phlebotomy from the left hand is that it is beneficial for spleen diseases; and similarly, do as you did in the second one equally.
The phlebotomy of the saphenous vein is beneficial for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the womb, retention of menstruation, and weaknesses of the kidneys, and old ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar ones from other diseases.
The quality of phlebotomy is such that the unhealthy one puts his foot into warm water: and he should make friction upon it until the veins swell: and tie above the joint of the foot with a ligature. The vein's location is at the heel, appearing toward the thumb: and they branch out from it on the face of the foot into many branches.
Therefore, phlebotomy should be made in a larger branch of it, or at the heel in its aggregation: because it is better and safer.
If phlebotomy is made on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are under it on the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy instrument perpendicularly, as if you wish to cut it: and the phlebotomist is Nesil.
If the outlet of blood is forbidden, then immerse his foot in warm water: and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
If the phlebotomist errs in the first vein, then repeat with phlebotomy to the upper part slightly, for it is safe, and do not fear any harm from it, as long as you beware of the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly, with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic vein, as we have said, is at the heel from the forest side.
And the benefit of phlebotomy is for pain in the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
The quality of phlebotomy is such that the unhealthy one enters the bath and hurries: and bind the leg from the ankle to above the heel with a thin, long bandage, for it does not appear unless for this reason.
When it appears, then perform phlebotomy as possible for you, either according to the transverse method: and it is better, or make an incision into her, or cut her off with a section. The place of this is safer, and it is very hidden in many people.
The place of this is safer, and it is very hidden in many people. If you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the senses: then perform phlebotomy on one of its branches, and there is one that appears on the back of the foot, turned towards the auricle: and beware of the nerves, and let the amount of blood run according to your wish.
Then unravel the stricture, and place skin over the site of phlebotomy, and bind the site. It is quickly healed.
On ventosation and the quality of its use.
They are made from horns, and from brass, and from glass.
And ventosation is done according to two modes. With incision and bloodletting: and there is another ventosation without incision.
And this ventosation which is without incision, is according to two modes. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the places of the body where ventosation with incision and bloodletting are administered are fourteen. One of them is Ventosation Alnocrati, and it is the last part of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and ventosations Alhagdahim, and they are two plates of the neck from both sides at once: and ventosations of the brain, and it is under the jaw on the lower part of the mouth: and ventosations of the two spatulas: and ventosation Alachosos above the end of the tail: and ventosations of the two fists, and they are in the middle of two arms: and ventosations of the two legs: and ventosations of the two calves.
And Ventosation does not draw blood from you from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore its power does not fall out of them, as is the case with its failure due to venesection. It is not necessary that Ventosation be administered with fire or without it for any of the illnesses caused by congestion, until the entire body has been evacuated.
If necessity requires Ventosation due to illness or custom, administer it at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle, and at any time whatsoever.
It is because there are men whose blood multiplies in them until it requires the extraction of it through Ventosation, who find a headache and swelling in their heads.
And there are those who find congestion and redness in their faces, in their heads, and in their necks. And there are those who find itching in their faces and foreheads, and darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And there are those who have a pain at the place of their Ventosation. And there is one whose laughter is increased. And there are those who find the taste of blood in their mouths: or their tongue is scraped and the blood is sponged off. And there is one whose sleep is increased. And there are those who see blood and redness in their dreams, and the dead, and wounds, and things similar to them.
When we see something from these [symptoms], and especially if it is during the third week of the month: we order Ventosation to be performed, after two or three hours have passed since that day.
The benefit of Ventosation for the neck is that it alleviates headache and that what is released goes to the eyes. It is necessary that it [the lesion] should be after evacuation of the entire body.
This [method] is called ventosa in the place of cephalic phlebotomy.
And it must not be used by one who has a cold temperament or where there is a catarrh. For it brings great harm to him.
And for that reason, it should not be used by the elderly, and in one whose head is afflicted with cold diseases.
He who becomes persistent over it generates oblivion upon himself.
And for that reason, you should instruct the ventosa operator to place his hand with the cupping glass slightly lower, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Cupping (ventosatio or alkehel) is in the place of phlebotomy Fusca, and Basilica phlebotomy, and for that reason it brings shortness of breath, constriction of the windpipe, shortness of breath due to instrument fracture, coughing, and repletion.
And it must be pushed slightly the cupping glass (alkehel), because if placed lower, it generates weakness in the heart and the stomach.
Cupping (alhagdahim) brings pain to accidents of the head, migraine, and optic neuritis, perforation, and pain in the roots of teeth; it is in the place of basilica phlebotomy.
And you should instruct the ventosa operator not to press his hand with scarification, lest he cut an artery and cause bleeding.
Cupping under the chin brings drunkenness to the mouth, corruption of gums, and similar problems that are in the mouth; it takes the place of another type of phlebotomy, which is located on the two lips.
Cupping with a spatula brings alchafacham, which occurs from repletion and heat.
Internal cauterization of two fires assists the phlebotomy of three veins, Basilica, Fusca, and Cephalica: since it draws blood from all those fine veins that are in the flesh; and those fine veins draw blood from other larger ones until the attraction reaches the three veins.
It is necessary that you instruct the cauterizer not to proceed too much in scarification: because there is flesh exposed, and beneath it are veins and nerves.
The ventose which is applied to the anus assists hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
It is necessary that you instruct the cauterizer that the ventose should be large and of iron: because the place needs strong suction, and perhaps small ventoses may break; and it should be scarified with a deep scarification.
The ventoses of the legs diminish with an obvious reduction: because they draw blood from the entire body, and provide old pains in the kidneys, womb, and bladder; provoke menstruation, and confer inflammation and coldness; and stand in place of the phlebotomy of two saphenas and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause fainting in many men.
And the ventose of alhorcobeni assists closely the assistance of the ventoses of two legs.
The quality of the position of the ventoses is that you should place the ventose first in an empty place, and suck with moderate suction; and do not prolong the position of the ventoses, but place them quickly, and remove them quickly, so that humors come to the site at equal arrival; and do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already redden and inflame, and the redness appears as blood; then scarify, and gradually repeat suction. Then consider in the arrangement of bodies.
For whoever is from soft-fleshed people, rare pores, it is necessary to scarify him once, not more: so that the place does not ulcerate.
And command to the Wind-healer (anesthetist), that he should enlarge the scarification and not too deeply: and temper the sucking in ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is swelling in blood, then it is necessary to scarify him twice. In the first instance, a way is opened for subtle blood flow and its liquefaction: and in the second instance, to the thorough examination of the extraction of coagulated blood.
If indeed the blood is extremely foul, then let there be a third scarification: so that it follows the last.
And finally, when we want to draw out blood little by little or less, one scarification is sufficient for us. If we want the extraction of blood many times, let there be multiple scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it is necessary to scarify with deep scarifications: and the end equal in scarifications, is the depth of the skin.
What is that which should be administered from the oils at the position of the Wind-healers (anesthetists), and what the anesthetist should avoid.
In the thick-skinned person, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, it is necessary to anoint with oils of opening (anesthetics), softening, resolving: if it is in the summertime, as aloe oil, or olive oil, or oil from sweet almonds, or oil from pumpkin seeds.
And if it is in the wintertime, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or soap (sabun): and similar to these.
If the superfluity is thick and cold, then use bitter almond oil, or oil from balsam or white oil, or oil of anise; and similar ones.
If the wound is large and filled with putrid flesh, then it is necessary to prohibit oil and clean the places of the wounds after lancing them with rose water, or cold water, or salt water, or cucumber water, or portulaca water; and similar ones.
He whose blood is much moisture, clean the wounds with vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and sumac; and similar ones.
He whose superfluities are thick, clean the wounds with old wine, or with juniper water, or anise decoction, or chamomile; and similar ones.
It is necessary to avoid lancing in the bath or near the bath, rather it should be administered after leaving the bath for an hour, or two hours.
And it is not advisable that anyone sleeps after lancing.
\*What is necessary to regulate the wound or phlebotomy before lancing?\*
\*And after this it is necessary to consider the following: Then if the wound or phlebotomy is choleric and its sharpness and inflammation dominate over blood, then it is necessary for him to receive cooling agents such as grapes, muskmelon; also onion with vinegar and lettuce, and cucumber and garlic; and similar ones.\*
\*And place his food for him, roasted young chickens, lamb meat, and cooked foods with vinegar; and similar ones.\*
\*And if his complexion is cold, he should drink honey syrup or almond syrup made from seeds; and sweet smelling wine that is between old and new; and it is recommended that he use sparingly with food.\* Place his food with chickens and let them eat; and sparrows, that is, small birds; and the young pigeons will be swallowed.
It is necessary that, on the day of ventositation and phlebotomy, there be more drink than food; and it must be given to some people in tyriac alfaroch hours, or medicine from musc, that is, muscatel, or alesselithe before ventositation; and before or after phlebotomy: so that the main limbs may be strengthened, and the blood may be made more subtle. It is not necessary to drink it in a heated drink.
Chapter on ventositation without scarification. Ventosations which are without scarification are those that are placed on the liver, spleen, foot-affliction, and on the abdomen, navel, places of the kidneys, and the ankle-blister: because these members cannot bear scarification upon them.
Nor is anything sought by these, except attraction of blood from one member to another; such as placing a ventosation on the breasts in the illness of nosebleed. And we use them to dissolve the cold and unwelcome ventosity in one member by another; such as placing a ventosation on the abdomen and navel. For it makes the member rarefied, and warms it, and removes pain therefore, because it dissolves that ventosity.
Also it is placed on the kidneys, when there occurs abscess or stone. By its virtue perhaps it opens an abscess, or expels a stone from its place.
And similarly it does when placed on the liver and spleen for the ventosity to be drained from either of them.
These are administered empty with incision only. And at times they are administered with fire.
And at times they are filled with warm water for diseases of pleurisy: and that is to fill the ventose bag and it should be large, hot water alone, or water in which boiled herbs suitable have been put.
§ Shape of a ventose administered with fire.
The width of its opening should be two fingers apart, as we have made it; and the depth should be half a palm; and on the side of it, in a place approximately halfway along its length, there should be a small hole, according to the size that can enter it with an awl; it should be made of brass or citronwood, smooth, equal-edged blades, cleansed; so as not to harm the member at its position above it; and in its middle, a transverse rod of brass or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And now this ventose is made large, larger than we have described, but slightly smaller than the one mentioned earlier, according to the diseases and age of the person who uses it.
For ventoses of children, and of those weakened, are different from the ventoses of men, and of fat bodies.
The quality of placing this ventose with fire on a member is that you should light a linen cloth or a small candle from wax; and place it on the middle transverse rod that is in the middle of the ventose; so that the fire is burned approximately below the lower part of the ventose, to prevent burning of the weak body.
Then it should be placed on the member; and a finger should be over the hole that I have said, until we hold the ventose; while we need it, we remove the finger, and steam will come out through the hole, and the ventose is immediately released.
Then, linen (you) heat according to its manner, and if necessary, repeat it.
In pneumothorax, which is administered in the sickness of pleurisy, there is no bladder with a cross or hole: and it is not administered unless because it is filled with water, and is placed only on the body part.
And this is its form.
And this pneumothorax, the larger it is, in order to hold much water, is better.
§ On Suspension of Sugar-water.
Sangue-sugars are not administered in many cases, unless in those members where the position of ventoses is not possible due to their smallness, such as lips, gums, and similar parts. Or in a member denuded of flesh, such as fingers, nose, and similar parts.
And the quality of use is that you come from Sangue-sugars which are in sweet waters, free from decay.
Then, they should be let go every day and night into sweet water until they are hungry, and there remains nothing left in their stomachs. Then the body is bled first with phlebotomy, and with ventoses. Then cleanse the ill member until it turns red. Afterwards, they are placed on top of it.
When they are filled and fall, and it is possible to suck at the place with a ventose, then it is more beneficial for healing; and if not, then cleanse the place with vinegar. Then, with much water, rub and squeeze.
If the flow of blood is prolonged after the loss of Sangue-sugars, and it is exuding; then immerse a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the exuding ceases.
If blood is multiplied, then pulverize over it zeji ground or gall-stones, and similar ones from poppy seeds: until the blood is cut off.
Or pulverized almonds (fabarum) without their shells are placed on the site and left until the beans stick to the place, for blood is cut off.
And it is necessary that if a repetition of Sanguisugarum (a sugar extract from the sap of the blood-leaf plant) is needed, it should be changed when possible.
But if Sanguisuga (leeches) are forbidden from being hung up, then clean the site with fresh blood. Or insert an aculeus (a pointed instrument or needle) into the sites until something comes out of the blood. Then place them, for they themselves will stick immediately when they sense something from the blood.
Whenever you want them to fall (off), pulverize something from ground aloes, salt or ashes over them, and they will fall immediately.
This Chapter is also frequently necessary in the art of Medicine and it is restoration for fractures and dislocations occurring in bones.
Know ye, O sons, that foolish doctors and the common people boast about this Chapter, and those who have never looked at an ancient book or read a letter from it.
And for this reason, this method has been deprived of learned men in our land. And I have never used it in a good way, nor have I acquired that from it except for the length of reading ancient books and my diligence in understanding them until I extracted the knowledge of that method from them.
Then I attach myself to experiment and study throughout my life.
And now I have described for you the entire content of that chapter containing my knowledge; and above what my experiment exceeded, after abbreviating it for you, and freeing it from occupation with elongation, and abbreviating it to its end of abbreviation, and showing it at its end of declination: and I have formed in it many forms of instruments that are administered within it, since it is due to the addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary that we say in the prologue of this chapter the main points and headings, to which the craftsman must be directed first regarding their truth: namely, that you and those who are ready should know or learn this noble art from each other.
Therefore, I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or accident happens to someone, then it is necessary to rush at first to bleed him and free him, or both simultaneously: unless something prevents it, such as weakness of strength; or he who it has happened to is a child or an old man decrepitus; or it is a time of intense heat or intense cold.
Then he should be content with his food, cold vegetables, beans and cabbage: and forbid wine, coarse meats, and to be filled from foods and all food that fills the veins with blood. Until when you are secure from a hot apoplectic attack, and do not fear the flow of matter to the limb: then let the sick person return to his own regimen first with which his custom has been accustomed.
When therefore the broken bone begins to heal, then it is necessary that the sick person be fed with nourishing foods in abundance, thick, heavy, containing viscosity: such as food made from cooked wheat with water, rice, and heads, and feet, and innards of cows, and eggs, and fresh fish; and thick wine, and similar things. When this regimen is followed, the healing of the fracture happens more quickly and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in men who are in the first old age and decrepit, it is not possible for them to be joined and consolidated according to their nature always, because of the drying up of their limbs; and they are consolidated and joined only at the end of the softness, such as the bones of small boys.
However, nature connects something similar to a glue on every part of the broken bone, in which there is thickness, by which it adheres and tightens it until they are consolidated to each other, and bound together until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until it does not prohibit something from its operations; and for this reason, it is necessary that you give nourishment to the sick with foods that have thickness, viscosity, and heaviness, as we said.
And know that the kinds of fractures are various, according to the diversity of the limbs; because the fracture of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and all other limbs are different from each other in this way; and I come with a reminder of every kind of fracture exposed in its own chapter distinguished from others. The species of bone fracture are also diversified within themselves.
Because the fracture is arched, stars also happen in it. And sometimes the fracture is along the length of the bone; and there are fractures called stars, that is, points, and additions protruding, like in a reed when it is cut with a knife for writing. And not protruding; and there is the fracture with wound and dislocation at the head; and there is the small crack fracture.
And every kind has a skill, or its own tool for restoration, according to what its memory comes up, distinguished in its places.
And from that which the bone fracture is known, there is its twist and its protrusion; and its appearance to the sense and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
When therefore there is no twist appearing nor sound under your touch when you touch the bone with movement, nor does a weak great pain appear; then there is no fracture there, indeed it is possible that there is a twist or small crack; therefore do not move it with your hand and compression at all, but put medicines over it whose memory comes up after some time; then tie a string around it with a fine ligation.
And know that the place becomes arched and is split into two, but stars appear in it; however, all parts should be removed from each other; then you must begin to start at your hour for its correction, aligning it before a hot abscess appears on it.
If however a hot abscess appears on it, then leave it for some days until the abscess subsides. Then align it according to whatever method possible with gentleness and skill.
And know that the restoration and its equality is easier than the bone, where complications occur.
Then tie it up, according to what comes to your recollection of it.
If there are complications in the bone, then an extension of this broken member is necessary from both sides, whether it be a hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes, or with a rope and your hand.
And let your position be such when you place the member on a level surface according to its natural shape, until the parts of the broken member are extended; then try to bring back all additions with every effort and in whatever way possible at their places; and beware lest, by your operation, pain or injury occurs, nor harm; and try with your strength, to apply one of two bones together with its companion, according to better shapes.
And it is necessary that you probe it at that time with your hand. If therefore you see anything different there, correct it and make it equal by the amount of your strength.
And beware of violent stretching and strong compressions, as many foolish people do. For they often cause an abscess to occur due to their operation or a contraction in the member; as we have seen this happens many times from their operations.
Then attach after the equality and suitable operation, and compression, relaxation, and peace of that member; and warn the weak person about it. And make him take care not to move it during his waking hours and sleep, during its rotation, its stirring, and during its exertions, and all his movements with the last of his strength. And so that it may be avoided, let there not be a position of a limb with which follows pain. Whenever there is pain or injury while in the position of a limb, then it must be moved to another position in which no pain is felt.
And see that its position is equal and straight, so that there will not be a twisting in the limb when it is restored.
The quality of the constriction of the broken member, as I have told.
Know that fractured members are differentiated according to their size and form.
Those that are small, such as the arm, finger, fleshy part of the ear, and similar to these, then it is necessary that the bandage be made of soft, fine fabric. Those that are large, such as the hip and leg, it is necessary that there be a wide, firm bandage around them.
Because a broad ligament binds a large member and compresses it from all sides with equal constriction, so that no spot remains inside of it.
Then begin after your evacuation to place a suitable poultice on it at the soft spot of the fracture itself. Then begin to wrap the bandage around the location of the fracture itself with three or four wrappings, according to what the member deserves; and bind your hand slightly with the bandage.
Then go to the upper part from the location of the fracture and bind it less than your previous constriction, with which you bound the fractured place. Then extend yourself and the bandage slightly away from the location of the fracture and gradually soften the constriction until you gather much from a healthy place.
Then take another poultice, and wrap it again over the fracture with bandages. Advance with subsidence towards the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be in the constriction of subsidence, and softening it, as we said in the first subsidence above.
Then place between the subsidences from soft sponge or cloth, which corresponds to the crookedness of the fracture, if there is crookedness in it; and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then subside upon another piece of meat above it. Then place equal stars (stitches) well made immediately on top of these subsidences, if there is no swelling or warm abscess in the area.
If there is swelling or abscess in it; then place upon it what sits on the abscess and remove the swelling; and leave it for some days. Then bind over these with stitches.
Let the stitches be half of a thick reed, smooth and well formed; or let them be from wood where sieves are made, which are made of pine or oak, or calingi: and let the width of each stitch be according to this shape and this same figure.
However, it is necessary that the stitch which is placed upon the swollen part be slightly thicker and wider than the other stitches; and the length of the stitch should be according to what is suitable for the limb in size and smallness.
Then bind over the stitches with another piece of linen, following the first constriction. Then bind over with threads well, as we said about the constriction; and let your constriction be over the fracture place more; and the farther it extends from the fracture, the less the constriction should be.
It is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and they should be from soft linen.
If threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of stupid people putting their threads twisted from the cord of flax, it is a great mistake: because the constriction falls out with them beyond its quality.
Fine threads do not agree again: since you will not obtain what you want through the constriction with them.
It is not necessary that there be less than a finger between one star and another.
If the sick person is injured by the points of the stars after the constriction in healthy places: then place beneath them from soft wool or carmine-coated wool, until nothing is injured from that.
When there is a break with a wound, and there is a rupture on the skin, I shall come for its reminder in Chapter 2 under special circumstances.
And know that not every broken limb should be strung with stars from the first day. For since a limb is large when it is large, you should not place stars on top of it unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your safety from the coming of a hot apoplectic fit.
This is the method of ointments, which the ancients used to place on a fracture and dislocation.
Common Ointment Method, restoring a fracture, suitable for many temperaments, especially women and children, since it is from that which heat does not conquer nor cold.
And you should receive from the flour mill dust, and it is the marrow of wheat that hangs on the walls of the mill near the movement of the millstone: and make it as such, except that you sieve it with egg white: and place the mixture not thick, nor thin. Then use it.
Another Ointment Method, restoring a fracture, and dislocation, and twisting. Prepare a paste with almess, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mugath. Grind all of them together with ten parts of myrrh, five parts of aloes, and twenty parts of althea. Strain the mixture and sift it. Mix it with water of althea, or with sheep's milk whey if the patient's complexion is heated. Use this paste as a plaster. For it is of good composition, restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial for many people.
Another method of applying a plaster, which also helps with fractures and dislocations. Prepare mugath, mess, white althea, all ground together with ten parts of myrrh, five parts of aloes, six parts of acacia, twenty parts of Armenian clay, and grind them thoroughly, sift them, and make into a paste with water or sheep's milk whey. Administer it.
Another method of applying a plaster for joints that are dislocated and bones separated from their places: it soothes the pain, heals the broken bone, and stops the cracking. Take boiled wool, immerse it in vinegar and heated oil, and place it on the affected area.
In this plaster, there is no power of restoration, but it is good for the soothing of a hot abscess and for expelling specific pains.
Another method of applying a plaster that restores broken bones. Take the leaves of fig tree and wild papaver, grind them all, and make a plaster from both.
Another method of applying a short-term plaster for the restoration of broken bones and when you want to dissolve the remnants of an abscess. Prepare the root of althea, chamomile, marsh marigold flowers, and the flour of herbs, all in equal parts. Grind them all and make into a paste with wine if the affected area is not heated.
If it is heated, then prepare it with water of coriander steeped in water, or use it.
Another stronger method for resolving an abscess, which is stronger than the first, when a hard abscess occurs during the healing of a limb. Take the root of althea, linseed seed, balustia, lentil, samsuc, violets, camomile and mix them all together, grind each part into one, then prepare it with water of willow or sweet water, or wine. Apply the whole thing according to the heat of the limb, and the calmness of its warmth.
Hippocrates however did not say in his book that it should be placed on a broken limb during its healing, except for wax made from tallow and oil; not anything else; and he said that it should be of medium thickness between coarseness and fineness.
Galen however considered it appropriate to place on a broken limb during its healing substances that have the property of extracting heat, such as myrrh, aloes and frankincense and similar substances from what we have mentioned.
Method of plaster that helps with injury and pain. Take mugath, chickpeas, human hair cuttings or bird feathers, althea, and salt in equal parts: grind them, sift them, and prepare plaster from it.
The quantity that should remain as ligature is such that you consider whether pain does not occur, nor itching, nor the bone moves from its place; then do not dissolve it for many days. If there is intense itching, restless pain, or swelling at the site; then hurry and dissolve it within an hour, remove the plaster from it; and take a soft cloth or sea sponge, moistened with warm water and clean the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain settles.
If there is intense itching, restless pain, or swelling at the site; then hurry and dissolve it within an hour, remove the plaster from it; and take a soft cloth or sea sponge, moistened with warm water and clean the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain settles. Then let the member rest for one hour. Then place upon it a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and bind over it at night until you are certain of the absence of the hot inflammation, and let the swelling of the member subside, and remove the pain from it.
Then repeatedly apply it to a narrow bandage and small plaster: and do not bind it with your first constriction, and with fine ones until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling, and all other signs have been completely removed: then apply the plaster and bandage equally as you did at first.
If nothing of the aforementioned occurs in the member: then do not loosen it until three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is released after twenty days, according to what you see in the solution of the member, as we have said: until such time as the fracture adheres and coagulation of flesh over it: add also more to your bandage than your first bandage: and add also more nourishment for the weak, according to the memory of its previous condition.
If you see that the location of the fracture is already drying out and becoming too thin: then know that nourishment must not reach it. Therefore pour warm water on it at every place where you loosen it: and let it be for all three days, and alleviate the bandage slightly.
Therefore by this operation nourishment flows to the member, and it heals quickly.
However what stupid restorers do for a fracture of the member instead of restoration as it should be: when it is not restored first according to necessity, and restored according to twists: it is an error from their operation, and great fear: and if it were correct, the ancients would have said that in their books, and they would have operated with it.
And I have not seen any trace of theirs there at all, and it is better that it is not done.
On the making of an ulcer in the head.
The types of fractures are various, and their shapes are many; and their causes are separate.
For from a fracture is that which occurs from a blow with a sword; and the blow removes the bone completely as far as it reaches to the pia mater, which is under the bone, just as an axe does in wood; and because of this, this type of fracture is called Axial.
The knife has cut something of a bone and has cut its face, but it does not pierce through the incision to the end of it; and this type of fracture is called Kalaman, that is, Absolute Lever.
And it is a wound of two types of fractures, either large or small.
And from the fracture is that which is a crush or rubbing; and its cause is striking with a stone, or falling upon a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also piercing, which approaches the cloth that is under the bone; or it is on the face of the bone; and it is a wound of these two types of fractures, either small or large.
And from the fracture is that which is hidden within the bone in the subtlety of hair; and it is a small crack, and because of this it is called this type of fracture Capillary.
And from them is a fracture which occurs from falling or striking with a stone and similar things, which cause the lamina of the bone to enter into the interior; and it forms a hollow: as happens with cauldrons of brass, when they are struck and part of them enters into the interior.
And it often occurs in the moist skull bones, such as those of children.
And all these types of fractures are separated by sawing, and I will go with the reminder of the entire thing to its place.
And we recognize all these types of fractures by examination on it and investigation of them with probes, and removal of the rotten flesh that is over them.
But the Capillary type is recognized by this: it is exposed on the bone and scraped off, and rubbed upon it with a hot iron; for the fracture appears black.
In treating a fracture, consider first the condition of the sick man; then if you see from his conditions that it indicates fear clearly, as vomiting cholera, extension, loss of intellect, abscission of voice, fainting, acute fever, discharge of eyes, redness of them and similar things in many dispositions, without a doubt he will not be cured; and if you see conditions that do not frighten you and you hope for salvation; then begin the treatment.
If a wounded person comes to you first with a wound, and it is during the days of winter, then it is necessary that you should study in the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every arrangement.
If it is during the days of summer, then you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is beneath the bone decays from fat and such things as we have mentioned happen.
If the fracture of the bone has already reached the fat touching the brain and is with fragments and traction, then you should cut the fragmented and smoothed part according to what I have told you.
And it is necessary that you shave the head of the wounded and pierce through the bone according to whatever method is possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound and what is light on what is weak.
If there occurs to you during the piercing of the bone a flow of blood or a hot abscess, then apply what is necessary to it. And it is necessary that you fill the place with soaked cloths in wine and rose oil: and let the wound rest until the abscess settles down and you are secure from the flow of blood. Then begin in the healing of the bone, and removal of it.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
One method is to cut the bone with a knife with a narrow blade: and this is its form.
Then administer another knife wider than the first: and this is its form.
Then administer yet another knife wider still.
And the second method is that you have a number of knives of various sizes, some of which are wider than others and some of which are shorter than others: and they should be at the end points of their sharpening, and made of iron or hardened: and use them with ease in striking the knife, so as not to shake the head and hurt it.
If the bone is hard and tough: then it is necessary that you perforate around its circumference before you administer Incisoria, with Terebris which are called Terebra not penetrating deep: and they are not named thus unless because they do not penetrate beyond the bone marrow to what lies after it; therefore, because the tip of the Terebra is rounded above that which is under its head sharp, similar to an edge, and a small circle prevents submerging, and penetrating through the thickness of the bone.
It is necessary that you take a great number of these Terebris, one of which should correspond to the thickness of the bone; until the present has all the Terebrum of the skull: whose sharp tip's quantity in length and breadth should be according to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three types of Terebris or Trepans.
The quality of perforating around the bone that is broken, is: that you place the Terebra on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then exchange the Terebra to another place and place what is between every hole of a size equal to the thickness of a finger or about it.
Then cut with Incisoria what is between every hole from the bone: and do it more subtle than possible over that from the end of delicacy, as we said, until you have removed the bone, either by your hand or with some other tools which you have prepared for this; such as tenalias and delicate forpices.
And it is necessary that you be careful with all caution, that the Terebra or Incisoria touches nothing from silk.
When you perforate the bone by going around and it is separated from silk, if it was continuous with it, and you remove it, it is necessary that you shave, and equalize the remaining part in the bone with another similar Incisoria. It is necessary that it should be thin and subtle more than other incisors.
If something remains from small bones and cartilage, then take it with ease, with what is near you among your tools. Then care for the wound after that with linen, and the ointments that I mentioned.
Another method of operation is easy, completely distant from fear; which Galen said and praised greatly; and this is his statement. You must first begin to expose a piece of bone from the place where the fracture is more violent and clear; until when you have exposed that part and placed under it the tip of this Convex Incisor, which has this form.
The convex part does not cut anything; and the sharp part of it extends on both sides in length, as you see; so that the convex part may be attached to the splint, with its face incidentally sharp on the bone.
Then strike the Convex Incisor on one side with a small hammer until you cut all the bone with ease, as it is rotated; and you will be safe from the cloth that does not fall into the place you fear completely.
And if the doctor were not foolish among men, and more ignorant of this, nor asleep, then if something remained attached to the bone from the cloth in some places, he would cut it off with the tip of the Convex Incisor and free it with ease. It is freed from it without harm and without fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate to the cloth and what is cut away from the bone is its face, and roughness and subtle cartilage remains in it; then it is necessary that you remove the roughness, and dig out the cartilages with finer rasors that you have prepared of various sizes, so that it will be possible for you to administer them in every place more suitable and correct according to where the operation leads you, and the fractured bone, and its figure. It is necessary that you administer [the procedure] according to your reasoning, firstly cutting the bone more widely with those broader scalpels. Then use a finer instrument after that.
It is necessary that you administer [the procedure] according to your reasoning, firstly cutting the bone more widely with those broader scalpels. Then use a finer instrument after that. Keep doing that continuously until you reach administering it more thinly and more finely with them all.
In each of the remaining small cracks and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to what leads to its correction.
And there is a thing that does not hide upon every one who has any study in this art and it stands upon what we have written and shown in large fractures.
If however a piece of flesh is detected while you are cutting the bone: then it is necessary that you take linen cloth according to the size of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it over the wound opening. Then take another cloth doubled or tripled and immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it on top of the first one: and do that as easily as possible over it so that it is not too heavy.
Then administer a wide bandage over it and do not tie it except according to the amount that holds the wound only: and leave it with this care for one day or two days until you are certain about hot swelling. Then dissolve it and administer afterwards medications with which excessive dryness is necessary: such as the roots of garlic, flour of herbs, powder of frankincense, Aristolochia, and similar ones: and it is so that you make a powder from these medications and sprinkle it over the wound like dry ones.
And administer universally in that all medication with a property to cleanse and not bite. Be careful according to your virtue, so that the wound may be clean during your treatment: neither should there be dirt from ointment, nor dirtiness.
Be careful according to your virtue, so that the wound may be clean during your treatment: neither should there be dirt from ointment, nor dirtiness. Do not let pus gather at all on it, because when pus gathers upon the brain tissue, it corrupts it and putrefies it, and a great evil happens after that to the sick person: and already has happened on the skull, when the bone is cleaned by him, especially when the care of it is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore, if the afflictions that have been mentioned occur to the sick person, know that it is certainly dangerous.
And if the blackness does not occur, except from the medicine that is put upon him, and it is in the virtue of that medicine to make the blackness: then you should receive a part from honey, three parts from rose oil, and wash with them cloth. Then place it upon the skull: afterwards take care of it with suitable remedies for healing, until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of a broken nose.
Know that the nose is not broken except for two of its upper parts at once, or one of them: because it has two bones, since below it is cartilaginous and does not break, nor does it happen to it except by abrasion, curvature, and deviation.
If one of its two parts is broken, then you should insert a small finger into the nose's opening and align the fracture with your index finger and thumb on the outside until the nose returns to its natural shape: and do this skillfully with ease. And be careful that pain does not occur upon the sick person due to your operation.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it is not reached by the finger: then it is necessary to equalize the end of the radius, where there is a small swelling.
If the fracture occurs in two parts, then do as follows: and approach with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, at rest, let the aposteme be made with warm poultices.
Then insert a piece of linen cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part: or insert two pieces of linen cloth if the fracture is in two parts: and let there be in the cloth a swelling of such size that it fills the nostril.
And some old restorers said that they should be soaked in butter and changed every day. But this does not seem to me, on the contrary, it is necessary that the linen cloth should be soaked in egg white, made with flour mill. Then release the linen cloth until the bone hardens and the cartilage thickens.
And sometimes a feather of a goose is inserted into the nose instead of the linen cloth, after it has been covered with soft fabric: and this happens so that the feather tightly holds the fracture of the nose, and prevents the weak from being hindered in breathing.
And this is not necessary. If you wish, do it: and if you wish, do with linen cloth.
If the nose again becomes infected while performing an aposteme with warm poultices, plaster the nose with pitch or with copper pledget soaked in rose oil or a little with tannin.
But if there is no infection of the warm poultice, then it is necessary to plaster it with wheat flour and frankincense powder mixed with egg white. Then place a soft cloth upon it (the wound), and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
If the nasal bones are broken into pieces, or crushed, then it is necessary that you make an incision over them and extract those pieces using suitable instruments for the purpose. Then make a suture (stitch), and care for it with what coagulates (the tissue) and consolidates it using suitable ointments or poultices that are suitable for the purpose.
If it happens (that) there is a wound between the nose, then it is necessary to care for it with linen and administer a lead cannula until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of the lower jaw when it breaks.
When the lower jaw breaks and there is no wound associated with it: examine whether its break is only external and not broken into two, and if it bends inwardly: then its diagnosis is easy.
Therefore, if the break is on the right side of the jaw, insert your left index finger into the sick person's mouth: similarly, if the break is on the left jaw, then insert your right index finger: and press with it the bulge of the fracture inwardly towards the outside with your other hand from the inner part of the bone evenly, and with it align it.
If the break of the jaw has already separated into two parts, then you must administer an extension from both parts according to their alignment: until it is possible for them to be aligned evenly.
If it happens that there is movement or dislocation of the teeth, then bind those that you hope will remain with a wire made of gold, silver, or silk. Then place soft wax on the broken jaw. Then place over it a double cloth, and place upon the cloth a large awl well made: or a piece of shoeleather equal in length to the jawbone.
Then bind it above as your preparation of the ligature requires and its application suits until it does not destroy itself: and order the sick one to take it quietly and with calmness: and place for him soft food for eating.
If you judge that it changes in some way by any means: then hurry and dissolve it on the third day. Then straighten out what is twisted from it, and plaster it with a plaster made of milled flour with egg white or with wheat bran after removing the soot: and place upon the plaster a soft woolen cloth.
As long as that plaster remains attached to it and the bone's position does not change, leave it undisturbed until it heals: or bind the fracture. For this fracture is frequently bound in three weeks.
If a hot abscess occurs meanwhile, then administer what we have said many times for the soothing of it until the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, be aware. If the fragment is separated from the bone or a tooth, be careful. Then use subtlety to remove those fragments of the gum that suit you for their removal using instruments.
If the opening of the wound is narrowed, then enlarge it with a leech according to your need.
Then when you remove the gum, and nothing remains from it, or if the opening of the wound is large: and if not, place upon it an ointment that suits for that purpose, and let it heal until it heals.
On the restoration of a broken Fork (Furcula).
Much indeed breaks the Fork from the anterior part near the shoulder, and its fracture is made according to one of three modes.
Either it breaks into two parts, beyond which occur protrusions (satagiae); and it is easier to restore this fracture.
The translation is: "It is thus, what happens in a fractured bone: and it is more difficult for restoration.
The translation is: "It is thus, what is a fracture with a wound.
The translation is: "And the operation in this case when there is no wound, it is to make present two assistants, so that one of them holds the supporting lever (Furcula) which follows the fracture, and the other stretches the neck towards the opposite side.
The translation is: "Then, make an equal fracture with your fingers until it has the required shape: and there should not be any projection nor depression.
The translation is: "If you need more extension, then it is necessary to place under the weak person's pillow a sphere made of cloth or wool, and let its size be according to your necessity: and extend, lift the lever, and press the sphere with your hand until an equal fracture, as required.
The translation is: "If you cannot pull the end of the lever outwards because it has reached deep inside: then, let the weak person lie on their neck and place a small plank under their shoulder in size, and press the assistant's arm downwards until the bone of the lever that is deep inside is lifted up to the surface: and then correct the fracture and make an equal one with your fingers.
The translation is: "If you feel a spasm from the lever and it moves: then, press on it and extract the spasm with ease.
The translation is: "If it is retained in the bone, then make an incision in that place with a tool prepared for this purpose after you have placed the instrument which holds the sifach under the lever. And the tool is made of wood or iron. The translation is: "And this is its shape.
The shell that lacks a hollow.
And let the width of it be according to what you need for it due to the size of the bone, and its smallness. Its length too, if possible for you, according to the operation.
And let it have two ends, as you see: and one end be wide, and the other narrow.
If, however, the fracture of the wound which you have cut when you extracted the splinter of bone is wide and you fear from a hot fistula: then bring together two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the fracture is small or you fear a hot fistula: then fill the wound with rags and pulverized charcoal according to the size of the wound incision.
If, however, a hot fistula occurs: then soak the rag in rose oil, vinegar, wine and place it on top of it.
But a bone setting without wound and without incision is as follows: place plaster made from flour milled with egg white on the bone. And place a soft woolen cloth over it. Then place a sphere under it if you need it. Then take the hemorrhoid, that is, a wooden roll which Saracens hold, which should be very long: and its width should be the size of one palm, or approximately that. Then place a double layer of charcoal on the woolen cloth and plaster. Then take a small awl made from fine wood, whose width is three fingers, and similarly long. Then thrust it through the cloth. Then thrust the cloth with the awl into the place of the hemorrhoid which falls on the fracture and wound. Then place the hemorrhoid on the fracture as it is rolled, and thrust it into the neck of the patient, both above the healthy part and below the injured part: and bring it all over so that the setting holds the fracture tightly: and this is what should not be hidden from you, and entirely, so that the awl does not move away from the fractured bone. It is necessary to observe the sick person every day. Whenever the bandage becomes soft and you see the splinter moving: then adjust it and tighten the bandage.
Then place the sick person's sleep on his back and put a small pill under his pillow during sleep, so that when he awakens, help will be summoned from his side. Therefore, break the collarbone by elevating the shoulder joint.
Or bind his arm to his neck and do not loosen the bandage unless it happens in the place where it is bound due to itching or abscess, for up to twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see his face turning towards it. And add to the constriction, and release it when it is healed and congealed.
The break in the collarbone is bound and supported as much as possible for 20 days; but sometimes it occurs in a lesser degree in some people.
Chapter on the repair of the spatula (thoracic plate).
The spatula rarely breaks, and in its wide place: and it is not broken from it except for its edges.
When the place from which it breaks and breaks in its middle is not known except by touch, then according to its shape prepare its treatment. And bring it back to its natural form by any means of skill that is possible for you.
Then place on it a little dust from the mill with egg white, and soft wool, and put above it a small piece of double-folded cloth. Then place on it a broad needle from thin wood according to the size of the spatula, or slightly larger but not too much.
But if there is a depression under the needle in any part of the spatula, then fill that depression with soft wool until the needle descends to the same level.
Then sew above it with long alum thread in a proper tension and the firmness of the needle until it is not moved from its place.
And examine the sutures every day. Whenever the suture becomes soft, sew it, and if the needle is moved from its place, let it lie weak on its healthy side.
The spatula is restored within twenty days, or within thirty days.
When this number is completed, then dissolve the suture: and you will be safe. For it is made from bones whose fracture is not feared, nor their solution.
But if a piece of bone protrudes and pierces the skin beneath it, then cut above it, and remove it. And do as we said in the treatment of the clavicle fracture by applying a hot poultice, if anything happens from it.
Chapter on the restoration of chest fracture.
Chest sometimes breaks in the middle of itself, and it happens rarely. Its extremities break or are crushed more often due to accidents.
When its middle breaks and it slopes downwards, accompanied by intense pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, possibly vomiting blood, a hollow appears on the fractured bone that is not hidden to the senses, its restoration involves laying weakened on his back with a splint placed between his ribs.
Then press his shoulders and bring together the ribs on both sides or flanks with hands, and carefully carve it into alignment, as much as possible, until its shape returns to that of a bone, as required.
Then place an ointment and woolen cloth on top of it, and place a star-shaped bandage made from thin wood or ivory, or similar materials, wrapped in a fabric when you apply it. Then carefully bind it over the broken bone so that it does not dislodge; and walk around with the bandage following the roundness to the back several times, tightening it properly.
Then consider the binding at every hour and whenever it becomes soft, tighten it; and if the need arises for its dissolution due to itching, corrosion that occurs in the area, pain, or abscess, then hurry, unbind it, remove the ointment, and correct whatever has occurred with the treatment method.
Then reapply the ointment if you see it facing that way; and apply a tightening bandage until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of ribs when they break.
Know that a rib fracture does not occur except in large areas following the back and from the anterior part of its extremities. It does not happen to them (the bones) abrasion, unless because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense during examination with fingers.
And its restoration is made so that it is set in a fracture with the fingers according to possible manner, until it corresponds to the shape as it should be. Then apply ointment, and bind the broken bone with an astragal if necessary.
If the fracture is of the ribs inclined toward the inside: then it happens a strong painful suffering to the weak, and puncture, as the puncture that occurs in him who has pleurisy: because the bone pierces the pleura, and also to him it happens difficulty breathing, and coughing, and vomiting blood many times: and this is difficult cure.
And the ancients have been skilled in this with many skills: and among them are those who say that you should put foods for the weak which generate inflammation and bloating, so that the stomach is inflamed and extended, and pushed the fracture towards the outside.
But we avoid that a cause arises for making a quick pustule, if it does not happen. If it has already happened, then you add (something) to it.
And some of them say: place a bladder on the location, then squeeze with force, and it is more similar to reasoning. However, it is feared that it attracts bladder superfluities to the location, due to the dispositions of weakness.
And some of them say: the location should be covered with wool that is already submerged in hot oil: and fleas are placed between the ribs until it is full: so that the binding is equal when you roll it according to roundness.
Then the sick person is to be treated for pleurisy with food and medicine.
If the disease causes severe constriction and the person cannot bear it, or if we pierce with a lancet and wound the membrane, and we fear for the sick person: then it is necessary that we make an incision over the spot, and expose the broken rib. Then we place on it an instrument which seals the sifac (whose description has been given earlier), and cut the bone with ease, then we cut it itself.
Then we bring together two edges of the wound if it is large with suture: and treat it with plasters until it heals.
If by chance an abscess occurs which is hot, then hurry and apply mustard seeds in rose oil on the spot: and treat the sick person with whatever suits the abscess.
Meanwhile, also rest on the side where he sleeps until it heals.
Section on the restoration of a fracture of the spine and neck.
Fracture sometimes occurs in the bones of the neck, and it rarely happens that they are rubbed [together]; and similarly with the vertebrae of the back as well. When it happens to someone that they are fractured and he wishes to know whether he will be healed or not: then consider [the situation]. For if you see that his hands are already softened, stunned and dead; and he cannot move them, extend them or close them; and when you press them with your fingers and pierce them with a needle, he does not feel it nor feels pain in them: then you will know that they will not heal, and in many cases, it is mortal.
If he moves them and feels compression with his fingers and the prick [of the needle], then you will know that the hump of the bone is sound, and that the weak one will be healed with treatment.
If it happens in the vertebrae of the back like the aforementioned [case], and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not: then consider his feet; then if you see that they are softened and the same thing occurs as in the hands; then when he lies on his back, wind comes out without his will; and when he lies on his stomach, wind comes out without his will; and when he tries to relieve himself, he cannot: then you will know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not labor in his treatment [of the fracture].
But if nothing of that kind happens to him, it is less severe.
And the treatment for his fracture that occurs in this way is to apply a plaster of warm emetics; thus placing oil of rose on the rubbed vertebra, or with pig's bladder soaked in vinegar.
Place it on that place several times a day until the warm emetic subsides; then place one of the strengthening and drying plasters, and bind it tightly over it with a bandage; and instruct the weak one to rest quietly and peacefully. He shall not sleep on the part where he found pain until it is cured.
If it happens during the fracture of a bone called Sathaiatum or something that has already separated from it: then one must remove it by incision on the skin and take it away. Then gather together two lips of the wound if it is large with suture. Then take care of it (the wound) with some ointment until it is cured.
If the last bone called Alhausos breaks and it is at the end of the tail: then one must insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus, and with the other hand one should adjust the broken bone as much as possible, according to the second alignment.
Then place it on (the broken bone) and take it away; and care for the wound with the remedy that has been mentioned before until it is cured.
Chapter on the restoration of anus.
Chapter XI.
Rarely do bones in the anus break. If they do break, the fracture of these bones is not anything but a comminution at their extremities; and they are split lengthwise, and they slope towards the interior; and there occurs pain and weakness in the place, and puncture; and the leg that breaks becomes numb.
And the restoration of it (the anus) is to extend your hand over it until you feel its shape at the breakage.
If the breakage is only at its extremities, then adjust that broken part according to the alignment prepared for you until it resembles its natural shape.
If the breakage is in length and already slopes towards the interior: then make the weak one lie on his stomach until the restoration of that broken part is prepared for you. When you have adjusted it (the broken bone), place an ointment on it; then place a splint made of wood or hide over it, and tie the bandage around it so that you do not fear the displacement of the fracture or the removal of the splint.
And equal the hollows of them with that which fills it until it is grasped by the ligature, according to equality; and command the sick one to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.
If, however, it happens that an abscess is hot: then cease from extending it and its healing until the hot abscess settles; and place on it what he sits upon, as before, then return to its healing; and tie it as necessary.
If, however, it happens that there is a fracture of bone, or it is broken, extract it.
[Section on the healing of fractures] Assistant.
The assistant is that which is between the elbow to the head of a spatula.
If it is broken, then its healing is according to one of two methods.
One is: that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, in this shape, which follows.
And two ligaments shall be tied at both ends.
Then it is suspended from a raised place: and the sick person shall sit on the seat. Then let his broken arm be thrown upon a log until it reaches the handle of that log, where the wound of the log is attached.
Then suspend something heavy above it so that the assistant stretches it towards the lower parts. The physician then presses the fracture with his hands until it returns, as is required.
There is another way, namely, that the sick person lies on his back and his hand is suspended from his neck with a rope. Then order two assistants, one to hold the broken bone with his hands above it; and let the other hold the lower part of it, and each of them should stretch their respective parts.
If you wish for a stronger extension, then tie a rope under the fracture and above it with another; and let each of the two assistants stretch their respective parts to the two sides.
If therefore the fracture is near the end of the humerus, then a rope should be placed under the pulley and another towards the elbow.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow: then a rope should be placed over that place and on the elbow itself.
Then press the fracture easily without effort, until it aligns as required and is applied well; then tie it if no warm abscess occurs.
If, however, a warm abscess occurs, then release the bandage for seven days. Place over it a shred of linen soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess calms down; then tie it; and the method of tying is to apply a plaster over the fracture.
Then place a new cloth wrap over the plaster. Then bend the arm over the support and place your open hand on your shoulder.
Place a cloth and tie the arm to the support so that the arm remains in position of the stars; if it does not prevent you from anything or anything from the broken bone does not move towards you.
If you fear that something may change on you from a broken bone, then use trephines: and it is, that you place the trephine upon the fracture itself which is broader and stronger than the other trephines. Place a trephine of any width equal to the length of the finger for each trephine: and let the length of the trephines be according to the fracture, with an addition of three fingers from all sides.
Then tie a ligature over the trephines as I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is, that your ligature over the fracture site should be tight. And as the fracture extends more, the ligature should be less tight.
If you see the positions of the trephines and the ligature, as we said, at the hour when you restore the limb, then do so: and if you fear a warm abscess, then release the ligature and the trephines until the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the ligature for three days so that itching, swelling, or food may not reach the limb due to the obstruction of the tightening of the ligature. Correct then everything as we said.
If you are confident that nothing will happen from it: then do not loosen the ligature, unless after three days or more.
And let the sick person lie on his back and place his hand on his stomach: and put under him a wool-filled cradle full of wool equally.
And consider at every hour of the night or day, so that the shape of the broken member is not loosened or the ligature softened. Correct then everything with your power.
And place the food of the sick person according to the order we gave, so that the food is subtle at first, until the bone begins to harden: then it is necessary that you increase his food.
In the custom of assistance and the leg, it is to be bound for forty days; then, therefore, it should be loosened, and a bath given, and it should be treated with ointments that correct it.
If the fracture is foul, to be scraped; then do not loosen the bandage and splints from it for fifty days, and until two months.
Chapter on the restoration of the arm fracture.
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the two humeri.
One of them is small; and that is the one following the thumb. And the other is large, and that is the one placed below the small one from the lower part.
Therefore, perhaps only the larger humerus is fractured, or perhaps both are fractured.
When the smaller humerus is fractured above, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the larger humerus is fractured below, its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse if both bones are fractured at the same time.
If the bone that is fractured is the smaller humerus above, then it is suitable for the physician at its restoration, that he places an extension smaller with ease, until it equals itself.
But if the larger humerus is the one that is fractured; then it is necessary that he places a stronger extension very much.
And it is necessary that he places the hand shape at its restoration, and its extension extended above the pulley. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers; and let the inferior joint be lower than all the fingers or the others; and let the weak one sitting squarely above itself, and let the pulley be before it, or directly in front of it, in height, so that the weak one does not fall into labor.
Then, the servant extends the arm from its lower part, either with his hand, or with a rope. And another servant stretches it likewise above.
Then the physician sets the bone, so that he can restore it to its best possible shape.
If there are fragments in a broken bone, then make an effort to put each fragment back into its place by your own strength.
If it appears that a fragment is separated and pierces the skin, and there is no hope for restoration: then seal over it, and remove it according to the method we have mentioned earlier.
If there is a fracture with a wound, I have already written a separate chapter about this, so take care of it from there.
If a hot abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then prepare a linen cloth with beeswax made from rose oil, and white wax, of a medium thickness between thick and thin: and bind the cloth over it tightly using a fine thread, until the abscess subsides: then remove the beeswax, and apply a prepared plaster made from milled powder with egg white. Then place the awls, and let the awl placed over the fracture be slightly wider and stronger.
And know that the number of awls for an arm is six in various arrangements: whether it be a fracture in one hole, or in two holes at the same time.
Then place your stronger and more powerful splint over the location of the fracture, and place a splint that is slightly longer on the upper part or lower part of the fracture, or place a softer splint for it slightly, according to what was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths that are wound around the fracture be soft and damp; they should not be hard or rough. And let the thread with which it [the wound] is to be tied be made from flax, of a medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have said.
Consider the member (limb) and the ligament after days. If something occurs that requires correction, such as itching of the member (limb): then it is necessary to anoint the limb with warm embrocation until the itch subsides, and leave the limb unbound until it has subsided, and only then tighten again.
If the ligature has already been softened and the bone removed and similar things have happened: then you should correct it with your skill, and consider again.
If nutrition is prevented from reaching the member due to an excess of ligature, then it is necessary to soften it a little and leave it for some days until it reaches its nourishment, and then tighten it again.
But if nothing of the kind happens to the sick man which we have said, then it is not necessary to undo (loosen) it unless after twenty days or about that time.
Then the hand of the sick man is to be suspended to his neck. And let his neck be equal (straight), and keep it firmly fixed against violent movements. Make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture will heal in thirty or forty days, and perhaps it may heal within twenty-eight days. Everything depends on the dispositions of the temperaments (humors) and the dispositions of one's abilities.
Chapter on the restoration of fractures: Hand.
Know that a scissor's hand and the fingers are seldom fractured. It does not happen to him unless he is rubbed frequently.
When the foot is fractured or rubbed, then the sick man should sit on a square seat and a seat be provided for him in accordance with his height. Then place his hand upon it extended.
The assistant shall then extend the broken bones and the physician shall set them, until they join together with good union.
Then it is necessary that he places a plaster and a woolen dressing, if there does not occur a warm abscess. Then place a probe (astella) on top according to the size of the place, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
If the fracture is around the lower part, about the heel of the foot, then make a splint similar to a ball from cloth; and command the patient to bend upon it with his broken foot; then bind it with a long cloth.
And let the probe (astella) be made of calfskin, with softness, to apply it to the skin of the sole; and bind it as necessary.
If the fracture is at the outer side, then it is necessary that you place a probe (astella) on top and another probe from below on the foot; and let the hand be open and straight. Then apply the splint as the hand is rolled; extend it between the fingers with a lacing.
If there occurs a fracture in any knuckle of the finger, if it is the thumb, then set it as necessary. Then bind it with the palm; if there are any, place a straight probe, smaller than the length of the fracture, so that it may be elevated and not moved.
If the fracture is in the remaining fingers, such as the middle one, index finger, ring finger or little finger, then set it and bind it with a healthy finger that follows it; or all of them are bound according to continuity; this is better. Or place a smaller probe on top as we said in the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the disposition of warm abscesses; and oppose it with what is necessary, when something occurs from that, according to its narrative.
On the restoration of a hip fracture.
The thighbone (Femur) is often broken and exposed to the senses because it turns towards the inner and posterior parts.
And its restoration is done in such a way that a ligament is tightened above the fracture, and another ligament below the fracture. The patient is then laid supine on his face.
Then, all the limbs are to be extended towards their respective parts according to equality; and this, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If, however, the fracture is near the root of the hip, then let there be a ligament towards the neck part so that the extension falls upwards; and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then let there be a ligament near the knee so that the extension falls downwards.
Then the physician equalizes the bone with both hands until he reduces it to its original shape; and the bone is joined by a good union.
Then it is necessary that you apply a plaster and a bandage if there is no abscess in the limb. If an abscess occurs in it: then let it be left for some days until the abscess subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be as follows. It is necessary to wind a hard material, that is a bandage, over the fracture; and double it twice or thrice; and there remains an excess of it. Then wind the leg until the heel reaches the root of the foot.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee towards the lower parts; and the ends of the thread come from the upper parts of the two limbs.\] Then wind over the leg and hip the excess from the bandage.
Then place a star (awl) over the thigh at the site of the fracture and place one star (awl) over the leg's bone.
Then fill in the gaps between thigh and shin with soft cloth, so that it fits tightly (to hold the fractured bones together).
Then begin with a firm ligature from the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four wraps. And as you extend the ligature away from the site of the fracture, let your ligature be less tight and softer, and looser.
Then direct the threads at both ends, which you inserted between thigh and shin. Tie together with each end three auls (awls) that are above (the area). Then go with both ends of the thread to the lower parts until you reach the ankle of the foot. And tie together also the ends of the awls with each end, so that the ligature is not dislocated from its place.
Then release the ligature when necessary, so that it does not cause rot (gangrene), boil (abscess), swelling or similar to the member. If something happens with it. Therefore approach with the solution of it (the affected area) and correct whatever has happened there entirely, as we have said many times.
If the splinter is in the bone that pierces it (the flesh): then it is necessary to equalize it (remove the splinter), if it is possible for you. And if not, plug over it and remove it; take care of the one who preceded it (the surgeon) in memory until it heals.
And sometimes this thigh fracture is ligated beyond what the auls (awls) are added, as we said in help for the arm and leg.
However, in repairing this fracture, it does not happen that a lame limp occurs. If it (the limb) is only restored, provided that another leg is not applied to it, then it is necessary that the one to whom it belongs will always limp.
Know that the hip is bound for fifty days, or a little more, or a little less; all this depends on the diversity of temperaments and other conditions.
Chapter on the restoration of the fracture of the knee joint.
Know that the knee joint rarely suffers a fracture but often suffers wear and tear.
But if it does suffer a fracture, then it is not other than a split or a hole in one of its parts. And it is with an ulcer and without an ulcer. It stands on the whole thing with feeling.
The restoration of it is thus that the broken parts are brought together with the fingers until they meet and are joined according to what is possible by means of matching and ease, and construction.
Then place a plaster made of oatmeal flour or milled grain with egg white on it; and place a round stopper over it if needed; then bind it above with a suitable bandage.
Then consider all the conditions that we have mentioned in other fractures; such as a hot abscess and similar things; so that you counter any occurrence with what is appropriate to it until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of a leg fracture.
Know that there are two bones in the leg, one of which is large and called the shinbone (Crus); and the other is slender and called the anklebone (Focile).
And it happens that in the case of the leg bones, as with the bones of the arm, fractures occur; and for this reason their restoration is made equally, and the operation is one and the same.
If two bones are broken together, the leg is turned to all parts.
If a bone is broken more subtly, the leg is turned towards the anterior part.
If a bone is broken coarsely, you will find it below; and it is from those that do not deceive you.
Then administer extension, equality, and ligature of the stars according to that equally.
However, if there is a foul fracture of the leg with many seithagi, it should have less extension and be softened more by your application.
And in the leg there is something more than in the arm in operation; and it is that when you tie the stars, and complete your entire work, then take two bands from pine wood, which are used in the making of solariums placed under tables; and they are made from the spatulas of the palm; and choose from them those with small thickness and not too small; and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee to below.
Then fold over each cloth twice, according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side and another part on the other; and they should be from the knee to below the foot.
Then bind two bands in three places, from the two extremities and middle. For when binding is forbidden, the leg inclines to the right and left, and remains in a good stance.
And indeed a cradle made of wood should be applied according to the length of the leg, and the leg should be placed into it so that it is restrained from movement.
And certainly it must be done in a fracture when there is an ulcer in it properly.
Then consider the leg every day, and strive with it to the utmost from apostemate, or inflation, or any others. If therefore something happens from those [things], then oppose it with what is necessary, until it heals, if God wills it.
On the Fracture of Bones in the Foot and Fingers.
Indeed, it does not happen that the calcaneum is broken entirely.
The bones of the foot indeed sometimes suffer a break, and it happens less often with the fingers; they do not break except by repeated impact in several positions.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and you see that the bone rises above itself, then lay the injured foot on the ground prepared like one walking.
Then stand you there, and place your foot upon that which is raised by those bones; afterwards press, or trample it; and hold it even, until it returns to its places.
Then place ointment and wax upon it; and place a small table underneath the foot with two flat heads.
Then bind it with a bandage suitable for the foot when you have wrapped it with linen and other things needed.
When three or four days have passed since then, loosen the bandage. For you will find the bones evened out if they are broken or displaced. Therefore the operation is as you see it.
If fingers are broken, then restore them and even them as I have told you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place a star-shaped splint on your finger according to the length of the finger, and it should be wider by a little; then place under the foot the table I have told you about, and bind it with a suitable bandage.
If what breaks is two or more bones, then place a star-shaped splint over the entire finger wrapped in linen; bind the table under the foot; and let the table stand on one side of the foot outside the waist to hold it firmly with good support.
It is appropriate for you to remember that you should consider all the things I told you about fractures from the accidents mentioned previously; and to apply each of these accidents with what is suitable.
On the fracture of a woman's jaw, and the bone of the breastplate, and the man's phallus.
When a woman's jaw is fractured, then make her sit upright. Then lean her towards the back of that side a little, and hold it in place.
Then fill her jaw with linen cloth until it is full; and make a ball of it within the jaw.
After that, strike the woman on the back, and rub the fracture gradually. For this reason, the linen cloth comes out until it forms a ball before the jaw opening, and the broken bone returns to its place.
Then place some small stones on her back. Whenever she wishes to drink, let her remove the linen cloth easily, then drink; and reduce it according to how you first inserted it; then return to the small stones first.
Do this for seven days or approximately, because the bone will heal itself.
And if you wish, take the bladder of an ox and tie a reed tube around its opening, and insert the entire bladder into her jaw. Then blow through the tube with force until the bladder inflates within the jaw, because the fracture will return to its place.
Then it is filled with linen cloth and remains for some days as we have said, until it heals.
When the breastplate bone of a man or woman is fractured, then administer the same treatment as we have said for the bone of Ancha.
And it is not concealed straight [bone] in such fractures which scarcely touch [it], especially when there is something of study or use involved.
Understand my book well, for the fracture itself signifies to you in many dispositions the way of the straight [bone] in its restoration and its constriction; therefore understand it.
When the penis of a man is broken, take the neck of a goose and insert the rod into it. Then place on top of it a covering made from cloth, and wrap it up, and let it be for three days or about that, and it will heal if God wills it.
Chapter on the restoration of bone fractures when there is a wound.
It is suitable for him who has a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially if it is large like the hip bone or humerus, to hasten and call the blood-letter immediately; if the conditions of phlebotomy are testified to you as we have previously mentioned.
If the wound exudes blood, then it is necessary for you to hasten to its excision, so that you powder over it a mixture of chalk and lime; if no other [substance] is present to you.
Then begin the restoration of the fracture on that same day; and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
If a hot abscess occurs, then wait for the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess settles down. And do not approach him on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause him harm.
If the broken bone is protruding above the skin exposed, then it is necessary to compress it and bring it back to its place with your hands easily and with little extension.
If however the extension is not prepared, and the same is equal to your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And is an instrument that is made of iron, the length of which is the amount of seven or eight fingers, and its width according to the size of the wound. And therefore it is necessary for the physician to receive three or four according to the quantity that he needs for this in all types of fractures.
And let it be round; and let there be a small thickness inside it so that it does not double up against the instrument during the operation within an hour; and let it have sharp ends with an edge on its ends. And the top of it should be thick from the middle to the bottom.
This is its shape.
In this operation, the sharp end should be placed on the protruding bone's edge; and push it with one blow until the bone returns and becomes equal to some degree.
Try then to align the fracture's ends facing each other.
If the ends of the fracture are subtle and do not accept the instrument well, then it is necessary to cut the bone's edge until the instrument can grasp it.
But if you cannot reduce them with the instrument as we have said completely, then cut it with the saw that suits it from the incision tools that we have mentioned; or cut it with a pair of scissors in any way possible for you.
Then file away what remains on the bone from roughness and small layers.
When the bone is reduced, and after the reduction of it finds a weak point causing intense pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
Make it. Thou conferrest great aid to the sick one, when thou complete the restoration that thou dost make of the bone.
Then immerse the cloth in stiptic wine, black. And indeed it is appropriate in summer. And do not place over the wound black things, nor anything that contains oil: so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption at the wound.
Then administer the astella in the hour of your completion of the bone restoration. And leave the detected wound: so that you cut with the forceps a hole in the swellings according to the size of the wound.
Take care to avoid at all costs that you bind the wound during the fracture. For many times have foolish doctors done this: and they caused death or corruption, or gangrene, that is, pus, upon the sick. Let your binding be soft, gentle, diverse binding from other fractures.
If the wound is bad or the wound is large and you fear certain evil accidents that we have mentioned, and you find pain suspended at the place: then it is not necessary that you place astella over it. And make swellings from stiff cloth in place of astella and bind it with them.
But when it is one day or two days and you see that the wound begins to produce pus: then take away from above the cloth that you placed over it with wine. Then administer linen and ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds: such as tetrapharmacon ointment and similar ones.
It is appropriate for you that you loosen the binding. Consider the wound every day at morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed.
It is necessary that the limb should be prepared in such a way that pus runs out of it easily towards the lower parts.
If several days pass without the wound healing and the pus is not expelled from it, then you will know that there are small bones there. Therefore, one should examine the wound with a probe. As many of these small bones as are separated, remove them and extract them. And those which are not separated and pierce the limb and cause pain, try to cut them and remove them in any way possible for you.
If there occurs a tumor or ulcer on the wound, that is to say, if it is an abscess or another form of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary to apply to each of these with what is suitable for its cure, which was described in its chapter.
And in the discussion from which my speech is required when a bone breaks and protrudes on the limb, such as the hip or the arm, and similar large bones, it is not to be presumed that one can attract it, for often death occurs from this; rather leave it alone until it has rotted away.
Perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days.
Therefore, treat the wound if you see fit; otherwise, leave it alone.
Chapter on the treatment of swelling in a fracture.
Often this swelling occurs in the healing of a fracture. Most often it is near the joints; and it corrupts the shape of the limb. And perhaps it prevents the limb from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, if the swelling is new, administer medications that have astringent properties, such as aloes, olibanum, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia and similar remedies.
Thus, take some or all of them, and suture them with sticky wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar; and place them on the knot, and tighten them well on the good constriction itself.
And leave the suture, do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it and make another one until the knot is removed.
Or suture it well on the lead sheet. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from the limbs.
If the knot has already turned to stone and been hardened, and urgently calls for its removal: then make an incision above it on the superior part, and cut off the excess protruding; or grind it with certain rasps until it is removed; and care for it until it heals.
\paragraph{On the treatment of when the limb is restored, and remains subtle after that, not according to its own nature.}
When a bone fracture is restored and the limb remains subtle and weak after that, it should not be made unless for many reasons. One of the reasons is the excessive solution and tying of the ligament not as required; or due to the excess tightness of the ligaments until it prevents nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to the excessive embrocation at an inappropriate time; or due to the scarcity of blood in the body of the sick and its weakness.
And the treatment of this is, to feed the sick, and make his body soft until the blood multiplies in him. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and happiness over him.
Then place pitch on the limb: so that the pitch attracts much nourishment to it. Apply embrocation to it with warm water until the nourishment runs, and return it to its natural shape.
On the cure of fractured bones when they are restored twistedly.
When a restored member, having been cured of its deformity and the protrusion of a fractured bone or nodule, becomes disfigured due to such condition; yet, it does not prohibit the natural operation of the limb; then, it is not necessary that you heed the speech of one who proposes breaking the limb anew.
And indeed there have been many foolish physicians and restorers, who did this in our land.
And this operation is highly condemnable, leading to death or great fear, indeed it should be feared as lethal.
However, if the limping and nodulation are recent; then it is necessary to immerse [the affected area] in warm water, into which have been boiled softening herbs such as elder leaves, its root, sweet clover, and similar plants. And make for it a plaster with a softening plaster like well-made dyachilon.
Or take the mucilage from elder root, pound it with chicken fat or sesame oil; and apply it as a plaster.
Or take the ripe figs, pulverize them with dove droppings and similar remedies that reduce hardening.
And sometimes the nodule dissolves through persistent, old-fashioned, and gentle rubbing, which is done with moist hands. And exercise the limb fully in all directions daily.
If the deformity has already occurred, and it has become strong, and has turned into a stone, and there is necessity for treatment with iron; then it is necessary to cut off its upper part, and to dissolve the continuation of the bone, and to incise what protrudes from the nodule or bone with subtle chisels; and apply ease in this with diligence and care.
On Speech in Dislocations.
Dislocation is the displacement of some joints from their place. Why it should be prevented from moving and becomes disfigured in shape (or appearance) of the member. And causes falling upon the weak pain, and severe injuries.
When therefore dislocation occurs to someone, then it is necessary to hasten for its restoration: nor should one delay it at all.
For if delayed, the location will be lost, and perhaps with it the reduction of dislocation.
Therefore, it should not be moved or extended during its relocation hour (or time of resetting). For because it often causes falling into a spasm, and painful injuries.
But when this happens, then it is necessary that you hasten to the bloodletting of the weak. Then it should be left until the abscess subsides (or becomes calm).
Then let the limb be wrapped with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced gently.
And all the limbs should be treated together, with that one whose recollection comes back to its place (or position).
I myself have already ordered the chapters on dislocations, even according to what precedes in fracture, from the upper part of the body down to the lower part.
Chapter on care for lower jaw dislocation.
The two lower jaws are seldom dislocated.
And dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways. Or they are removed from their places slightly and softened slightly (or temporarily).\] Et aut dislocatur una ex eis, altera autem restat in situ suo. The dislocation is to be reduced by integration, completely, until it softens towards the chest, until the saliva of the weak runs and it cannot hold her, nor can it close its own mouth, and his tongue is rolled up with speech.
When the dislocation is slight, then, by itself, it returns in many ways with a little effort.
If the dislocation is complete and whole, then it must be quickly administered the reduction of it and should not delay greatly; and there is to be one who holds the head of the weak, and the physician inserts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocated jawbone if the dislocation is from one side. Or, he inserts two thumbs at once, if the dislocation is from both sides. And the remaining fingers of his hands are to be outside, with which it is equally held.
And order the weak one to cleanse his jawbones and purify them for eating in every respect. And the physician presses and pushes the jawbone until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jawbones are dislocated at once: then administer vaporization with hot water and oil until the reduction of both becomes easy; do not delay the reduction of both in any way, as we have said.
When they return and align, and the mouth of the weak one is closed, and they do not become soft: then place over them small pieces of cloth, with beeswax that has been made, and scented oil.
Then it is to be bound gently with soft ligaments.
And the sleep of the weak one is on his back; and his head is standing between two pillows so that it does not move to the right and left; nor should he be forced or compelled to chew something; rather, let his food be soft sorbitio, until when the pains are removed, and the jawbone is loosened: then he can eat what he wants, and it is administered gently.
Do not let him eat or drink, nor speak, at his mouth operation, until the mandible is healed and it is cured.
If the reduction of the two mandibles becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and do not return to their places: then frequently fevers occur, and an abscess continuous; and perhaps the weak stomach dissolves, and perhaps it vomits pure cholema.
When you see that (thing), then know that it is a disaster, and he who has it frequently dies within ten days.
Section on the reduction of dislocation of clavicle, and the extremity of the humerus.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the inside side, because of its connection with the chest. And it is sometimes dislocated towards the outside: and this becomes clear to sensation.
The restoration is that the weak one lies on his back and extends his arms. Then empty the place with your firm grasp, for it will return to its place.
Then place the plaster on it and the little pills, and press it down.
The extremities that follow the elbow do not dislocate except rarely. If it is dislocated on any day: then it must be returned to its place and made equal according to what was said, and what has been prepared for you.
Then place the plaster on it, and pills, and a bandage. And command the weak one, to hold onto tranquility and rest until he is healed.
With this same treatment, the elbow joint is returned when it also separates from its place.
Chapter on the reduction of shoulder dislocation.
Know that the shoulder does not dislocate except in three ways.
One is, it dislocates to the side of touching towards the lower part. The second is, it dislocates towards the chest. And perhaps it is dislocated to the upper part of the shoulder: and that happens rarely.
It does not dislocate towards the back, due to the spine of the scapula. It does not dislocate towards the front, due to nerves.
Most often it dislocates and exits towards the lower side, turned towards the side of touching; especially in those whose flesh is scanty. Because it quickly comes out in them and enters quickly.
In those whose flesh is numerous, there is contrarily its counterpart, namely because it exits with difficulty, and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some people a blow or accident and the humerus is amputated with hot amputation tool and it is believed because of that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, one should test it so as to be certain of its truth and then proceed with its treatment.
A dislocation is recognized when it faces downwards towards the tip of the elbow; and you should distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy one. For you find among them an obvious difference, and in the head of the shoulder you find a hollow, and beneath the tip of the elbow at touch, it seems like an egg; and an invalid cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards: then you find a clear touch and it is not hidden.
This kind of dislocation can be easily reduced when it is recent or if the child is weak.
The reduction of this kind is that the hand should lift itself towards the upper part. Then place your thumbs under the tip of his, and lift the joint with strength to its place; and let the hand lift itself and stretch it upwards. Then put it down below, for it will return quickly by itself.
But if it does not return according to what has been said, and there are many days since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary to bathe the invalid in warm water, and administer an embrocation that softens and soothes, such as if they boil the roots of althea, fenugreek and mellilotus in water, and administer it.
Then, the sick one shall lie on his back: and let there be placed under his navel sphere and wool, which is equal in thickness between softness and tightness.
Then the physician shall place his heel upon the sphere, and lift up the head of the arm with force, and draw the hand of the sick one downwards.
And if you wish, bring him back in this manner: and it is, that you make a man who is taller than the sick one to stand by his side, and insert his arm under the navel of the sick one: and lift up the navel of the sick one towards the upper part, until the sick one is suspended in the air. And another servant shall draw the hand of the sick one to the lower part of his belly. If the sick one is light: then it is necessary that something else be suspended with him to weigh him down; for a dislocation returns immediately.
And another method is also returned: and it is, that a long piece of wood be formed on the ground, whose head is round in shape, like the handcuff of a miller; but not too thick or too thin. Then let there be placed under the sick one, after the head of the wood is placed, soft cloths: and the sick one shall stand according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand shall be stretched out to the lower part from one side, and his body shall be extended from the other side with force: for the union returns to its place with speed.
If the reduction is difficult through all that has been said, then use this remedy: and it is, that you take a piece of wood whose length is the size of two arms, and its width is the size of four fingers, and its thickness is the size of two fingers; and let its head be round to facilitate the entrance into the deep navel, according to this shape.
Then, soft cloths shall be bound over the rounded head, so as not to injure the weak wood.
Then, place under the trembling of the weak one, so that the hand or arm can be extended over the wood until the lower parts; and tie the wood with assistance, and the arm and the end of the hand.
Then, place the arm over the step of the ladder at its width, and extend the hand to the lower parts, and let the remaining body be suspended from the other side. For this reason, join immediately.
When the opening for it is completed in whatever way possible: then it is necessary that you place under the trembling sphere of equal quantity from wool. Then place the prepared plaster from milled powder with olibanum and egg white over the whole shoulder as it is turned upside down.
Then bind under the trembling tie of suitable size; and roll up the bandage over the plaster above; and attach his hand to his neck, and let it not be moved for seven days.
It is necessary that a small amount of food be placed, until the limb is strengthened; since it is quicker for its healing.
Then, place it larger after seven days or five, and let it be shaken with motion. If it is strengthened and does not become soft, then it has been healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times, because of the moisture that happens to it, or for another reason: then it is necessary, to administer cautery on it with three holes, according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
If all this is done and the bandage is loosened after seven days, and the joint does not become strengthened, and the plaster and tie are not placed over it again, and it does not become firm, and falls, and cannot be raised to above: then you will know that the nerves of the neck at the shoulder have been cut or stretched or softened; and you will know that the joint never heals in its place.
Dislocations that occur towards the chest and breast, or are reduced to the rear, are accomplished by pushing and extending with the hands, until it returns, and treatment and restraint are administered in it until it heals.
If pain or sluggishness in the limb occurs after healing, then the weak should use baths often, until the pain is relieved and it returns to its natural state.
Chapter on the treatment of shoulder dislocations.
Know that the union of the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and also returns with difficulty; and indeed it is dislocated in all directions, but especially towards the front or rear.
And the dislocation of this joint will not be hidden from you; since it falls under your sight and touch, according to whatever form it is dislocated. And when you join a dislocated shoulder with a healthy one, the dislocation is revealed clearly to you. For the joint will be hollowed out, and it cannot double the arm, nor touch its own humerus with it.
And it is necessary that you hasten and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a warm abscess occurs.
For if a warm abscess occurs, the reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps it will not heal at all, especially when towards the rear. For of all kinds of dislocations, it is worse in every way, and more painful; and death often accompanies it many times.
And the restoration of this, when it can be reduced, is as follows: extend the hand with two hands; let the arm be spread out, and the hands of the doctor to be above and below the shoulder, and he himself should push the joint with his thumb or the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
If it is a dislocation to the front: then return it so that he separates his hand with his hand until he strikes with the root of his palm the elbow which is dislocated.
If the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then administer a violent and strong traction; and it is such that two attendants stretch the arm; and the two attendants also hold it, so that it is not moved during the traction.
Then the arm is turned to every part when it falls upon his hand, a cloth doubled long or a wide bandage is applied over it.
And when the doctor touches with his hand the joint, he anoints it with oil; so that it is from those which aid in lubricity of the joint with facility. Then push the joint forcefully until it returns.
After its reduction, it is necessary that a plaster be placed on it, containing the stiptic and the application of white wax; and to bind with a suitable ligature. Suspend the arm from the neck of the patient; and leave for some days.
Then loosen it. If the joint is fixed in its place, then loosen the bandage from it, and leave it.
And if you see the joint not bound well, then apply a new plaster, and bandage, and leave it for some days until it is bound. Then loosen it.
If, after the reduction of the joint, there is pain and its position is in motion: then administer humectation in bathing, and subtle friction, and compression, until it is lined, or place over the joint a goat's fat tail, that is, a thick grease. Then bind it and leave it on it day and night. Then remove it, and immerse him in the bath. When therefore it sweats, then rub the junction with moderate rubbing. Then again apply it to the same three times, with the beginning of the bath, until it becomes soft.
And if you wish, place upon it dung of sheep, moist and warmed with butter, and press upon it.
Make that frequently. It becomes soft, and returns to its former state.
Chapter on the cure of dislocation by Al-Zahrawi (Albucasis).
Mahassem's hand is often dislocated, that is, the junction between arm and hand.
The reduction of this dislocation is easy. Contrariwise, other joints. However, it is necessary that swiftness be in the reduction of this dislocation at the hour it occurs, before the place is evacuated; or a hot abscess may occur there.
And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place Mahassem's weak hand on a table and extend the hand of the assistant; and the physician shall place his palm over the prominence of the junction and push it until it returns.
However, it should be considered if the palm has already receded to the abdomen of the hand; then let the weak hand lie on a table during extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then its position should be inside the table, that is, the inner part of the hand should be placed on the table, so that the physician's hand falls upon the prominence of the junction.
If it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then press it with an ointment sitting on a hot abscess, and leave it alone, do not repeat it.
For if it does not tolerate and you cannot perform the reduction of it after the days have passed, nevertheless the joint remains in its crooked state; and it does not harm the weak anything, except that the hand is softened and nothing can be pressed; then you will know that the nerves have been cut or rubbed.
The skill in it is only to tighten with a cautery near its failure. And perhaps that brings nothing additional.
Since Almahassem did not return, then place a plaster on top of him, as we have said. Then it is tightened and released for five days; afterwards it is loosened and released, and exercise the hands.
If its movement is hindered, and something heavy happens to it; then soften it with warm water, and rub it occasionally until it becomes soft.
Chapter on the treatment of finger dislocations.
When a finger is dislocated from any part, or a finger is dislocated to the back of the palm or its ventrum; then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then hold the head of the finger, and suspend it turned towards the side to which it is dislocated, and release it for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it becomes straight on that day itself.
When it is night, bind it according to the aforementioned description; and do not cease to release it during the day; and exercise it with movement; and bind it at night.
Do that for some days until it tightens.
And similarly do the same if the dislocation is towards the palm of the hand; and bind it to that part itself, and perform your first operation on it until it heals.
And similarly do the same when it is dislocated towards other parts.
Chapter on the treatment of spondylous dislocations of the back.
When anyone has a spondylous dislocation of the back or a complete dislocation of the neck, or many spondyles are displaced from their places; then there is no cure for it, because death approaches the sick one.
The sign of it is that the sickness of the person departs without will, and he cannot hold it; and many times some members of his are softened from it, or two legs of his, or two arms of himself, or one of them; or a vertebra is removed from its place.
Many times a removal occurs, which often happens in four parts.
Therefore, what is removed towards the backside is called Gibbositas.
The cure for it is to consider whether the Gibbositas occurs during childhood; then there is no treatment in it, nor healing at all from it.
However, the one that occurs by accident, or blow, or similar things, the ancient ones have already described the methods of treatment in a long discourse. It is unlikely to return when it advances.
I have already departed from that which excuses itself little by its proximity to my intention; and in my exposition of it, I formed the tool for it differently than they showed it and explained it.
Therefore, I say that there is no remedy, nor healing from the Gibbositas that occurs from the front side.
And similarly in the one that occurs on both sides.
And it is not treated from them unless the one that occurs on the back properly, as I say; and it is to be done that the sick person extends his face on a flat surface, almost against the wall; and a wet blanket is spread under him so as not to hurt his chest.
Then place a straight piece of wood fixed in the fireplace on the floor, at the end of the foot; and another piece of wood about his feet at the other end of the foot; and hold the man keep the wood, and it should not be fastened in the fireplace. One assistant holds the other.
Then, stretch over the head of the sick one, and bind a ligament gently but firmly beneath his chin; extend the end of the ligament to the wooden post that is beside his head; and tie it there.
Then stretch another ligament over his ankles, and above his knees, and at the shackles of his legs. Then gather all the ligaments, and tie them to another wooden post that is by his feet.
Then each assistant extends his ligament to the part of the wooden post, and let the two posts not be moved from their places where they are fixed; but they should not be made fast as we said.
And the physician places his hands on the patella (Spondyle) firmly until it returns; or he can place a board over it. Then connect his feet to the board until it returns.
If it does not return through this treatment, then take a board whose length is approximately three arms (about 4.8 feet or 1.5 meters). And drive a hole in the wall as mentioned near the sick one, into which the end of the board enters. Then place the middle part of the board over the patella (Spondyle). And let the physician put his feet on the other end. And bind it well until the patella (Spondyle) is dislocated and returns to its place.
Then, if you want, operate with a drill that is held by your hand; and it will be like driving two wooden posts into the ground at the head of the sick one on the last foot, whose length is an arm (about 1 cubit or 48 cm); and at his head on the last foot, two wooden posts.
And let the length between every post be a palm (about 9 cm); and it is now made that there is a hole where the drill runs through; and let every post be fixed firmly in the ground so that it does not move at all.
And a round stick is introduced: and it is a probe in which the ligament revolves in the two holes of the two sticks.
And at its end there is a hole, in which the stick is fixed, whose length is a palm with that which revolves; and similarly on the other two sticks.
Then tie the ligaments which you have tied in the chest of the sick man to the probe that is at his head; and the ligaments which you have tied in his legs to the probe that is at his feet.
Then stand by each probe the servant who will twist his hand with the linen cloth, with which the probe revolves; and the doctor ties the Spondile, as we said before.
This is the form of the probe that follows.
Then when the Spondile returns and the place is tied, then it is necessary that you put on an ointment of lime with egg white. Then apply a plaster (or lint). Then put on top of the ointment a star-shaped patch from wood, whose width is three fingers or around that. And its length is the amount that covers the humpback (or protrusion), and above the healthy part of the Spondile.
Then it should be tied with the ligament that we said before. And the sick man shall take a subtle nourishment until he is healed.
If something remains as a protrusion in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines along with the use of the tablet that we said before for a long time. And now lead is applied on it (the Spondile).
Sometimes a protrusion occurs at the last Spondyle of the back; and it is thought to be a dislocation, and that bone which is now projecting. It is not appropriate to presume [treatment] with this medicine, for perhaps it will cause death.
Treatise on the Treatment of a Dislocated Shoulder.
Know that the joints of the ankle and shoulder do not occur except by dislocation; nor does what happens to the other joints happen to them through slight displacement and concavity.
Indeed, the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four parts. It is because it is dislocated to the front and back.
It is dislocated indeed more towards the inside; it is dislocated less to the front and back.
The treatment of dislocation towards the inside is: because when you join the weak foot to a healthy one, it is longer; and the knee of the weak one protrudes more than that of the healthy one, and the weak one cannot double his own foot at the groin; and there is a place following the groin which is pressed with something hot, therefore because the head of the hip has already reached there.
The sign of dislocation towards the outside is: that its symptoms are opposite to these symptoms.
The sign of dislocation towards the front is: that it stretches the healthy leg too much; however, it does not double without pain in the knee; and if he tries to walk on it, he cannot do so over it at the front; and he retains his urine, and his groin is pressed, and during walking his heel is stepped on.
The sign of dislocation towards the back is: that it does not stretch the knee, nor can it double before the groin doubles; and his leg is even shorter than the other one; and his groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at its place.
The reduction of this dislocation however is: that you should consider then if the dislocation is old, which has already become chronic with the one having it. Then if you administer the reduction of it and it remains according to its position; then there is no cure at all in that case. Therefore, it is not appropriate to presume him completely.
In the case of a recent dislocation, which belongs to one of the four types of dislocations: then proceed by pressing and stretching [the limb], moving it inward and outward, and shaking it left and right: perhaps it will return, and no further care is needed.
If it does not return by this method, then prepare a strong assistant, and let him stretch the leg from below: either with his hands, or with a strap that is tied above the knee: and another assistant should extend the hand above, so that he introduces his hands under the joints. Then, bind gently with a strap over the root of the pelvis, and hold the end of the other strap.
And the extension should be either from the front part of the groin to the neck region, or from the back to the back region.
The extension of all [limbs] should be uniform until the weak one is raised from the ground with his body and remains hanging.
And this type of extension is a common type among the four types.
If the dislocation returns with what I have said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary for all types to apply what I will say about its treatment.
In the case of its own reduction when the dislocation is toward the inside, it is necessary for the weak person to lie on his healthy side. Then, place a strap over the root of the pelvis, where it is between the head of the pelvis and the area under the groin. Then extend the strap upward from the groin to a higher part of the body, to the neck region.
Then receive another strong assistant with his arms, and reduce the swollen area of the weak pelvis, and stretch it outward by means of a strong extension. Now, it returns to its own place.
This is an easier kind of treatment among the rest, by which this limb is reduced.
If it is excised over you and does not obey you for this kind of treatment at all: then it is necessary that two weak feet are bound together with a strong ligament, gently, on the two heels, and on the two knees; and let the length of each be four digits' width apart from its root; and let the injured leg be extended by more than twice the width of two digits.
Then the injured one is suspended above the head of a pole, which is in the house; and let its length from the ground be two forearms' width.
Then command a strong youth to strap the head of the hip; and suspend it with the injured one, another youth will do so; and another youth will push, strapping the hip with force, for the joining returns to its own place quickly.
In its own reduction, when it is a dislocation towards the outside, it is necessary that the injured one lies on a stool, according to what we have said about having a hump. And bind a bandage around its leg, the injured one's own, and its chest.
Then two poles are placed, one at his feet and another at his head. Then a pole is placed in the middle of the stool, firmly fixed; on which the injured ones are wrapped with wet cloths so as not to injure it; and let there be a pole between its hips, so that it is not pulled downwards during extension.
Then all attendants go to their respective parts, and the doctor equalizes the reduction with his hand.
If it therefore obeys for the reversal, it will be good.
And if not, place it on the table and press it equally, as we said in the case of a hump. The sick person should lie on his healthy side.
When there is a dislocation in front, then it is necessary to quickly extend the sick person's leg. And according to this same narrative on a bed, the doctor should place the palm of his right hand on the sick person's groin. Then bend him with your other hand, and with this bending, place him extended towards the lower parts at the knee joint.
If the dislocation is towards the back: then it is not necessary to extend the sick person towards the lower parts and lift him off the ground. Instead, he should be placed on a hard surface, as is also necessary if his hip joint is dislocated towards the outside, according to what we said about his lying on two hips: namely, on his face and with his legs extended: according to what we said recently.
It is necessary to apply compression with a board also at the place from which the joint departs, when reduction is completed as required.
And the sign of its reduction is not hidden from you: and it is to extend the two legs of the sick person: and when you see them level, and the sick person tightens his leg, and expands himself without support: then you will know that the limb has returned, as required: then join the hip bones, and apply a plaster, and tighten with bandages, that is, a roller: thus, so that the hip joint is not moved to any part: and let the sick person rest quietly for three or four days.
Then loosen the ligament, remove the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them level in position: then you will know that the dislocation is already fixed: so release the sick person to walk.
And if you see something softening: then return, and apply a plaster, and bind it according to your first binding: and leave it for three days.
Then loosen that [part] and make it slow in walking on either side for several days, until it recovers well.
Chapter on Dislocations of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It [the knee] is dislocated externally, internally, and downwards (backward).
And it is not dislocated anteriorly.
The sign of its [the knee's] dislocation is that you instruct the weak to apply their leg to their hip. If it does not stick with the hip: then know, that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the ways of its [the knee's] dislocation is that you make the weak sit upright, so that he can now extend his leg over it and let his back touch his face; and put his foot between your feet.
Then make the [knee's] bones adhere with your hands, and place them straight across the [knee] between your fingers. Then apply both sides of the knee with the palm of your hand firmly. And another servant extends his [the patient's] foot until the knee returns to its place.
The sign of its return is that the leg sticks with the hip gently, not forcefully.
Then bandage [the knee] and let the leg stick with the hip. Then bind it together with a plaster for three or four days. Then loosen it.
And the weak one should not walk for some days until he is healed.
If [the knee] refuses to return, then administer a powerful extension with ligaments, the treatment of which has been described earlier for an ankle, until it returns.
Chapter on the Treatment of Ankle Dislocation.
Heel is sometimes moved with slight removal, and at other times dislocated according to its full extent. Its dislocation is either internal or external.
The sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen, projecting towards the part to which it has been dislocated.
The treatment of its removal is easy; it consists in bringing it back easily with the hands and equalizing it until it returns to its place.
In its dislocation according to its full extent, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright; and let a strong attendant hold him from behind the middle of his back.
Then you hold his foot with your right hand from above and your left hand below the foot of him in the position of the ankle joint.
Then, pull the foot towards you with your right hand. With your left hand press it (the dislocated heel) in two places.
Then stretch it (the foot) with the left and push the front of the foot (ankle) towards the back with the right hand without effort.
Do this twice as we have said.
Then push the front of the foot (ankle) towards the back for the third time and you pull the ankle joint.
If it returns to its place once or twice according to this method, and you see the foot straightened, that is good; if not, then repeat the operation on him, because he will return to his place.
If the reduction of it (the dislocated heel) is prevented for you with him as we have said, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground and set a pillow firmly fixed in the ground so that he falls between his hips; and you should already have wrapped him in cloth so that he does not injure himself.
Then let the attendant take hold of his thigh: afterwards, let another attendant extend the other leg, either with his hands or with a strap that ties around the neck of the foot. Let every attendant extend himself opposite the stretching of his companion: and let the footstool be standing between the two thighs of the weak one, holding him so that his body is not drawn towards the lower parts during the stretching.
Then let the physician adjust [the dislocated part] with his hands, and another attendant hold the sound leg towards the lower parts. For a dislocation returns swiftly.
When the dislocation returns and the health of its return is made known to you: then apply plaster and pitch, and bind it firmly with bandages, and tie the foot with a strap to the sound leg.
And it is necessary that you be careful or afraid of the nerves which are above the heel at the back, so that the bandage is not too tight and injures them.
Then dismiss him for two or three days. If the bandage softens, bind it again; then unbind him on the third or fourth day; and forbid the weak one from walking for forty days. But if he attempts to walk before that period, there will be no assurance that the dislocation will not recur, and it will be damaged, and will not receive healing after that.
If he has a hot abscess: then it is necessary that you administer to its sedation the remedy which was previously mentioned in another place in the cure, and embrocation until it is removed.
[Section on] Dislocation of Fingers of the Foot and Cure.
It is necessary that it be adjusted which has been dislocated with little extension without effort; and this indeed is not difficult, but rather easy.
If the dislocation is in certain nodes of the foot's back: then it is necessary that he makes his foot sit on an equal place with the ground, or on a table: and he stands as if walking.
Then you stand and put your foot over that which rises from those joints. Then press it with your foot until it comes back, and you see that it is equal, and no longer appears to protrude from its place.
Then put a board under the foot's belly which can hold the entire foot, having two legs. Then bind it with a suitable bandage for three days. Then unbind it and let him rest from walking for many days, until it is bound and secured against relapse.
Chapter on the types of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When something happens to it, and you attempt its cure and restoration, death often occurs multiple times; therefore, one should not presume to treat this type of condition without being wise in the art of long practice, merciful, pious, patient, cautious, not presumptuous, and using only cold medicines at first: and let the sick man be left to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for salvation from impending destruction with the softening of the sickness, and where something appears to indicate hope. Try its reduction immediately at the beginning, before a hot abscess occurs.
If the limb then returns as we desire, then administer a regime that checks an abscess; and heal the wound with that which is suitable for it from dry ointments.
If the dislocation is with a fracture and there are separated splinters in the bone of the shaft, then try to remove them, and make in that which was said for simple diseases from the place where they preceded.
And be careful according to your virtue, and guard yourself from entering the path of fear: according to what my prediction preceded for you.
That is better for you with your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more safe for your body among them at your time.
