After I completed the book for you, O Sons, which is the last one regarding knowledge in medicine with its supplement, and I have reached the end of it through explanations of the same and the declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise, which is part of surgery, namely, chirurgery with my hand.
Since operation with hand is laid low in our region and at our time entirely deprived of it: perhaps the knowledge of it has perished, and its trace is lost; and only small descriptions of it remain in old books, which have been altered by hands; and error and hesitation occur until the intentions are closed and the force is weakened: It seemed to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and that I should come with forms of iron tools of Cauterium, and the rest of the instruments of work; when it is done by addition to the declarations and from the necessity of its use.
The reason why a good artisan of it is not found with his hand at this time, is because the art of medicine is long, and the author must be trained in knowledge of anatomy before that, which Galen narrated, until he knows the means of the members, and their shapes, and their union and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, and their number, and their movement, and the pulse vessels, and quiet ones, and their exits; and the locations of their origins.
And for that reason, Hippocrates said that name with name is much, and with work it is little, and especially in the art of hand.
We have already said about him at the beginning of this book.
Because he who is not knowing what we have said about anatomy, is already in danger of falling into error, in which men are killed: just as I have seen many of those who form themselves from this science and boast about it without knowledge, and without experiment.
Because I have seen a foolish surgeon remove an abscess on a woman's neck and cut some arteries in the neck: therefore, blood flowed from the woman until she died in his hands.
And I have seen another surgeon who presumed to extract a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large. Therefore he came to him, and extracted it with a piece of the bladder. Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I was already called to extract it; and I saw from the size of the stone and the weakness of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another surgeon who was receiving a fee from one of our land's dukes on account of his medicine; and it happened to a black eunuch who was with him, that he suffered a fracture near the heel: and the surgeon, in his ignorance, bound up the fracture over an ulcer with plasters and needles, and strong bands, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he closed it according to his negligence. Afterwards he released him for some days and ordered him not to loosen the bandage; and he stood thus until an abscess formed on his leg, and his foot, and it came to his ruin.
Therefore I was called to him; and I rushed to unbind the bandage; and calm came upon him, and he was relieved of his pain.
However, the corruption had already been confirmed in the member; and I could not stop it.
Stop the corruption from walking through the limb, until it dies.
And I saw another physician who pierced a cancerous boil; and it became an ulcer until the malignancy of it was exposed with its lord.
Because when it is a pure cancer from black bile, then it is not necessary to reach it with iron altogether, unless it is in a limb that can endure, so that the whole of it may be cut off.
And because of that (the saying) "O Sons," it is necessary for you to know that the operation is divided into two divisions; namely, the operation associated with safety; and the operation, with which there is danger in many situations.
And I have already aroused myself in every place of this book where the operation comes where there is fear and dread.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be careful not to divide it and to leave it alone; so that fools do not find a way to speak about it and to dishonor it.
Therefore, receive the measure with diligence and protection; and your weak ones with ease and firmness; and use a better way leading by God's grace to salvation and praiseworthy succession; and leave behind difficult diseases; and rid yourselves of that which causes you fear, so that hesitation in faith and comfort may not enter upon you.
For it remains more to your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your rewards.
Galenus has already said in some of his warnings. Do not treat the evil disease; do not be called an evil doctor.
Now, however, I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
Chapter One.
On Cautery with fire and with sharp medicine, this subject is arranged from head to foot, and the forms of instruments and tools for cautery; and all that is necessary for the operation. ¶
Chapter second.
On incision and perforation, bloodletting and ventoses, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows and similar things: and the whole chapter, arranged in the forms of instruments. ¶
Chapter third.
On restoration, dislocation, treatment of twisting and similar conditions: the chapter arranged from head to foot, and in the forms of instruments.
Before I remember the operation with him, it is necessary to say the quality of his remedies and his harms, and in what composition they are displayed.
Therefore, the discourse on the quality of the Cautery remedy and its harm is lengthy, subtle, scientific, and a hidden secret.
Also, a multitude of wise men spoke about it and disagreed on it; for myself, I find their words sufficient, fearing lengthy debate.
Therefore, I say that the Cautery is applied universally to every composition, whether with matter or without it; except for two compositions, which are the hot composition without matter and the dry composition without matter.
However, in the hot and dry compositions with matter, they disagreed. Some said that the cautery is beneficial in it. Others said that the cautery is not suitable for an illness that is caused by heat and dryness; because fire is hot, it is inappropriate to heal from a hot and dry illness with fire and cold.
And the one who says contrary to that said: by means of cautery, a remedy is made for all hot and dry illnesses that occur in human bodies; because when you apply heat to a human body, you find it cold.
And I myself say by his words: because from experience, he has often demonstrated that to me.
Nevertheless, it is not necessary for him to come on that, unless he has been proven and trained in the chapter of Cauterii exercise at the end, and knows the differences in human compositions, and the dispositions of illnesses within themselves, and their causes and manifestations, and the periods of those illnesses.
From the remaining temperaments there is no fear for you; and especially concerning cold and moist illnesses. For, indeed, all physicians have agreed upon them (the cauteries); and they have not disagreed about the benefit when using cautery on these.
And know, my children, that through the secret of curing with cautery and fire, as well as its goodness upon the cautery with medicine burning, because fire is simple, whose action does not reach any other part than the one being cauterized; and it harms no other connected member except in a slight degree.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that which is extended from members; and perhaps it causes difficulty in healing the member, and perhaps it kills.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and goodness, does not do this unless it is excessive.
But we have come to know this through experience, because of the length of service and study with art, and because of its steadfastness on truth; and therefore I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not forbidden to this book of mine, I would tell you the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies in expelling diseases, which was demonstrated by the philosophical discourse, which would sharpen your minds.
And know, my children, that they themselves disagree concerning the time when cautery is to be made, and place better the time with truth.
And I say that cautery is fitting at all times; therefore, any harm resulting from time is submerged in the benefit which attracts it when cautery is applied. And especially if cautery is for pains from necessary strong, speedy pains which cannot tolerate delay; therefore it is feared that a greater evil may occur than slight harm caused by time.
And let not that thought occur to your minds, my sons, that they do not consider, except for the common people and foolish physicians, that there is no return always in the ailment which is cured by cautery; and they place this as a consequence, but matters are not thus as they think: therefore because cauterization is not, except in place of medicine, which changes complexion, and expels humidities which are the causes, wherefore pains occur.
Nevertheless, cauterization is superfluous over medicine due to the swiftness of its health, and the power of its operation, and the violence of its dominion; and it is possible that the ailment returns at some hour of time according to the complexion of the sick, and the location of his ailment, and the strength of it; and what has been prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluidities in him; and what reaches him in acquisition from foods and similar things due to causes, unless there is an ailment where cauterization is administered.
A subtle ailment in a member of few superfluidities and humidities, such as cauterization of the tooth, due to pain, and similar things, it is possible that that pain will not return in him. But this happens in few cases.
Indeed, the speech of the common people again, that cauterization is the last medicine, is a correct statement; not regarding what they intend in it; for they believe that there is no cure which confers with medicine, nor with anything after the disappearance of cauterization.
But the matter is opposite to that which they intend regarding that cauterization is the last medicine; it is not so unless when we administer methods of cure for some ailment, and those do not confer with the medicine; then at the end of the matter we apply cauterization, and it confers; hence arises the notion that cauterization is the last medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron; and they did not say this unless on account of the equality of gold and its nobility; and they said that it does not produce pus at the site of the cauterization. That is not absolutely true; for I have already proven it, and I found that this does not happen in certain bodies without others.
And cautery with it (gold) is good, and better than with iron, as they said. Nevertheless, when you put fire to the cautery from gold in fire, it is not made clear to you at what degree of heat it burns according to your will, because of the redness of gold; and when it approaches towards it (the gold), cold comes forth, and if you add more heating, it melts in the fire, and it turns into leaves.
Therefore, the craftsman falls into a fixation with it (gold); and for that reason, we use cautery with iron more quickly and closer at hand, because of its straightness in operation.
And I myself have already arranged this Chapter on Cautery, according to chapters; and I have arranged it from head to foot, so that the seeker may find what he wants in it.
Chapter II:
Here, the cauterization is applied for the mastery over humidity and coldness on the brain: which are two causes of soda (seizures), and of the abundance of fluid flow from the head to the parts of eyes and ears, and the abundance of sleep, and tooth pain, and throat pain: and universally every sickness that happens due to coldness, such as paralysis, sodae (a specific condition), epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar conditions due to sicknesses.
The method of cauterization is to instruct the sick person: that it should be evacuated first with a solution of medicine cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to the strength and age of the sick person and his custom.
Then command him (the sick person) to scrape his head with a potsherd. Then make him sit facing you, so that he has placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that place with an unburnt (charred) spot.
Then burn the cautery in oil: this is its form.
Then place it (the cautery) on the marked and unburnt spot, while you press it gently with your hand and turn it around. Then lift your hand quickly, and look at the place.
If you see that the quantity of skull or the quantity of pus is exposed, then lift your hand. And if not, press your hand with the iron itself, or with another tool if it becomes cold: until the bones I told you appear.
Then take something from salt, dissolve it in water, and immerse the cloth in it, and place it on the spot: and leave it for three days.
Then place upon him a cloth soaked in butter, and let it remain over the place until the eschar (scab or dry crust) is consumed by fire. Then treat it with the ointment called tetrapharmacon, until it heals.
As they say, the more an open wound remains, the more it discharges pus; therefore, it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the skin should be cauterized to the bone; and hold the cautery until something of the thickness of the bone is burned.
Then file away the burnt part from the bone, then treat it.
And others say that when you reach the bone with the cautery, an impression should be made in it as deep as a nail head, so that the bone falls out, forming a cavity like a cork: or an instrument that women use filled with the small alphabet (poultice): and they think that the vapors of the head are exhaled from this place, and leave the open wound for a long time.
Then treat it until it solidifies.
For me, these two types of cautery do not seem to be suitable for anyone except in certain men, according to the way of fear (fearful people).
And leave it alone, in my opinion, it is better with his own health.
For the head weakens from the resolution of its own continuity (natural state), as we have witnessed in other members: and especially when the head of a sick person is naturally weak: and the first species of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use it; therefore, operate with it for safety.
Head (chapter).
When there is a chronic pain throughout the head, and it persists in a weak person and uses heat-producing agents (herbs, hot baths, etc.), massaging the head, applying oils and plasters. And particularly if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, as I have said, and nothing is added to it from those [others]: then consider. If the head of the sick person is strong by nature and not weak, and finds violent coldness: then cauterize it with another cautery slightly. Then cauterize it over all the horn of its head with another cautery, so that the skin is not penetrated, and a quantity of bone, as I have said, is exposed. And cauterize it with one cautery on the back of its head, in a place called "the vase", and it is the place where the vent is placed; and lift your cloth (matum) in this and do not expose the bone. For the sick one finds intense pain because of that pain, and different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
And I will say that this Cautery is in its place: and it must be a cautery with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of its head more subtlely with a cautery with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur in a part of the head or extends to the eye, and the head is weakened with purifying medicines, and further treatment, as I have said in the divisions of diseases, does not help: then cauterization in this case is done according to two methods: either cauterization with hot medicine burning, or with iron.
The cautery with hot medicine burning is, that you take one tooth from an allium (onion or garlic), and grind it up, and cut off the ends from both sides. Then cut the painful spot in time with a broad lancet, until there is a place under the skin where the tooth can be captured.
Insert it there under the skin until it is hidden; then bind it above with a suitable plaster and leave it for fifteen hours, then dissolve it, and extract the onion, and leave it untouched for two or three days: afterwards place a warm compress over it submerged in butter, until the spot makes pus; then care for it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do this with certain burning medications, which I wrote about in the twelfth treatise, on the Meidicines that Burn.
However, cauterization of it with iron is as follows. The form of the fire cautery is as follows.
And it is called "Clavilis" because the shape of its head is like that of a nail, in which there is some hardness, and in the middle of it there is a small projection.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand; and you rotate the iron slowly with speed: and let the quantity to be burnt be of the thickness of the skin, as its half. And raise your hand so that not the artery below is burned and let blood flow out.
Then immerse the compress in water and salt, place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then put the compress with butter; afterwards care for it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemicania with the tip of a second-degree cautery knife. Avoid cutting the artery in this hemicania, not an old one specifically.
§ On the method of cauterizing in an old hemicania.
When you treat a hemicrania, with what we said in the preceding cure, and what we said in the divisions of illnesses, and the treatment does not help: and if you see from the illness that what we said about the first cauterization with medicine or with cauterization with fire is insufficient, then it is necessary to heat the cauterium with iron until it turns white after marking the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger or similar: and place one hand in its place, and press it until you cut through the artery, and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary that you avoid burning the jaw which moves during chewing, so as not to burn the side or nerve which moves it, from where a spasm may occur.
And be careful of the guard and caution for the flow of blood from the artery that was cut. For there is fear in its cutting and especially for him who does not know what he is doing or is not diligent, experienced: and he should first abandon the operation.
And I shall come with a reminder of the management of blood flowing from the cut artery according to its own manner, and at the place of this book.
If you see from the illness that this cauterization is insufficient and you see the body of the weak person bearing the cauterization in the middle of the head as we have narrated, then treat a wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cauterization as we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery with a cauterizer having two blades. For this cauterization is better and more helpful.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in pain of the ear.
When cold pain occurs in the ear and it is treated with solutions, and the rest of the treatment as we said in division, and yet the pain does not subside, then cautery by fire: and this is called a puncture, whose shape is as follows.
Then, after the cautery, make a puncture around the entire ear as it revolves; or around both if pain is on both sides. And extend yourself slightly with the cautery from the root of the ear afterwards, after marking the places with pitch; and let the size of the cautery be ten punctures in every ear, and so on.
Then treat the areas until they heal.
Section on the method of cauterization in strangulation.
Chapter VII.
Strangulation, which is treated with cauterization, is not anything but those which occur due to phlegm, as we said in the divisions of diseases.
And avoid cauterization for species that occur due to exhaustion and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this type of strangulation with hyssop, purges and gargarisms, and your treatment does not improve, then it is necessary to cauterize the weak one with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, second slightly lower than its opening, and third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery from the weaker side. Because softening does not occur unless in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of the cauterization is that you should cauterize yourself with the cautery directly on the extremity of the upper part of the ear under the horn of the head slightly; and another one in the opening: whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until the thickness of half the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the Cautery, and it is a type from a knife, whose shape is as follows: nevertheless, it should not be too fine, as you see; and it is necessary that the knife in it should have little excess thickness.
Then care for the places, until they heal.
Chapter on the ancient method of cauterization in Apoplexy.
When the apoplexy becomes ancient and the care of it, as we said earlier, does not help, and the patient is not feverish, then cauterize him with four cauteries on every horn of his head, and a cautery in the middle of the head, as mentioned before, and a cautery on the occiput of the head, according to what was stated; and the method of cauterization should be as stated previously.
Also cauterize with a Cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and this is more final.
Then it should be taken care of when the previous procedure has been completed.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in drink there be first of all the juice of large onions, and pills cleansing the brain.
Then shave completely the head of the sick person and place upon his occiput an ointment made from henna described in the treatise on ointments, and place it often.
For this is the method of cautery; make that same one according to the order I mentioned there.
If therefore he is healed by it, it is good. If not: then make for him three cauteries on the back of his head, which shall descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye, and place between each cautery a thickness of a finger.
Then care for the cautery with it (the same as before).
If however you wish an addition and the sick person can bear it: then make a cautery in the middle. What if you wish an addition: then cauterize him over two horns (of the skull).
Then care for it until he is healed; let the cautery be anointed according to the shape that was mentioned before.
On the method of cauterization in paralysis and softening (of a hardened mass).
Chapter X.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleaning of the head with onions, and as I have said.
Then shave the sick person's head; then cauterize it with a mid-head cautery, and with a cautery on every horn of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of his neck, and with three cauteries on the spine.
If you need softening of the body by more of these (cauteries), and the sick person can bear it and the ailment is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries on the spine, and the last one with cautery until it burns most from his skin, and take care to spare the hand. Then care for himself until he is healed: and thus cauterize with oil.
On the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
A epileptic is not cauterized, unless his epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore it is necessary that you first clean the brain of the patient with hyson, and with the rest of the treatment that we have said in the division: when the sick person is serious, or is tolerant in receiving medications.
If however the patient is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer gargarisma and cleansing chews that clean the brain, before that for many days with good nourishment.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize it with a single cautery in the middle of the head as was previously mentioned, and also with another cautery at the back of his head, and over all the horn of his head with cautery. If the sick person is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with cauteries as was said in the case of paralysis, and with softening of the body over vertebrae at the neck and vertebrae at the back: and let the cautery be oiled according to the method that has previously been mentioned.
If however the sick person is a child, then place a subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter on the manner of cauterizing in Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with Cauteries, as we have said in the one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of declivity towards melancholy, and there is a weak body wet, then give him in drink what purifies his brain, according to what has preceded in division: then shave the head of the sick one, and make afterwards a correctly made plaster (tortellum) from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the sick one sitting square should be held from all sides.
Then present the liniment. And it is more suitable from ancient sheep butter. And heat it over fire with a moderate temperature measurement, which the finger can tolerate when it is introduced into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and let it out until it cools down.
Do this to the sick one once a week with the rest of his good regimen, until he is cured.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small punctures in it, besides which hold the hand with the cautery: let it be smelling.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with its nature.
Then put a damp cloth soaked in butter or goose fat on it.
Chapter on how to cauterize in water falling on the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When you are informed of the beginning of water flowing into the eye through signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the sick one, with what purifies his head.
And keep him away from all humidity, and make him sit in a bath for several days in fasting.
Then command him to shave his head and to cauterize it in the middle of his own head. Then cauterize it on both temples with two cauteries, if there is no descent of water in both eyes at once; or from one side, if there is no watery discharge in one eye; and cut off all veins and arteries that are under the skin with the cautery; and let the cauteries be long in width equal to the temples; and avoid bleeding.
If you see something from it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of veins, and the cutting off of them, and precaution against bleeding.
And at times it is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two cauteries extended to their utmost limit.
Chapter on the ancient method of cauterizing in tears.
When the tears of the eyes are chronic and continuous, and are above the veins and arteries that are manifest on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is due to an excess of cold, phlegmatic humors; then cauterize with the same cautery as I described in the treatment of watery discharge, cauterize in the middle of the head with a single cautery, and on both temples with two cauteries, and on the neck under two bones with two cauteries. And if it requires additional treatment, then cauterize it on every side of the eye carefully with a small cautery at the end of the eyebrow.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in nose smell.
When you treat it (the ailment), as we said in the division, and medication does not improve it: then hurry, and give three nights of infirmocochie in drink; afterwards, shave its head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with an oily cautery. Then cauterize it with two small cauteries, on each eyebrow under the hair.
And protect from an artery, lest you cut it.
This is the form of the Cautery of Claw.
[Section heading] On the method of cauterizing in the softening of the Eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye softens due to illness or wetness: then cauterize the eyelid with a single cautery, with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows with two cauteries in all places; and let them extend from both temples; and let the length of all the cautery be according to the length of the eyebrows; and do not place your hand with the cautery at its end, rather according to the amount that the third eyelid is burned.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing an eyelid when the hair points towards the eye and pierces it.
The cautery is in it according to two modes: either the cautery with fire; or the cautery with burning medicine.
In the cautery with fire, command the patient to release his hairs if they are from those who clean them, until they extend and match. If they prick him at the place of its emergence: then bind his eyes with ointment so that they do not move until it is born.
When they are born and match, then place the head of the patient in your bosom: then mark on the eyelids of his eyes with encaustum (hot wax), marking it in the shape of a myrtle leaf; and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
Then place a cotton soaked in egg white or slippery elm bark decoction over the eye.
Then heat the cautery, whose form is as follows:
Then cauterize gradually in several places on the skin whose surface has the shape of the myrtle leaf, appearing completely.
And your mark of health for the operation is that if you see the eyelids contract and hairs raised at the prick on the eye.
So lift up your hand then: and dismiss him for three days.
Then place cotton with butter over him until the eschar is healed. Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
If any hair returns after an hour and softens the eyelid, then repeat the cautery on that place as you did before.
If the hairs are in the lower part: then cauterize it until the hair grows back to its own natural place and matches so that it does not prick the eye.
Inform the patient to shave, until they grow long and are even. Make from cloth a shape like a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and un-soaked lime, one ounce of each, or approximately the same amount; then grind them together with good friction, and do it quickly so that it does not become cold. Then place it on the cloth that you have prepared in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put it on the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place raw egg yolk that has been soaked under the eye, and let the head of the sick person be on your chest.
Place your index finger on the medicine and press it slightly. And you move it as often as the sick person feels the bite of the medicine, for its bite is like fire.
And when this bite that he feels persists, then release the medicine and move it with your finger. When the bite ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And then observe whether the eyelid swells as it does when heated by fire or cut; if so, it is good: and if not, apply more medicine to the place where the medicine does not press and does not darken, until your operation is complete and the eye contracts.
Then put raw egg yolk with butter on it until the burnt skin is removed. Then treat him with diaphinicon ointment or another, until he is healed.
It is necessary for you to keep the final precaution during the operation, so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes soft after days and some matter falls into the eye from the hairs, then apply more medicine to that place which has become soft from the eyelid, just as you did at first. Then care for himself until he recovers.
This is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And know that human eyes vary in size and shape. Therefore, according to this, your consideration should be: and the path of righteousness for him who is devoted to this art should not be hidden.
Section on the method of cauterizing in lacrimal fistula.
When you treat a Fistula, and your treatment does not improve as we said regarding the division of diseases: then, it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner.
Command the sick person to place his head in your lap, and let one of his servants hold his head like this, so that it is not moved or shaken with his own head.
Then place warm oil soaked cotton or slippery elm on his eye, then apply the hot cautery of this form.
Let it be concave like the shape of a vulture's feather quill from one end, and make the cautery in this manner: if you wish it to penetrate to the other end, and if you wish it to extend upwards in this way.
However, this concave shape is better for your work.
Then open the fistula if it is open and drain the pus from it, and cut out the fistula; and if it is not open, then open it and drain its pus.
Then place the cautery on it, which has been heated very hot.
And hold your hand near the cautery from the eye to the nose, so that your hand does not stray or shake the sick person; and place the cautery on the fat of the eye and destroy it.
If you reach the beginning of your cautery to the bone, it will be good. And if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it for three days.
Then place warm oil with butter on it, and treat it with an ointment for healing, until it is healed.
If it has passed forty days and is not healed: then place a sharp corrosive medicine on it until the bone appears; and scrape it as it comes in its chapter (layer).
And there is another method of cautery for a fistula, which some early ones said. Direct yourself to the location of the fistula, and find it; then place a thin cannula therein: namely, a thin cannula with this shape. Pour a quantity of drachmas worth of molten lead into it, and hold your hand with good retention by the cannula, and let not the weak one be moved at all, so that the molten lead does not run or reach his eye.
It is necessary that you place a hot cloth over the weak one's closed eye in egg white or water.
For lead burns the location of the fistula and heals it by a marvelous cure.
If the fistula is healed together with what we said from cautery, and cure, that is good. If not, then it is necessary to make an opening in the nose and lead the fistula back to the course of the nose, as it comes to its own proper place.
Section on the method of cauterizing in fissures of the lips.
Multiple splits occur in the Lip, which are called Hairs, and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these splits, as we have said in the division of diseases, and the cure does not help, then use a small cautery with a scalpel, according to this shape.
And let the concavity of it be according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Then place it heated quickly into these splits, until the cautery reaches the depth of the splits.
Then take care of it with caustic, until it heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing an Oral Fistula.
When a boil occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and bursts; afterwards it becomes old, and pus runs, and it turns into a fistula: then treat it, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary to burn cautery according to its size, which can enter the fistula. Then insert it heated into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand, until the iron heated reaches the bottom of it and its end: do this once or twice.
Then take care of it afterwards, with what we have said about the treatment, until it is healed.
If the pus is cut off and heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place, and remove the rotten bone according to what comes at its head.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing a Softened Gum and Tooth.
When the gum softens due to dampness and the teeth move, and it is treated with medicine but does not help; then place the head of the sick person in your lap.
Then place the cautery tool, whose shape will come later, on top of the tooth, and insert in it a heated cauterium quickly. Hold your hand briefly until the weak feeling of fire heat reaching the root of the tooth is felt.
Lift the cautery tool. Then repeat the cauterization several times, as desired.
Then fill the weakened mouth with water and salt, hold it for an hour, and then spit it out.
For a tooth which moves, its firmness is strengthened, the gums are softened, and corruption of moisture is dried up.
[Paragraph] On the method of cauterizing teeth in pain.
When the pain of a tooth is due to coldness or there is coldness within it, or worms, and treatment with medicines does not help: then use the cauterization in two ways: either the cauterization with butter; or cauterization with fire.
The cauterization with butter is as follows: take cow's butter and boil it in an iron cauldron or earthenware. Then take the cup and turn it over on top of the stitched edge. Then immerse it [the cup] in boiled butter: and place it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools: then repeat it several times, until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or a cup in cold butter, and place it on the painful tooth: and place hot iron on top of it until the heat reaches the depth of the tooth's hollow.
However, cauterization with fire is to shape a brass or iron cannula. And let there be something of substance within his body so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the weak bone.
Then with the cautery, let its shape come: and place it on that tooth: and hold your hand until the cautery cools.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed either on the same day or on another day.
And it is necessary that the weak bone be filled with good butter during the impression of the cautery and hold it for an hour: then spit it out.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
Cauterize with whatever end you wish, according to what is possible: and this is the form of the cannula.
Chapter on how to cauterize in blisters.
When blisters are caused by phlegm and cold humors, and they do not respond to digestion with medicines, and you wish a quick digestion: then with the hollow cautery shaped like this.
Having two open ends so that the smoke can escape from one end of the cautery: and place it hot on top of the boil once, and twice if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the boil.
If the ulcer is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the ulcer.
Then let it be for three days, and put on top of it a hot pot filled with butter, until what burned by fire is removed.
Afterwards, care for it with tooth ointment, until the form of the channel heals.
[Section heading] On cauterizing a throat obstruction and constriction of breathing.
When moistures conquer over the canal of the lung, especially when this is with coldness of constitution, then it is necessary that the sick one should be evacuated firstly with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it (the lesion) at the notch of the throat near the root: and take care that the cautery does not reach the throat, nor the skin, unless something of it (the cautery).
Then cauterize it (the lesion) with another cautery at the junction of the neck near the last vertebrae: and let the cautery be a nail, according to the method that preceded.
Then care for it (the lesion) with what was previously used, until it is healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing illnesses of the lung and cough.
When cough and lung illness are from cold moistures, and the sick person does not have fever, nor consumption, and the illness is old: then cauterize it (the lesion) with two cauteries above the collarbone in hollow, open places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cautery be a tube according to the form that preceded.
And if your method of cauterization is by pricking with a cautery called Punctum, whose form was previously mentioned in the treatment of ear pain: and let the pricks be from thirty pricks up to others (similar).
Then care for it (the lesion) with what was previously used, until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this form. Why is cauterization avoided when you do it with only one cautery instead of three?
Head Chapter XXVII.
When the head is dislocated due to causes of humidity and it does not return on its own by the hour following the dislocation, until it becomes accustomed to the return, then it should be dislocated slightly, as has been already testified, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first. Then the sick person lies down on his back or on the healthy side. Then the skin that is inside the cheek towards the upper part is to be peeled off with your left hand fingers, and if the dislocation is towards the inner parts.
Then taking two-pronged cautionery by fire. Its shape is as follows.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side and a figure of four cauteries appears.
And sometimes cauterization is done with a cautery having three prongs, for which the figure of cauterization becomes that of six cauteries; and there are prongs according to the subtlety of the test.
And this is the shape of the cautery having three prongs.
And sometimes one is added to this method, for which there are eight cauteries.
Then put over the cautery softened onions with salt. Then make the sick person remain still so that the limb is not moved at any time until it recovers.
If the dislocation is towards the upper parts, and it happens rarely, then cauterize it on the shoulder with a clavicle cautery, or many cauteries piercing.
For the joint is made firm, and moisture is removed; and the sick person recovers.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and many humidity occur in the stomach until it separates from its composition, catarrh multiplies towards it and continuous methods of treatment do not help; then it is necessary that the sick person lies down on his back, extends his legs, and his hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, one cautery under the size of a cowry shell of the breast, one cautery like a nail, and two cauteries below from the sides of one cautery, until the figure of the cauteries becomes triangular. And extend between both so that they do not join together, when it causes pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the thickness of two thirds of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be in this shape without addition: and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape: and let the cautery that makes this cautery be one according to the shape of a circle according to this shape.
And the stomach is cauterized by puncturing it with the person who is afraid of this cautery: and there are signs marked on the stomach according to the amount you wish with the encaustrum: then cauterize itself with the cautery for the puncture: then care for it with the cure that preceded until it heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing Epar (cold iron).
When there is pain in the liver due to coldness and dampness, or from large flatulence, until it exits from its natural exit of superfluous matter and the sick person recovers with what we have said and does not improve in that: then it is necessary that the sick person lies down on his neck, and marks with encaustrum three cauteries according to this shape, and the same size below Epar where the arm length reaches: and let the space between every cautery be the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight: and do not press your hand much with the cautery.
And let the size of what is burned be according to the thickness of the skin, without addition: and let the sick person stand on his feet.
If it is not standing, then let it lie, which already extends its legs, and raises its arms.
This is the form of cauterization.
And indeed it is possible for you to perform this cauterization with a small knife cautery when subtlety and wisdom are present with you in the art.
And beware that you do not overly proceed in cauterization so that the thickness of the skin is burned throughout, wherefore the body is burned entirely and reaches the bowels; because the skin there is delicate, know this.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing liver abscesses.
When it happens that there is a discharge, and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the liver or its membrane: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, there comes a mild pain and heaviness without sharpness; and if it is in the membrane of the liver, with intense pain there is a severe sharpness; and you see now that the treatment of this person has exhausted the doctors.
Therefore the sick man should lie on his neck. Then shape the place of the abscess with a brazier; then light the cautery that resembles a rod. And this is its form. And cauterize it with a single cautery until the skin is burned entirely and reaches the membrane, until all pus comes out; then treat the person by means of treatment for discharges, until he is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this cauterization method, unless the zeal for the study of medicine prolongs one's life; and when these illnesses converge in one person with experience on occasion: then let him dare to perform such an operation.
But rather to abandon it, is better in my opinion.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing pleurisy.
The ancients said, cautery with the roots of Aristolochia for cold pleurisy according to this method. And it is, that you receive from the dry roots of Aristolochia (long ones), one longer root which is found among them, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil, and light it on fire. Then cauterize with one cautionery where it is between the neck of the collarbone and the neck, and with two small cauteries below in the hollow areas near the area that is under the beard.
And with two small cauteries also where it is between the fifth and sixth ribs on the sides a little towards the back, and with one cautionery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three small cauteries from the back: one where it is between the scapulas (shoulder blades), and two from the sides of the chest, below, one where it is between the scapulas.
And you should not press your hand with the cautionery, rather it should be in open air to smell the skin.
And some of the ancients have said that there are men who use a cautery made of iron similar to a ray (probably a reference to a tool called radium), and heat it, and put it inside where it is between the ribs until they reach the abscess with it, and the pus comes out; as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this perforation with cautery, there is fear that either the sick person dies immediately, or a fistula occurs at the site, which does not heal.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the spleen, XXXII.
When you treat the illness of the spleen, as we have said in the treatment of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then there is a need for cautery on it according to three methods, which are all correct.
One (method) is to make three or four cauteries, by drawing them along the length of the spleen according to the shape of Epatis' cauterizations, whose preceding figure it is.
And let each cautery be of thickness equal to that of a finger, or more or less.
Let the method of cauterizing, which we mentioned in the cauterization of the liver, be done equally.
And do not press your hand with the cautery; let the patient be weak and lying on his back.
Another method of cauterization is: holding the cautery with two openings, as we said in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; and peel off the skin that is directly over the spleen, where the elbow of the weak left arm comes to; and your peeling should be in the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert two openings with very hot fire until it penetrates the skin from the other side; then remove the cautery; thus there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize using a cautery with three openings.
Then take care of the cautery after you release it, let it discharge pus for many days; for it is more effective than the rest that preceded in treatment.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in dropsy.
The cautery does not fall in dropsy unless it is properly applied.
When you treat a dropsy with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division, and the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two behind the vertebrae, and one on the breastbone, and another on the stomach; and let the depth of the cautery be nearly equal to the thickness of the skin.
Then let the open cautery emit pus for a long time.
And do not evacuate the weak patient from treatment after cauterization with it: this should be done so that two intentions are gathered to him: and healing will hasten towards it with God's help.
The form of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be a claw, according to its previous form; and the one with which the back is cauterized should be an oil jar, according to its previous form.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing feet and legs.
When they suffer from hydrops and are filled with citrus water, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the nail area, which is between the earlobe and ankle; and hold the cautery with one hand and do not twist it; then remove your hand; and do not return to it at all.
Citrus water will boil and the cautery should be of this shape.
Then make two cauteries for each leg, and let the cautery be with the tip of a scalpel-shaped cautery; and let the cautery be along the length of the leg, one below the knee, and the other below it, about halfway down the leg; and over the entire hip joint, place two cauteries; and leave the open cautery without treatment for a long time, so that some liquid boils out of it; then treat it as we have said.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in the resolution of the abdomen.
Chapter XXXV.
When the abdomen is dissolved by cold and humidity until the retentive and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines weaken; and it is treated with methods of treatment but does not heal; and you see a weak person tolerating an excessively hot cautery, then cauterize it with a large cautery over its own stomach, according to the previous method of cauterizing the stomach with a ring-shaped cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a thin claw-shaped cautery; and with a large cautery over the alcatin above the hips or with two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moisture and the weak enduring it, then cauterize him with a cautery on his head and with a cautery over all of his back; and perhaps you will add two small cauteries near the stomach.
The treatment is progressing, whose benefit does not stray.
[Title] On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are thick, cold, or corrupted by excessive moisture, and they are treated as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help: then cauterize with three cauteries on the lower part of the back of the pelvis below the almuecate, triangularly, and with a cautery beneath the navel about two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold and food is not digested in him, and you see that his face is discolored, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery as before; and with a cautery on his liver and another on his spleen, with a cautery at the clavicle; and leave the open cautery for some time; then care for him until he is cured.
Chapter 37.
When you amputate a toe (or digit), then heat the cautery similar to a rod. Then insert the heated (hot) instrument into the amputated toe (digit); and hold your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows; do this once or twice.
If there are many toes (digits) to be amputated, then cauterize each one with the cautery as we have described. Then care for them with the substance that you apply to them until they heal.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery on the boil, it is more beneficial for healing.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing an anal fistula.
Chapter 38.
When the sick person does not obey the cutting and operation that we have described in its place, and is afraid of it, perhaps he will heal with cautery.
If an anal fistula arises and becomes inflamed, pus flows from it, and the surrounding tissues become corrupted (rotten). Therefore, as is fitting, it should be examined with a probe of fine thread. Then, recognize the depth of it with the probe.
Then heat the cautery which is similar to a rod. Then insert the heated instrument into the fistula up to the depth of the probe (clamp).
And repeatedly cauterize over it until all the corrupted tissues are burned away, once, twice, or three times, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerve or large vein if it is there; or if the fistula leads to the bladder or the intestine, then be cautious in these areas.
Do not do this unless when the fistula is in a fleshy area; and reflect that it does not penetrate (pass through).
Then take care of the place until it heals.
If (the wound) is sealed and the matter within it is removed, and it remains in this state for a long time, then you will know that it has healed completely.
If the matter is not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating, or that the bone within it is rotten, or as if from one of those (things) whose memory comes to mind in its place.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys from cold or gross wind, and it weakens the body because of that, then it is necessary to cauterize it on top of the almethenem over both kidneys, with a cautery over the entire kidney with a claw-like cautery, whose precedent has been remembered.
Perhaps we should cauterize it again in the same almeidatum. Therefore, three lines will come. Hence they will be more beneficial at the end.
Chapter on the mode of cauterizing the Bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the Bladder due to coldness and moisture, so that the sick person cannot retain urine, then cauterize it at its lower part on the anus above the Bladder, where the pubic hairs begin, and cauterize from the right anus, and another one from the left of it: and let the length of this cauterization be according to the size of a thumb knuckle: and cauterize it with a lower back cautery, or two cauteries, if necessary: and let it be as deep as the previous cautery.
When weakness and softening occur in the Womb due to coldness and moisture, so that the sick person cannot retain seed, then cauterize
When coldness and moisture occur in the Uterus, and it is prevented from conception, and its menstruation is corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs near the time of their arrival, then it is necessary to be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the Bladder, and a cautery below the navel on the back, or with two cauteries: and let the cautery be deep.
On Cauterizing the Anus in Dislocation. In this Chapter,
and when the secretions of the mucous membrane flow towards the anus, and this causes its expulsion from its place, there is a sign that this has happened because the leg is prolonged above the other when they are put together: and a hollow is found in this displacement.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the sick person over the anus of this with a similar cautery in a circle around the anus: after you mark it with enkaustre around the anus, as it has been described: and let the anus fall into the center of the circle.
If this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, together with a large oily cautery: and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin in total.
Then take care of it until it heals.
On the method of cauterization for Sciatica.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint and its cause is coldness and moistness: and the sick person is treated as we said in division, but the treatment does not help, and it deteriorates: then it is necessary that you release the sick person from thick humors with fetid pills or with artificial pills and similar ones. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization is done in two ways: either with cautery using medicaments or with fire.
Cauterium cum medicinis adurentibus, est sic faciendum: Preparatur vas calidum et purgatur ab humore. Et in e
One method is to cauterize on the joint of the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this manner: And make it a good or bad depth for them. And let the space be which is between every cautery of this size, that of a finger's thickness: and let the cautery be oil-soaked.
Sometimes the cautery is done in the middle on top of the ankle joint itself. Why are there four cauteries?
If you wish to cauterize with a circle that precedes the form of the ankle joint dislocation, it should be one: so that the circle contains the ankle joint completely.
And burn the thickness of the skin all around.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica, when the pain is adhering to the ankle itself and does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, at the place where the sick person indicates, where the pain is, and with your cautery four fingers towards the outer part: and let the cautery be sharp-pointed.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the sick person indicates that the pain extends up to the toes of the foot, then cauterize it there where he indicates, with a cautery of points, three, or four, or more, if necessary.
And if he indicates that the pain is turned towards the leg from the knee, then cauterize it there with a single knife-cautery.
And beware of yourself in all your cauterizations, so that you do not burn the nerve or great artery with the cautery, and attract harm or contraction upon the sick person through it.
And I myself have already seen one and another who cauterized above the heel and exceeded in their cauterization, and the leg became swollen until the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated all over, and the entire foot was rotten; then there followed a rupture of the abdomen, and death after that.
If the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And some wise men have said about cauterizing the anus, that this is the method of the cautery. Make a brazier similar to a thimble, whose diameter is half the width of the palm; and it should be placed at the opening according to its size, namely the thickness of the tip of a finger or less; and inside this brazier should be another smaller brazier.
And let the space between all the braziers be the size of a grape; and let the braziers have openings on two sides; and let their height be like that of a knuckle, or two knuckles; and make handles for them from iron suitably attached to the braziers.
Then it is heated in the fire until it glows and sparks; then it should be placed on a brazier near the sick anus, who lies on his healthy side. Cauterize him therefore with three round caustics at once.
Then release him for three days. Afterwards pack it with butter; and leave the open wound for many days. Then treat him with an ointment until he is healed.
Says Albucasis to his sons, we have too little used the method of cauterization with this appearance, due to fear of its aspect; and therefore, because few are found who await him.
Nevertheless, it is one of the good caustics for him that endures it, and finds a place for it.
However, cautery with acting medicines is to be done thus by you: take two samia having a perforated armillary, into which descends the pin of his door from bronze or iron, the length of the wall; whose height should be two knots, or as if themselves.
And let the space that is between the two be of the size of the thickness of a finger, and be open below and above; and let it hold each other in place according to this shape.
Then lay it on a pot-ash anchor, with the weak one lying upon the healthy side. And press your hand very much upon the pot-ash anchor. Then pour between two circles of warm water, which is heated a little with fire and hold it for the length of an hour; and let the weak one endure the biting of it, and his burning, for he finds the biting as fire, until the biting stops.
Then wash your hand with an instrument, and remove warm water from the entire pot-ash anchor with sweet water; then release it for three days.
And place butter over it until the blackness of burning is removed; and release it for some days, and let pus run out from it. It is indeed the final help [remedy] [in a medical treatment].
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain spreads to the hip or leg: make a socket in it that contains water, as you did equally in the ankle.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of drugs. Take equal parts of alkali and unburnt lime, grind each one separately, put them in a new pot whose lower part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that will enter [the pot], namely the radius: put another unglazed pot beneath it: pour over the alkali and lime from sweet water, so that each submerges to the depth of a finger: after you have compressed them with your hand, let it stand until the sharp water comes out through the lower part of the unglazed pot.
Then mix that water with another lime: and boil it until it returns.
It will then be indeed very strong against sharpness, which is used in many medical procedures and in the cauterization of other parts [of the body]. Since it performs the operation of fire itself.
And from the drugs used in the cauterization of ankles, such as tetisie, honey from the nutmeg tree, lime with soap, so that each is mixed together. (The rest of the sentence is incomplete and cannot be translated accurately without additional context.)
And Galenus himself, in his narrative, reported a cure for the pain of an ankle and sciatic vein, which he highly praised [as very effective]. And he said that it did not require any other cure, and that it was cured with just one application, as long as [the patient] himself probably entered a bath, and came out healthy from there.
And it is to be taken from green seitaragia: and if it is not found as green, take dry and recent one; and grind much with some fat, and place on the sore, whether it is on the leg or in the hip: and tie it, and leave for a quantity of three hours, or until it feels a weak sensation of heating. Then insert it into the bath.
When its body becomes warm, insert it into the sun. For pain recedes, and it heals.
And know that no one should use cautery with these medications unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that goat dung, when it is burned with sciatic vein, gives it: and the cautery is made according to this method. Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the deep place that is between the toe of the foot and the heel, and closer to the heel.
Then take dry goat dung, ignite it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool and leave it until it is extinguished. Then repeat that procedure. Do not stop doing that until the sensation reaches the sore and the pain ceases.
And this method of cautery is called "cauterium Vaccinum".
[Section heading] On the cauterization of back pain.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to many causes, either from a fall, strike, excessive evacuation, or similar things, due to the influx of cold and moist matter. And cautionery does not apply except in this single case, which is made by the influx of cold matter.
Therefore, after the evacuation of the sick person with fetid pills and similar ones, three lines should be made on the back where there is pain, according to the width of the palm itself, after marking them with encaustic in every line with five cauteries or more according to the amount that comes from the strength of the sick person. And the cauterization should be done with cauteriopuncti.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries along with a median claw-shaped cautery in this manner.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in hump-like growths.
This illness often occurs in small children many times.
And the sign of its incipient growth in children is that it occurs upon them during stridor at elevation, and movement: and you find at the bottom of the spine and the nodes of this that it has begun to protrude above the other spines.
When you see that and wish to make it, then cauterize it with a round-shaped cautery in this manner.
And take the cautery over the entire spine equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the spine with a puncture-shaped cautery, make two lines or three; and let the punctures be close to each other.
Then take care of the place until it heals as we have said.
And beware not to administer cautionery in a hump-like growth that is caused by a spasm of the nerve.
On the method of cauterizing in gout, and the pains of joints.
When the pains of joints are due to cold and moist humors which flow into any part of the body, then when such pains occur in the feet, it is proper for physicians to call it gout (Podagra).
Since gout caused by cold is treated with various methods of treatment and the pains are not removed, then cautery removes them.
And it is that one should cauterize it after evacuation around the joint of the foot, with many cauteries; and let the cautery be Oilburner.
And if you need to puncture the sole of the foot, then do it with a cautery point. If the pains rise up to the knees or other joints and it frequently happens so, then cauterize it over the whole knee with three or four cauteries from all sides, using this same cautery called Clauile.
If more than one cautery is required for you, then cauterize it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, rather let it be about as thick as the skin.
If the pains rise up to the knees and the back, then administer what was said in the chapter on it.
If the pains are only in the hands, then puncture around the knuckles, as if two lines were turned over.
If pain remains only in the fingers, then puncture them all, on every knuckle and on the back of the hand.
If the pains rise up after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both from all sides.
And do not evacuate the weak from good management, from receiving medications. If good care is taken and phlegm is evacuated, it will be cured with God's help by means of this cautery.
On the method of cauterization for ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groins and the intestine or the scrotum descends, and it is beginning nearby: then one should order the patient to abstain from food on his own day. And let him use laxatives, so that he may expel feces from his belly.
Then let him sit on his back before you; and order him to hold his breath until the scrotum appears or the intestine does.
Then reduce him with your fingers and mark the place of rupture on his chest with hot wax, using a sign whose end is similar to the diameter of half a circle above his body.
Then heat the cautery of this shape until it becomes white and throw pieces of hot iron on it. Then return the intestine or scrotum to its hollow. Then let the servant place his hand on the place, so that the intestine does not come out; and you have already opened between the legs of the patient, and you placed a stone under him, and another servant is on his thighs, and another on his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on the mark, with your hand holding the cautery upright. And hold him until you meet the bone with it; or use another place if you are not able to meet the bone with it until the bone.
And carefully observe the exit of the intestine at the hour of your cautery, so that you do not burn him and it comes over him, or he dies from it or suffers great harm.
And know that when you do not meet the bone with the cautery, your operation is of no avail.
And it must be a small, delicate cautery for children, according to their size.
Then treat with the remaining ointments until he is healed.
The patient lies down for forty days until the wound is sealed.
It is necessary that you place the nourishment for him according to the length of his treatment time, so as to soften his stomach; lest his intestines go out during attempts at evacuation and famine.
Then when he wishes to rise after forty days, then administer a well-made bandage and let him hold it for another forty days.
Let him be lessened in labor, and fullness of food and drink, and violent voices.
For when he uses this regime, thus is he cured with complete healing.
And I will say the cure for hernias with an incision in its own chapter.
When hernias occur in the rest of the abdomen and are beginning and they fear that they will increase, then cauterize the hernia with a round cautery according to its size; and let it be what is burned from that point on as one third of it. Then care for him as I have said; do not add to it.
And some of the first ones have said that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this shape.
After it is signed with pitch and a line is placed that is across its width on the upper side of the hernia, and another line downwards. And place your hand in the middle with the awl (clavius).
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing for pain due to a blow or impact.
Chapter XLVIII.
When pain occurs in some limbs due to a blow or impact; and the pain persists for a long time and there is no help with medications, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the puncture cautery.
And let the cautery be for every member, according to its size and its smallness, and its weakness, and its strength, and its location of twisting, and the pain from it.
If he is cured by the first cautery, it is good. If not: then repeat the cautery upon him.
Because it is customary for these pains to change from one member to another that is near it. Therefore, you must follow them with the cautery until the sick man is cured.
Chapter on the mode of cauterizing in Leprosy.
The leprous, however, are sometimes helped greatly by the cautery. And particularly the species of leprosy which is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: when you consider the need to cauterize it.
If the leprosy is incipient and you have treated it as we said in the division, and it does not decrease nor cease: beware of the sick man, lest corruption spread over his entire complexion: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, known, and the second below it facing the forehead at the end of the hair, and two above the two horns, and one behind it over the nuchal bone of the neck.
And lay your hand with the cautery a little longer, until it makes an impression smaller than the palm in the bone, and the cortices will be displaced: so that the expiration of gross vapors from it may be alleviated, and cauterize the spleen also with the cautery according to what has preceded.
If the leprosy is already spread over the sick person and it is evident: then you must cauterize with these cauteries which we said in the head, and a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on the two cheeks, and two cauteries on the spondyles of the neck, and six on the spondyles of the back, and one large one over the alhahosos near the gran caudae and one on it, in the almeidat: and two over the ankles: namely over every ankle with one, and two over the knees, and two over the shoulders, and two over the elbows, and two over the forearms, and two over the softnesses of the chest: and cauterize it over every joint of his fingers on both hands, and feet: and cauterize over all calcaneum of his feet, and focilia of his hands.
Beware that you do not burn the nerves which are on top of the last heel bone, so as not to burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the chin, and another time on the belly, and another time on the epigastrium.
And know that the more you add cautionary substances, the more beneficial it is, and the more conducive to success.
And know that the sick do not feel pain in cautery, as the healthy do; therefore, because his body is already numb.
It is necessary that the cauteries be of suitable size and shape according to the members and joints; accordingly, they should be made from a particular type of iron.
Then care for the cautery with flour of herbs mixed with honey, and the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in stupor (faint or delirium).
When any member becomes numb and is treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and yet does not heal, then the affected member should be cauterized with cauteries according to the size or condition of the member.
Let your cautery enter the thickness of the skin a little way. Then take care of it with an ointment until it heals.
Furthermore, when the cautery is applied to some numbness that happens in the hand and foot, in the joints of the back near the nerve exits that move that member, the numbness will be removed.
However, do not presume to act upon it unless he is wise in the knowledge of the structure of members and the exit of nerves moving the body.
Title LXI.
When Albaraz decays and does not offer any help from the art of medicine: then cauterize on top of it with a deep cautery a little way, according to the thickness of the skin until the whiteness disappears and the color changes.
Then take care of it with a mixture of grain of wheat, lentils with rose oil, leaves of arnoglossa, blood of a dove, and blood of a frog: equal parts of each: mix all these together, soak them on cloth, and apply them to the place until it heals.
Chapter on Cauterization for Cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference, as is customary.
Wise men have said, it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
But that does not seem right to me, for I fear it would cause an ulcer; and I have already seen that happen several times.
It is rather right to cauterize around it with a circular cautery, as we have said; or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Adubelati.
When someone has Adubelati and it slows in maturation due to an excess causing it or due to the weakness of old age, when it is very few in blood, or due to time and you wish to hasten the maturation of Adubelati, then cauterize around it with small multiple cauteries by puncturing. Then let it be released. For itself it will hasten with maturation.
If you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then fire the cautery, whose form is this: (no further text provided)
And place it in the middle of the Adubelati until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be weak, so that its course may be made pure.
Then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in a cancerous ulcer.
Chapter XXXIV.
Corrosion is only corruption walking in a limb and consumes it; just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see a corrosion in a place that can bear cautery with fire, then apply much cautery, small and large nails, according to what suits the place where the corrosion is located.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you remove the entire corrosion, and nothing remains of it in depth.
Then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized places ground sulfur with oil until all scabs are removed and all corrosion.
Then treat it with ointments that cause flesh to grow.
If therefore you see that after three days flesh is born through healthy growth, in which there is no corrosion, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery over what remains from the corrupted places.
And corrosion is sometimes treated with a strong medicine. Indeed, it arises in the place of cautery.
However, cautery with fire is quicker in helping: and I myself have already said that the cauterization of it with a strong medicine is in the division; therefore take it there when you need it.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing nails and warts.
Chapter 50.
It often happens that this illness occurs in the lower parts of the feet and is bulky, filtered, which injures the foot.
Indeed, cautionery in these [cases] is according to two modes: cauterization with fire and cauterization with hot water.
As for the cautery with fire, it is made concave like a bird's feather; which should be made of iron, according to the size that contains the nail from all sides; and it should be thin on the edges.
Then place the hot iron on the nail. Then turn the hand with the hot iron around the nail until the hot iron reaches the depth of the nail; and let it be for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then plaster it with wild herbs crushed with salt; and let the plaster remain on it at night. It will be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the place with a good ointment for flesh until it is healed.
If they are not converted and often recur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet; then administer cautery with hot water: and it is, that you receive a cannula from brass, iron, or from an eagle's feather; and place it on the nail or ulcer. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the cannula; hold your hand and turn it with the pressure of your hand for a while, so that the tip of the cannula is pressed against the root of the nail, and let the hot water find its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait for a short time on the bite of the hot water for one hour.
Then let it go, as the nail will be uprooted with its roots.
Do this to them one by one, until you have reached all who are affected by it in the body.
Then care for them after they have been uprooted, with that which generates flesh from ointments.
Chapter on cauterizing tremor.
When trembling happens to anyone in a nerve due to cold, or quartan fever, or something else: then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the dorsal vertebrae, and with a cautery between each vertebra, and with a cautery on its chest, and with a cautery on its stomach.
The trembling ceases with cauterization by oil, and hastens the health of cold sickness.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing Albatheer (Albucasis).
Chapter LVII.
Sometimes Albathir expels from the body fetid matter, that is, pustules, which are produced by corrupted thick materials.
Therefore, first when they appear, it is necessary that they be cauterized over every head of the pustule with a subtle cautery and myrtle wood, whose tip is ignited with fire. Or with a root of long arista-lochia (Aristolochia). Or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized with ademenes (adena), at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and they do not increase; and the excess is cut open making them, and heals from them.
However, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy (bloodletting).
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in bleeding from an artery in a wound.
Many times there is bleeding from an artery which has been cut at a wound, which happens externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or cauterization of a member, and similar cases; and it is difficult to separate it.
Therefore, when it happens to someone, then you quickly go with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place your index finger upon it; and press strongly, until the blood is compressed under your finger, and nothing escapes from it.
Then place in fire a small oil lamp cautionery, and many of them more: and blow upon it until they become very hot.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the wound and place where the artery is broken, and place the cautionery upon the vein, after which you remove your finger quickly: and hold the cautionery until the blood is severed.
If it is expelled with the removal of your finger from the opening of the artery and you extinguish the cautionery, then take another cautionery quickly, from those which are prepared in the fire.
Therefore, do not stop doing that with one after the other until the blood is severed.
And beware, lest you burn the nerve that is there, and an additional harm falls upon the already weakened person.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to sever it: particularly because the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautionery, as we said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, the ends of it contract and the blood is severed. Or it is tied with a strong thread. Or medicines that have the property of stopping bleeding are placed upon it and it is compressed with a suitable tourniquet.
He who administers the amputation with a ligature and compression with cloth, or by placing hot things upon it and similar ones, does not give him completely, unless rarely.
If that happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine: then let him begin with the position of the index finger upon the opening of the vein as we said, and compress it very strongly, until the blood is besieged from above the wound, and upon the artery. Do not remove the finger, upon it always apply cold water of violent coldness until the blood freezes and swells, and then cut it off.
And meanwhile consider what requires cautery or medicine in it.
Section on Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds and their Types.
As we have said in Chapter One, every disease in which it is appropriate to use fire as cautery and burning medicine, and the occasions for this, causes of this, tools for this, and forms of cautery are mentioned.
And I have placed chapters from the head down to the feet there.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same way: so that the sought-after information may be alleviated for those seeking it.
And before I begin that, you must know that what is in this chapter comes from the fear of what was in Chapter One on cautery.
And because of that, there should be greater caution in it since in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation with blood often occurs, with which life stands when a vein is opened or an incision made on an abscess, or an opening made for excretion, or treatment of a wound, or extraction of arrows, or incision on a stone, and their similar occurrences; from all of these are associated tremor, fear, and death occurs in many of them.
And I warn you not to fall into that in which there is hesitation, for sometimes men of this art fall into it with the modes of weakness. For there is one who gets angry with his illness and death is easy for him because of the violence that comes from his weakness and the length of his wickedness. And when illness is from fear, it signifies death.
And he who gives his trumpet to you and promises health with it, hoping for salvation, but his illness is fatal.
Therefore, you should not agree with him who comes to you in such a manner. And let your caution be greater than your greed and your avarice. And do not presume about anything from him unless after certain knowledge, which will be verified by a praiseworthy outcome for you.
And in the treatment of all your sick ones, use prognostication and indication about that to which it properly belongs to be health.
For in him there is help for you concerning the acquisition of fame and glory, memory and praise.
God will inspire you, O sons, with His understanding, and not take from you direction and inspiration; for that is in His hand.
And I myself have arranged this chapter by dividing it into sections according to what came before in the chapter on Cautery, from neck to feet; so that your question may be alleviated which you desire from him, and what you need.
Chapter on the treatment of water collected in children's heads.
Chapter 1:
Know that this weakness often occurs in children during childbirth: or when the midwife tightens the child's head without ease.
And also it sometimes occurs due to hidden causes which are not known.
And indeed I myself have not seen this illness in anyone but children: and to every one of them that I have seen death followed: for this reason it appeared to me that the operation should be abandoned in it.
And indeed I myself have seen a child whose head was filled with water and his head swelled every day until he could not sit on himself due to the size of his head: and moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture, it accumulates between skin and bone: or accumulates under the bone on the skull.
And the operation on him, if there is moisture between skin and bone, and an abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a crack in the middle of the head, one fissure in width: and the length of the fissure should be like two fingers, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the shape of an enostome (spatula).
If therefore the moisture has increased more and the abscess is larger, then place these two fissures, according to this shape.
And if the moisture is under the bone and its sign is that you see the openings of the skull everywhere: and water is pressed when you compress it with your hand towards the inside, and it does not hide from you: then it is necessary to make three fissures in the middle of the head, according to this method.
And after the incision, extract all the moisture entirely. Then tie the fissures with linen and wool threads. Then anoint it above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then remove the bandage, and take care of the wound with ointments.
And thou shalt not loosen to bind the head with equality. Feed the sick man with any dry food of slight moisture, until he strengthens the limb and is healed.
Another method of cutting is to consider where it appears that the abscess is in size, and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is in the occiput more, or in the head, or in the right, or in the left.
Then rise with cutting where it appears to you that there is an abscess and filling of water; and cut it, according as it is possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut an artery, and let blood flow, and the sick man dies from this flow along with the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter on the incisions of the arteries that are after the ears.
Chapter II.
When catarrh happens to someone's eyes or chest, and it becomes chronic and medical treatment does not help: then the last cure is in that, incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when one wishes to cut them (the arteries), let the sick person shave his head. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then let the sick person tighten his neck with any cloth he has. Then observe where the vein pulsates. And the places of both (arteries) are the places that are depressed behind the ears and rarely hidden except in some people.
Then mark both (arteries) with wax on each side and cut one on each side with a knife, the incision reaching to the bone, making it wide across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the knife under the artery and cut it above with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be like two fingers joined together.
For when a vein is cut, blood flows out with a pulsating exit, which leaps to the inner parts with frequent jumps.
If the artery does not appear to the sight, then it is necessary that the measurement of space from the ear should be three fingers in width. Then mark with wax and cut through to the bone.
And what must be expelled from blood is about six ounces and perhaps you will expel more or less from it. All of this should be done according to the quantity that appears to you from the strength of the sick person and the filling of his artery.
Then observe for a wound. And if there remains some flesh on the bone after the wound, then cut it so that an abscess does not form; then bind the wound with linen rags.
Then take care of it with an ointment until it heals.
On the Extraction of Arteries which are in the Temples.
Third Chapter:
When an old hemicania or acute catarrh occurs in a man due to acidulous humidities and warmth in the temples, or an old soda, violent, and similar: and it is treated with methods of curing medicine, but it does not improve: then we are experienced in these illnesses in the extraction of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have told.
And the method of operation for their extraction is that the sick hairs which are on the temples are shaved off, and he should direct himself to the appearing artery in the temple. Itself is shown to you by its pulse, and it seldom hides except in a few men or extreme coldness.
If it is hidden to you, then the sick man should press his head with any cloth of his, and then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or apply heat to the place with hot water, until it appears to you in a clear manifestation. Then take the cannula, which I have prepared previously. Then burn away the skin with it easily, until you reach the artery. Then insert the hook into it, and pull it out upwards until you pull it out of the skin, and make it come out from all sides through the layers that are under it.
If, however, the artery is delicate: then roll it up with the tip of the hook. Then cut the part according to its length so that its ends are drawn together and contracted, and there is no blood flow. For if it is not cut and separated, the blood does not rise up deep within.
Then let six ounces of blood flow out, up to one-third.
If the artery is large: then it must be tied in two places with a double thread, strong, of silk; or with alum threads, so that decay does not occur near it before the wound is healed, and there is no blood flow.
Then cut the surplus which is between two ligaments. Do this at that hour, or another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone, with a knife-shaped cautery, until its edges are cut through and it remains in place for this same operation.
And it is a better procedure unless the patient has a fever or is affected by calefaction. Because the cautery is made of those things which help to end moisture. Therefore it is better as a remedy.
And after the extraction of the arteries, it is necessary that the place be filled with cooked old material; and pulverized lice should be placed on top of it evenly.
And after the dissolution (of pus or inflammation), it is to be cured with dry medicines which cause new flesh to grow, and with linen, until it heals.
If during the operation, bleeding occurs from an artery, then hasten to cut it off with a cautery, or fill the place with alum; and press your hand until the bleeding stops. If there is nothing available to you from those things (to stop the bleeding), then place your finger on the place until it becomes frozen. And irrigate the place with water of intense cold, until the pain subsides and it is bound according to what is necessary.
And from what is lighter and easier to extract, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives; and let the sharpness of the two knives be similar to alum. Nevertheless, they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they are as sharp as two knives, cold should be applied to each; and they will not cut through the flesh quickly. When there is a certain amount of swelling in them, heat from fire should be applied and the flesh should be quickly cut off: when this operation is needed, it is better than any other work, and easier and less laborious.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
The space between the two knives should be the size of a finger's width after you mark two locations with pitch; then place both heated [instruments] closely, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between the extremities may be removed. They do not fully coagulate with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
Chapter on the care of chronic, acute tear ducts from the eyes.
When the tears are chronic and there is a channel from the veins that are on the outside of the skull of the head; and if no medication for healing is applied to them with medications, then you will see the face of the sick person becoming red, and it feels like walking as ants do on the forehead: and the eyes are weakened, moist, so that the hair has already been corroded by the corrosion: and the eyelids have been heated due to the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients resorted to this treatment for them, and they called it a cure with a knife.
And you should advise the sick person to shave the hairs on his forehead. Then make three incisions on the forehead equal in length to the forehead; and let the length of the incision be like two fingers, and let one incision be at the same level as the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second one slightly below the movement of the arms, and the third one on the other side: and avoid cutting the arteries that are on the sides; and stretch your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the space of all incisions be the size of three joined fingers: and prepare a piece of sponge or dry cloth with which you can absorb blood.
Then insert a probe with two sharp ends, which follows this form. From the incision on the side of the temple, up to the second incision: excise along with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, together with the sifac which is above the eye. Then do the same from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then remove this probe and insert another tool called a sharp scapel into the first incision, with the blunt side from one end, not the sharp side from the other end. And this is its shape.
And place the sharp side of it towards the attached flesh with the skin, and the blunt side towards the bone; and push it in until it reaches the midline; and cut along with it all the contents that descend from the head to the eyes, except that it is connected by an incision up to what appears on the skin.
Then do the same in the midline up to another fissure.
And when an equal amount of blood flows out, squeeze the places from the clots of congealed blood.
Then place a linen cloth from an old garment into every fissure and place over them pledgets soaked in wine, oil or vinegar. And see to it that no hot abscess occurs.
And on the third day, loosen the ligature and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then care for it with basilicon ointment, and the other remedies used for wounds until it heals.
Chapter 5.
Chapter on the treatment of sharp tears and catarrhs of the eyes from the inner parts of the head.
When sharp, acute, frequent catarrhs occur to someone; and you see the eyes of that person weakened, small, and already the appearance is diminished; and the eyelids are ulcerated, hairs fall out from them, and in the depth of the head there is severe pain, which hurts, and sneezing follows: then take from these symptoms, that those substances, and catarrhs do not come unless from many veins.
A better treatment for them is this one. And it should be ordered that the sick person shave their forehead. Then make a single cut in the middle of the forehead or slightly less wide, and start with the cut from the left temple to the right temple; let the incision go as far as the bone; and move your hand away from the temples that are moved during chewing until the bone is exposed; then dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the edges of the wound with spatulas or linens. Then pull together with sutures and soak the sutures with wine and oil to prevent a hot abscess from forming.
And when you loosen that (the suture), and see that a hot abscess is beginning to subside; then it is necessary to scrape the bone until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then care for the bone with dry dressing to make flesh grow; as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of pitch, prepare a plaster from it and administer it for the growth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter 6.
[Section title: Treatment for injury to the ear]
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either it is a mineral stone, or resembling a stone such as iron and wax; or it is from a plant, like chickpea and beans; or it is fluid, like water, vinegar, and similar things; or it is an animal.
When therefore a stone falls into the ear or any other kind of stone that does not grow in the ear, expose only the ear: if you see a stone then pour something from violated oil or sisamo into the ear. Then administer the extraction of it and make him sneeze with a snuff containing catharpic herbs, and close the nostrils near the onset of sneezing, when you place around the ear fragments from cloths or wool, and stretch the ear upward.
For many times it comes out with this care.
If it does not come out, then administer the extraction of it with Guesthwi, that is, finely ground pigeon droppings; its form is as follows.
If it comes out with guesthwi, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a fine blind hook few times.
If it does not come out through that, then make a tube from copper and introduce the end of the tube into the ear opening as much as possible, and close what is around the tube with beeswax softened with oil so that there is no way for the wind except the tube; then extract it with your strong suction.
For many times it comes out with what I have said. If it does not come out this way: then take from helkalimb or urine, that is gluten prepared as birds are caught, a small amount; and place it at the end of the radius when you place a well-centered cup over it; then introduce it into the ear opening with ease after you have pulled the ear away from moisture.
If it does not come out with all that I have mentioned, then hurry to cut, before a hot abscess or a spasm occurs.
The method of lancing is as follows: first, the unwell person should be lanced in the head; and extract from him according to the strength of the phlebotome. Then make the sick person sit between your hands, and turn his ear upward, and make a small incision in the base of the ear at the fat in the depressed place; let the incision be in the shape of the moon until you reach the stone; then remove it with what is possible for you with your tools.
Then lance the incision from your own time and take care of it until it heals.
If something falling into the ear is one grain or more, which swell and grow; then administer its removal.
But if it does not obey you for the evacuation, then take a thin, subtle probe according to this shape.
And administer with it the cutting of that species from grains which fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think that the grain is already wet by earwax, until you put a lot of it; then remove it with forceps or with a fine probe or with suction, as we said, for the extraction of it is alleviated.
In water that enters the ear, the sick person should use sneezing when he first lies down; and his ear has already been filled with some cooked old one; it is lying on top of it where the water is. If it comes out through this, it is good.
If not, then take many small stones according to the length of the finger, soft and smooth, and heat them slightly with fire; and the sick person should insert one from these into the ear's opening; and let him sprinkle water on one foot from that side, and strike the stone in the ear with another stone. Therefore, it should not cease to be done with the stone and the stone, until all the water comes out.
And now the water is coming out so that you may take one from parchment or reed and insert its end into the ear; and heat the other end with fire until it burns most of it. Then take another reed and do the same thing many times until all the water comes out; and draw it out with a cannula according to what was stated above concerning the stone.
In the case of an animal entering into it (the ear), if its body is small, like a louse or similar, care for it as I said in the section on division.
But if it is of a large body, which appears to the senses: then administer its extraction with tweezers and hooks; and its removal is easier for all those who are holding onto the ear.
In the case of worms generated in the ear, when you care for it with what I said in the section on division and in the treatise on distillations, and your treatment does not help: then you should look at the ear in sunlight. If therefore something appears there from worms, then draw it out with tweezers or fine hooks.
If nothing appears there, then take a cannula with this shape: narrow below and wide above; and insert its fine end into the ear according to the amount that the sick person can tolerate; then suck with strong suction. Do it many times until all worms come out.
If they do not obey you for their exit, then use poppy seeds surrounded by a cannula with wax as I said in the stone.
If they do not come out with what I said: then administer the distillations that the ancients were experienced in for the destruction of worms; and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And let your drainage be with oil and medicine into the ear using this instrument, whose shape is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or brass, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, and wide at the top.
Therefore, let what is within the concavity of the tube (cannula) be made of brass. And if you wish, take radium (a heated metal) and wrap it at the end with a suitable covering; then pour oil, juice, or any of these medicines into the cannula; let it be in the ear; then introduce the heated radium with the covering on top, and press it gently with your hand until the oil is forced out into the concavity of the ear, and the sick person feels it inside; and whatever is poured into the ear should already have been slightly heated by fire. And take care that no substance distilled in it is very cold; medicines cannot tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
[Chapter title] On the treatment of a perforated ear.
Whenever some infants are born from their mothers' wombs without being perforated.
And it also happens to some people that the perforation of the ear occurs from a wound or tissue born in it.
And this perforation sometimes occurs in the deep part of the ear canal, which does not affect vision; and sometimes it occurs near the outer part of the ear canal and affects vision.
Therefore, the one that occurs in the deep part of the ear, which does not affect vision, is difficult to cure in many cases.
And in the one that affects vision, it is necessary to place the sick person's ear on the sun and observe it; then if you see the perforation, open it with a fine spatula whose shape is as follows: its end should have a small notch, part of which is sharp; the rest of the spatula should be flat on both sides to avoid damaging the ear.
If therefore an opening is born from the flesh within the ear: then hold it with a delicate hook, and cut it with great force, until all the flesh is removed.
If therefore an ulcer is deep within the ear: then take a thin probe, soft and warm it slightly with fire; then insert it into the ear.
If therefore you find an ulcer accompanied by weakness and difficulty of hearing: endeavor to open it with ease; but be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Then place a linen cloth of the size of the opening you have made in the ointment of Egypt; do this for several days until you are certain that the wound has healed.
Or take linen and immerse it in rosewater, powderize upon it the ground zinc, and use it.
If you see the ear already discharging pus: then extract the linen and allow it to dry with another piece of linen which has been soaked in a pot made with rose oil, until the warm pus settles; then take care of it until it is healed.
If bleeding occurs: then immerse sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear; and use the rest of the treatment to stop the described bleeding using methods of distillation.
Chapter on the care of Althaea's (Marsh-mallow) eyelids.
Chapter VIII.
Those Althaea's which occur on the eyelids of eyes, are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore they should be held with tweezers or with a hook, and cut from their roots. Then apply ground zinc on the place.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize with a fine lens-shaped cautery.
And it is better to cauterize [the wound] after making an incision. For many times they come back when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter on the care of the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter IX.
Often something happens in the eyelids that resembles sand in its firmness and hardness, and it is called gravel due to this. And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
Therefore, the operation for this is to see if there is gravel proceeding from it, which appears in the eyelid, and to move it around in all parts, and its nature is easy.
Find therefore a fissure over it in length. Then scrape it off from all sides with ease, until it comes out. Then hang it up with a hook and cut it off itself.
If however you do not prepare to cut it off unless after you have pierced the eyelid with a slight incision, then it may harm the weak in some way.
If however there is a large fissure: then bind it up with suture: and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from that. Oil therefore restores it and fills it in.
If the gravel is directed towards the inside of the ear and turned on the inner surface, then turn the eyelid over, hang the gravel with a hook: besides which you will need an incision, and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is stretched by an incision, then it will not harm anything.
Then clean the eye after the gravel incision with salty water, and care for the place with it until the weak heals.
[Title: On the Care of Eyelids.]
Chapter X.
The adhesion (Axirnath) is a deposit that is generated in the outer layer of the upper eyelid; and it most certainly occurs in children; and it weighs down their eyes, and they get cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun, because tears flow towards them, and because of this you see them lying on their faces constantly, and they sleep on these, and their eyelids are always wet under the eyebrows, which has already been covered by swelling; and the appearance of Axirnath is visible to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the Axirnath among them.
The method of its operation is that the sick one places his head in your armpit.
Then take a clean cloth and prepare within it linen, and make from it a circle according to the size that contains Axirnath on all sides. Then place him upon it and press with your fingers from all sides, so that the Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of this humidity with a blunt probe producing cracks along its width, and let the crack not be larger than that which is made during venesection in depth.
Or it is necessary that you find the entire skin until you reach Axirnath, for in many dispositions, the Axirnath proceeds from the crack according to the shape of a fatty white peach pit.
So draw it out with the cloth that you have moistened between your fingers on the outside; and you shall turn your hand from right to left until it is dispersed; be careful not to add in the crack so as not to reach with the probe to the eye, and do not harm it.
If it does not appear to you at first that the Axirnath is in the crack, you should gently add more in the crack until the Axirnath comes out. Then draw it out as we said before.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot and press with small stones.
And among men there are those who grind salt, and they place it in the hollow of the crack, so that what remains from that moisture softens.
Then care for it until it heals.
If there occurs in the spot an abscess that is hot, then care for it with soothing plasters until it heals.
Part on the methods of A taximir eyes, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft, so that it droops as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow in the eyelids over and above the course of natural hairs, and become old: then they harm the eye, and bring about types of diseases, such as constant tearing, softening of the eyelids, and clouding, until that cause results in the destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmir indeed is cured according to four modes. Or by cautery with fire. Or with sharp medicine, according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cautery. The sentence translates to: "It is treated by incision and suturing (of) Ataxmir. "Or by cannulas, as I shall say.
"It is necessary that you place the head of the sick (person) in your lap. "Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
"Therefore, if it is turned (back), it is good. "And if not: introduce the needle into it (the eyelid), where there is a thread from its lower part of the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate through the thread above, and let it be near hairs themselves or close to the margin of the eyelid, where hairs grow: and pull the thread upward with the eyelid, and turn it with the rod.
"Then find (the) conjunctiva on the inside of the eyelid, under added hairs, where the spatula meets from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal.
"Then extract the thread and place a small amount of cotton or cloth under the eyelid; then mark the eyelid with wax, so that it is like the figure of the leaf of myrtle.
"However, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: because it varies greatly among humans.
"For there are those who need to be cut according to the size of the eyelid, in accordance with the softening (of) the eyelid.
"Then with the spatula find (the) two lines that you have marked, and start from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal, and let there be a split near natural hairs, as the thickness of a rod.
"Then insert the hook into one (of) the two angles of the skin. "Then scrape it completely. "Then join the two lips with a suture using a sharp needle and thin woolen thread; remove blood and make the excess from the threads adhere to the eyebrows, if you want to do this: and if not, do not treat it.
Then let the suture go and the threads until three days, or four: afterwards take care of it.
And if you wish, let the wound heal without suture, and take care of it so that it dries and contracts. For the eyelid is to be raised during sealing of the wound and its dressing; but it will be better in future.
This method of healing they taught, the ancients.
Yet there is concern for the sick one in it, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is also in Ataxmir: and it is to make signs on the eyelid with a shape like that of a myrtle leaf, as we have told before.
Then lift the eyelid with three separated or joined uncini, according to the following shape, then cut what is excessive with small forcipes according to this shape, with equal incisions.
If it is not possible for you to hold the uncinus, and it does not match; then take a needle with thread, and insert it in the middle of the shape: and insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and another thread near the smaller tear duct: and bind threads between your fingers with equal tension.
Then lift your hand equally with the lever: and lift the skin over which the incision is made, as we have told before.
Then bind together the two lips of the wound with suture: and take care of it until it heals.
If however an abscess occurs at your incision or split; sew up the abscess with wax and similar materials from soothing ointments.
And sometimes the eyelashes also turn over.
Therefore, it is necessary to use what we have said in the incision: but suture for both is more artificial. Treatment for Ataxmir with dogs.
It is necessary to turn the eyelid and make a cut along the inner fissure, as I have previously described. Then, using skill, make two small dogs or thin sticks of such length as that of the eyelid and narrower than the distance between the teeth; and you have already made incisions at both ends near where the sutures are located on either side.
Then gather both together with finesse on that which projects from the eyelid of the eye, and bind two small dogs tightly from either side with a strong ligature, and leave it for several days. For the contracted skin will die, darken, and rot until it falls off by itself.
If it slows down (the dying process), then make incisions with scissors. Then take care of it until it heals.
When it has solidified, lift the eyelid and do not pluck out the hairs.
And this is the shape of two dogs which you will make according to this form and size in length and width.
Chapter 12.
On plucking out hairs that are pricking in the eye with a needle.
The operation is to take a fine needle and thread a thin silk filament through it gently. Then gather the ends of this together and tie both with a very fine knot; let the length of the filaments be one palm.
Then prepare another thin silk filament shorter than the first and tie its ends if you wish.
Place the patient's head on your lap and let it be close to the sun so that the operation can be seen; because this is a subtle or small operation.
Then insert the needle with the thin silk into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you pull out the natural hair from above.
Then pull out the needle above the aneurysm and insert it into the aneurysm. If there is one, or two, or three, do not more than that.
Then draw your hand with it, until the needle comes out with the aneurysm along with the natural hair of the eyelid.
If the aneurysm is drawn out and the needle does not come with it: draw the aneurysm downwards with the thread you have made in it, until the aneurysm comes out through the upper opening, and you see it with the eye. Then draw out the aneurysm and the thread, and remove both, and close the eye; and let it remain closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back to its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then attach a long hair from the natural hairs and draw it out with it; or let it be until it grows longer, and then draw it out.
Chapter 13.
When this Xanthema happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Xanthema is either natural or accidental.
Therefore, the accidental one results from the consolidation of a wound, a cut, a cauterization, and similar things.
And the method of treatment is to find the consolidated area and separate its lips, and place a linen cloth in it, and tie it until it heals.
Do not use on its treatment things that dry and constrict it; for if you do so, the Xanthema will return worse than before; rather, use things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and embrocation with water in which althea has been boiled, with flaxseed; and unguento dyaquilon, which has been made liquid with some oil; and anoint with this linened cloth and treat with it.
Thy treasure of cure is that thou strive with all thy wit, so that it not be consolidated, according to the form which it was firstly.
This operation indeed that I said is no more than a correction of Alzahrak, so that the form of the place does not return to what it was altogether.
On the care for Alzahrak in the lower eyelid, and it is a wrinkle or contraction upward towards right and left.
Chapter XIII.
This that is below, is that which is truly named Alzahrak. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental arises from wound, or split, or cautery, and similar things.
And the way of operation in it is that thou takest a needle, in which there is double thread, and thou dost anoint it with flesh, and maketh it penetrate from tear-duct left to tear-duct right, until the thread cometh at two extremities of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upward with a needle, and cut it with a wide knife. If therefore the form of the eyelid returns as it ought to be, that is good.
And if not, take a cautery, and place it in the split, and turn with it the eyelid; and make two splits on the inner side of the eyelid, and let them be extremities of two splits from two corners of the cut, until they come together and make an angle: until when they are gathered together, this figure is made, and it is the letter lambda (λ) Greek.
Then remove that flesh by measure, which is its acute lower side, from that which follows the eyelid. Then gather together the separated parts; or it with thread of wool.
Then take care of them with what we said about softening medicines and liniments until they heal.
If Alxatrati occurs from a fissure, and suture or cautery: then it is necessary to clean the fissure flat under eyelashes, as previously described. Then separate with a linen cloth, as we have said.
The summary of the treatment for Alxatrati, whether it is above or below, is to perform the operation according to how it is prepared in the form of Alxatrati.
For it has many variations in shape: and the skillful craftsman prepares his intellect with whatever method is possible for him, so that he may return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and the sick person himself, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in various positions.
Chapter XV.
Chapter on the adherence of the eyelid with conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid adheres with whiteness of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural operations.
Therefore, you should insert the tip of the rod under the eyelid and push it upwards: or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a thin spatula without sharpness, but rather slightly blunt: so as not to disturb the sick one during the operation, and remove the spatula, and harm the eye with its sharpness: and your incision should be like you peel off that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the adhesion is healed completely.
Then pour salty water into the eye, while washing it with water: or drip it onto him from a syringe made of sheep's horn, or from vinegar diluted with water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen cloth: and put wool soaked in egg white over the eye: and after three days, use vinegar, and with solidified substances, until it is healed.
Chapter on the Incision of the Toenail and Protrusion of Skin around the Eyes.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the toenail is in two ways. Or it is horny and is like a hard shell, subtle. Or it is not horny, similar to frozen white moisture: which when touched with iron or attempted to be picked up with a hook, is cut off and the hook does not stick to it.
And neither of these types starts unless from the greater tear duct, until it gradually reaches the eye, covering it and preventing light, and moving the eye.
And the method of operation in the incision is: that the sick person places his head in your lap. Then open his eyes and raise the eyelid with your hand. Take a few of the nails with a small forceps and extend it towards the upper part. Then take a point and insert it into the hair of horse, ox or sheep; let it be a thread, and slightly sharpen the tip of the needle and fasten it in the middle of the nail; push it with the needle and tie the nail with the thread, and extend it towards the upper part; scrape off the side of the nail following the pupil, as if you were holding it with the hair up to its end.
Then cut the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal duct with a thin spatula or with small forceps; and let the natural flesh of the lacrimal pass through, so that not due to the incision there is a continuous flow of tears.
And when the nail extends with a nail pick only; or with thread, as we said. Then it is scraped with a soft spatula, whose form this is.
And be careful that the spatula does not touch the corneal membrane and there is a rupture, and the pupil is pierced through.
Then after the incision, throw something crushed salt or made from snow into the eye and let it remain until another day. Then care for it with what is necessary, until it heals.
If the nail is not nerve-related and you cannot insert an awl into it or a pick does not fit into it, then this type of nail is frequently treated with medications and heals as I said in the division.
If you want to cut it, then open the eye of the sick person and take a thin, soft, fragile spatula with blunt end, according to this form. And smooth down the nail with a razor of fine sharpness. If you see that it thickens and cracks, and the razor presses into it, then pour snow made from your snow or red snow or crushed salt onto the eye and cover the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation until the entire thing is removed. Unless it is a warm abscess in your eye; then let that be and treat the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the operation on it with a razor until it heals.
Prominence of the tear duct (lacrimal caruncle), if it causes great harm to the eye, should be suspended with a hook and a portion of it cut off; not at the very end, so as to avoid damage to the tear ducts.
Then drain the pus from the tear duct (lacrimal) or make it red (rubefy), or apply a mustard poultice until it heals.
Chapter on incision of Alguardenic and the flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
When the red flesh is born in certain human eyes, composed or superimposed, until it covers the pupil, approaches, or contracts over the eyelids and perhaps turns the eyelids toward the outside; it resembles a balaustine rose.
And there is also an operation for this: that you place your head on your shoulder. Then open the eyes of this person and collect the entire flesh with appropriate hooks; hold it with a single forceps or tweezers.
Then cut the flesh at first until you finish the whole thing with a knife. And be careful not to harm the eye during the operation; make your cut be such that you cut it (the flesh), or with a spatula, as we said in the incision of the nail; or with small forceps, as used for collecting scabs, according to what shape it will take after this chapter.
When your cut is completed and the entire Alguardenic is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt; or pour in red powder and similar to it from corrosive medicines; place a piece of cow's fat on the outer eye with egg white: to protect it from hot infection.
If there remains anything of Alguardenic and hot blood dominates you, and you fear a hot abscess; then let the eye be, and treat the abscess with what calms it.
Then repeat the procedure over him until he is healed.
And likewise do with the added flesh that occurs in the eye of this type.
However, it is necessary that all weak eyes, whether from natural causes or accidental ones, be treated with the iron: and do not introduce your hand into any of these operations until you see that the limb can bear this operation.
Chapter on removing a Sebula from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
A sebula is a red vein that covers the eye and prevents the operation of sight; and it weakens the eye day by day.
Therefore, first you must determine if the eye in which there is a sebula is strong and there is no other illness besides the sebula; then remove the sebula from it.
And it is to be ordered that the weak one should put his head in your lap.
Then suspend the veins with a single hook or two according to your discretion; and let the hook be fine of double thickness, in this shape, or let there be two hooks in one body, in this shape.
Then remove the veins with fine forceps with precision and let the blood be drained an hour after an hour until you see the veins removed from the eye and resolved; and be careful not to harm the eye with the points of the forceps.
Let your work be done at midday under the sun, and let you be very firm in your operation; so that you do not cut except the veins themselves.
And when you have finished, then pour into the eye either green or red; so that its sharpness may burn what remains of the sebula.
If it is not possible for you to remove it all in that hour, then cover the eye with plaster, so as to ease the pain of the eye; and leave it for a few days until the pain subsides; and apply heat to it; then repeat the procedure according to the same method until healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
Of the Reduction of a Sore Nasal (Nasal Abscess).
Chapter XIX.
The surgeon named Arisatha treats a fistula, which he cures with a cautery or with medicine burning sharply, according to the account that precedes it.
And if it is not cured, then there is no skill in it: except to open an abscess at its birthplace, and draw out all the moisture that is in it and pus, until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackening in it, then scrape it with an instrument that has this shape.
It is called the scraper of the skull.
Make it from iron indo and let its head be round like a compass (azir), with tiny holes made by the grinding of a file or a fine, pointed tool: place it on the corrupted part of the bone.
Then turn it with your fingers and press your hand slightly, until you know that the corruption has been scraped away: do this several times.
Then restore the place with dry, astringent medicine.
If the place consolidates and flesh grows up there, and the flow of pus ceases: and it remains for forty days without being renewed or abscessed, and no incident occurs in it: then you will know that it is cured.
And if not, then there is no skill in it, except to reduce the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this shape.
And it is to expose the second bone with iron or with sharp medicine: when the bone is exposed, then take a trephine according to this shape, its tip should be triangular and iron at the end: and the wood of the trephine should be extended like a pyramid until the end, as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself: let it be close to the tear duct, and extend your hand slightly from the eye. Then turn your hand with the lancet until it penetrates the bone and feels weak. By this you will find air escaping from it when you hold your hand over its nose.
Then restore the place with drying medications, as I have taught you.
When the flesh is born and the place hardens, then the matter that flowed outward returns to the nose; therefore it becomes lighter above the weakened (wound).
Chapter on reducing protuberance of the Eye.
Chapter XX.
When the eye protrudes completely and no visual harm or diminution occurs, then it should be softened; then use a phlebotome on it; afterwards place fumigating vapors on the neck without making incisions, but with suction.
Then place over the eye a poultice made from acacia, aloe, myrrh and saffron. Then compress the eyelid tightly above with plaster containing many small lumps.
And the method of small lumps is to take soft cloths, many, and cut all the cloth into four equal pieces; make many from them; then place one over another according to the quantity required by the eye; then compress strongly upon them with a strong bandage.
And repeat this fumigating vapor with suction but without incision.
Then remove the fumigating vapors and allow the eyelid to remain closed during the day and night.
If the bandage becomes soft again, then it should be tightened very much; then remove the bandage after a day and night, as previously mentioned.
If you see the eye has returned to its normal state, that is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster, small lumps, tightening bandage, and fumigating vapors until it heals.
On the incision of the empty bladder.
Cum in urinando, si vis inspexeris
If you observe urination and it breaks, then a bladder stone is emitted outside the eyes like a grain of sand and it spoils human form due to this, and the urge to cut it arises: then operation on him is performed as I have told, and it is, that you insert a probe from the base of the bladder from below towards the upper part.
Then insert another probe with a double thread from the lachrymal side and make it penetrate, and release the first probe according to its position.
Then cut the place of the double thread and bind a part of the bladder around the probe with it and tighten it much.
Then remove the probe, and place wool soaked in oil over the eye and let it go until the thread comes out with the bladder.
After that, take care of the eye with something that comforts it, until the wound heals.
And sometimes the bladder is tightened all around with a bandage of cloth until the eye protrudes greatly.
Then it is perforated with a fine spatula that reaches to the depth of the eye, and moisture of the conjunctiva is let out and the eye descends, and enters immediately; then bind it until it heals.
On the treatment of Alopecy.
Cum uir aliquis aetas uigilet
This disease that is called Alopecy, is nothing but pus that gathers in the eye, similar to water descending and it is not the same.
And the method of operation on this is, that you make him sit on a prepared chair or a straight one.
Then take his head with both your hands from the sides and shake him until you see pus reach the lower parts of your eyes. Then it is fashioned and does not descend, and the passage is opened: let the sick one see as he saw before: and if it does not descend further, know that it is water.
But if no descent of pus occurs with what was said, then make the sick person sit between your hands. Then take a fine probe and puncture it together with the cyst at the junction of the conjunctiva and the corneal membrane in the corona, until the pus comes out.
When it comes out, then pour warm water into the eye in which you have mixed honey; or warm water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey; afterwards treat with the remainder of the treatment until it heals.
On the cure of water that descends into the eye or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have already said the appearance of water in division and which is suitable for puncturing when it speaks and expands, then take the same according to health.
Then it is necessary that you make the sick person sit facing your hands, opposite the light, near the sun; and tie the healthy eye, and press it hard; afterwards close the eyelid of the affected eye with your right hand, if the water is in the left eye; or with your left hand, if it is in the right.
Then take your right hand, if the affected eye is the left; or your left hand, if it is the right.
Then place the tip of your thumb near the cornea on the white part of the eye visible as the smaller lacrimal; then press with force; and you turn with it your hand, until it penetrates into the white part of the eye; and feel that your thumb has reached a void area.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the journey be great enough for depth, the measure of the space which is from the pupil until the end of the blackness: and it is the corona of the eye. You will see this in itself in the vision of the eye, because of the clarity of the cornea coat.
Then place a great [distance] until the place where there is water. Then press it downwards once after another.
If therefore the water descends immediately, then the sick person sees that which opens his sight immediately, and a great [distance] in his own eye.
Then rest a little. If therefore the water descends, then place it again, except that the great [distance] comes out.
When therefore it is pressed and does not rise: then extract the great [distance] with ease; and you turn your hand little by little.
Then dissolve something from clear salt in water: and cleanse the eye with it inside. Then place outside the eye all flaxseed or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white: and bind the healthy eye with it.
We, and those who are of our time, place upon him caraway seed ground with egg white.
If the great [distance] does not obey you in entering into the eye because of its hardness, since it is a man whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you take the spathule which is called Albarid, whose form is as follows.
Therefore pierce it with it only the conjunctiva, and not your hand into the opening: and it is not until you make a way to the great place subtle.
Then insert the great [distance], as we have said.
And for the completion of your work, prepare for the sick a bed properly made, in which he will sleep on his back in a dark house: and prevent him from all movements, and from coughing: and place his food that softens his nature: and do not move his head to the right, nor to the left at all.
And let the suture be according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark place and test its sight: let it see things. Then return the suture until the seventh day.
And it is not proper to do that at the hour of cure, or immediately after the incision; on the contrary, it should be left to others, because water rises quickly through a violent wound.
If it happens to be a hot abscess: then it is necessary to dissolve the eye before the seventh day; and correct it with what soothes the abscess until it is soothed; then without its sight, place it on his face orally, which regulates its vision for several days, as long as it remains in that dark place.
Then he should go out of the house gradually, and convert himself to his own cases.
And know that in surgery a student is not excused from observation often; then he dares to perform an operation.
And indeed a certain one of those from Alayrach has come to us who said that a wound was perforated in Alayrach, through which water flows out.
Therefore I have not seen anyone in your country who has done that; nor read it in any of the old books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the shapes of species from magdan, to stand over him who does not know them.
Make them out of bronze; and let the ends of them be with this same triangular subtlety, and the end sharp.
Chapter XXIV.
Chapter on care of newborn flesh in the nose.
Sometimes numerous different types of flesh are born in the nose, one of which resembles a scorpion with many feet; and from this is cancerous flesh, stony, dark colored; and from this is soft flesh, not dark colored.
Therefore, for the soft flesh among these that is not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should have the sick person sit facing the sun with his nose opposite it, and then open his nostrils; next, insert a hook into those fleshes; then pull them out towards the exterior; and cut what you have caught with a subtle, sharp spatula on one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
If something remains of that which cannot be cut off: then shave it with a small and gentle instrument until nothing remains from it. If blood controls you or a hot abscess occurs: then oppose it with what is necessary; or if it is from malicious abscesses, then hurry and cauterize it until the blood is separated, and all the flesh is removed.
Then vinegar, water or wine should be poured into the nose after the cut. If the nose opens and moisture comes out to the palate, then you know that he is already well.
If the moisture does not penetrate as required, then you know that there is flesh born in the upper bones of the nose, which was not reached by the cut with the instrument.
Therefore, you should insert a linen thread with several knots and let the sick person send one end of the filament into his nose with a reed or whatever he can do after making it similar to a syringe; and draw out the smell until it reaches the skull, and comes out on top of the throat.
And indeed many boys do something similar to what Attomus did in school, and it is an easy thing for him who wishes.
Then place two ends of the thread, one which comes out over the nose and the other which remains inside the nose. Then with scissors, cut the flesh together with the knots that are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already with the knots of the thread.
Then draw out the thread and place linen in the nose after bleeding has ceased, which you have soaked in Egyptian ointment: do this for three days or more, until the ointment completely eats away all that remains of the flesh.
Then put a tube made of lead at the end of the procedure into the nose for some days until it heals.
If it requires drying treatment, use that.
For capping the head while oils and other medications are distilled into the nose, make it from silver or copper, similar to a small lamp, open like a shell and its opening likewise.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, as a tube (cannula).
And the shell-shaped instrument for capping the head should be full, perforated: with a handle at its end, which you hold when heating oil or whatever you wish from distilled substances and liquids.
Chapter 25.
Often a Thelum grows at the tip of the nose and becomes more prominent with days, until its appearance becomes disgusting.
And for this reason it is necessary to cut off the beginning of its appearance and to remove all of it. Then place on that spot a caustic or burning medicine in its place.
If therefore the incision is delayed until it enlarges, then consider if it is hard, stone-like, dark in color and has few senses: then do not touch it with iron, because the ulcer is cancerous.
I have often seen that one who has incised a boil and malignancy has happened to the one who had it.
And if the ulcer is soft when touched and not dark in color, and you see that an incision can be made throughout it, then evacuate the weakened part, and cut it without fear or concern, and care for the place with it, because it extracts and constricts it until it heals.
Chapter 26.
Chapter on nasal suture, lip suture, and ear suture.
Know that when dislocation of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, the operation contributes little to it unless in certain men.
Therefore, when something happens to anyone from that, you must consider if it is a recent wound with its own blood: and then collect the edges of the wound with suture; then care for it until it heals.
And if the dislocation of continuity has already separated the lips and each part is healthy: then it is necessary to remove all the tissue from its visible skin until it bleeds. Then collect the two lips with suture, bind them and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood, pulverized aloes and asafoetida on top of it. Place a piece of emplaster (diafinicon) over the powders, and another consolidated emplaster. Leave it bound for two or three days. Then dissolve it (the suture) and change the medicine. Leave it until the threads are removed by themselves. Then care for it with ointment until healed.
The method of suturing is that you gather the solution of continuity, or with needles, as we have told in abdominal suturing; or gather the solution with thread, as I have informed you.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of lip nodules.
Many men indeed have hard eruptions similar to grains of herbs on their lower or upper lips; some are smaller and others larger.
Therefore, one should turn the lip, find above every nodule of it, and hang it with a hook, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision with boiled linen cloth until the blood is separated.
Then it is rubbed with vinegar and the place where there is an inflammation is treated with it until the wounds heal.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the incision of the born flesh on the gum.
Often a flesh grows up over the gum which is called ablus by the ancients.
Therefore, one should hang it with a hook; or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, and let pus or blood run out.
Then put over the place boiled linen cloth, or other healing powders, drying.
If that flesh returns after treatment, for it often returns, then cut it a second time and burn it; for it does not return after being burned.
Chapter XXIX.
On the scraping of teeth with iron.
When they are gathered on the surfaces of teeth from both the inner and outer parts, and between the gums and rough cortices, they become decayed, turn yellow and green, until corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul because of it.
Therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and place his head in your lap, and grind away the cavity and tooth, where the cortices appear to you, until there remains nothing of them; similarly do for blackness, greenness, yellowishness, and others until they are clean.
If what is within them is removed at the beginning of the reasoning, it is good; and if not, then apply the razor to them on another day, on the second, and on the third, until finally your study reaches the end that you desire.
And know that a tooth requires razors of various shapes and forms, many figures; according to what is prepared for your operation: because the razor with which a tooth is shaved from below is different from the razor with which it is shaved between teeth, in accordance with other shapes.
And these shapes of razors should be prepared by you, which you see.
Chapter 30.
Chapter on the extraction of tooth pain.
It is necessary that you cure the tooth from its own pain with all your skill, and proceed slowly in extracting it. For there is no substitute for it when it is extracted; because it is a substance that is raised up; until when there is no excuse for the extraction of it, then it is necessary when the patient is compelled to extract it himself, that he may be strengthened and assured by you that the tooth causing pain will be replaced.
For often pain deceives the patient and believes that there is pus in the tooth and extracts it himself; then the pain does not subside until the diseased tooth is extracted.
We have already seen that from the operation of phlebotomists.
When therefore it is certified to you that a hard tooth itself is painful, then it is necessary that you lancet around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is something virtuous, until it softens from all sides: then move it yourself with your fingers, or with fine forceps first of all gently, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps in those places well, and hold the head of the weak between your knees: what you have already firmly held, so that it does not move: then pull out the tooth in a straight direction, so as not to break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and introduce it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did first.
If however the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary that you fill that hole with a cloth and bind it with the end of a fine radius so as not to break it during your compression on it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you be careful with the lancet around the gum from all sides much.
And keep your strength so as not to break it and a part remains of it and returns to the weak from that illness which is greater in pain at first.
And be careful not to do what ignorant phlebotomists do in haste and the arrogance of their extraction, beyond what we have said.
For often they bring great illnesses upon men, whose more difficult ones are to break and all roots remain or some of them, or to extract it with certain bones of the jaw as we have testified many times.
Then it is to be covered after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If there should be bleeding from the places (for it often happens), then rub something of the alum and fill the place with it; and if not, cauterize it if you do not have alum.
The handles of the fine forceps by which the molars are moved should be long at the ends, short in the arms, heavy, so that they do not break when pressed on the teeth; they should be like those of large forceps, until they do not bite themselves or become bent when squeezed with them; the ends should be short, and made of hard iron, or skillfully made from brass, with sharp tips at the ends; and in their tips there should be teeth, some of which enter into others and tighten with a proper constriction, strong.
And sometimes the ends are like the shape of a bird's beak called "ciconia", and they are strong in constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
Chapter on Extraction of Teeth and Removal of Fractured Bone of the Jaw.
When a tooth that breaks off remains after its extraction, then it is necessary to place hot compresses with butter for one or two days until the location becomes softened; then introduce into it alum or forceps, whose tips resemble the beak of a bird called "ciconia". The form is that of forceps.
The ends should be made like a plane blade or an aliskilfegi.
If these forceps do not obey you in extraction, then it is necessary to cauterize the root and to peel off all the flesh and to introduce an instrument called "Palanca parua", whose form is as follows:
The extremity should be short and not too thick; and it should not be filled (or swollen), so that it does not break.
If the root comes out through (it), it is good; if not, help with other tools of similar form.
The first (one) has a triangle-shaped end, in which there is some thickness.
Triangle-shaped thin end.
And with other tools and implements that came before (in the ratio of teeth).
Also helps with this tool similar to a large nail, of the same form, triangle-shaped twisted end with some thickness, so that it does not break; and let it not be filled (or swollen).
And know that there are many tools for the teeth; and similarly, other implements are not counted; and the wise artisan, skilled in his art, finds for himself the tool according to what the operation and the disease itself require.
Because among diseases there are those for which the ancients did not create a tool, due to the diversity of their forms.
If the bone is broken from the jaw, or from other bones of the mouth, or putrefies; then examine it at its location with that which suits it among the tools and forceps mentioned for root extraction, and help with the one whose shape is this (described earlier).
Let there be some thickness gradually, so that the bone can be pulled or held with it and does not escape and move, until the bone comes out; and restore the place with appropriate medicines for that.
If there is a small putrefaction in the bone, then scrape it off from its own putrefaction, and take care of it until it heals.
De Serratura dentium quibusdam protrudent
On the serration of protruding teeth.
When some teeth protrude not according to their natural course, it gives rise to an ugly form, and especially when this happens in women and girls, that is to say, those of a venereal condition.
The surgeon must examine the matter carefully. If a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit or can be serrated or filed, then pull it out; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it off with this tool, whose shape is as follows:
It resembles a small beak made of iron and has an extremely sharp tip.
Make your cut several days apart, due to the hardness of the tooth and so as not to disturb another tooth.
If it is protruding for filing, then file it with a file made of iron, whose shape is as follows:
The whole is made of ivory, and its handle is of many small points like a limed lime-stone, with which it is ground gradually for many days with ease, so as not to disturb the tooth, and fall: then smooth it with it, at the end, grind it again with some rasps.
If it is a tooth, from which a part breaks and injures the tongue: then it is necessary that lime be applied to it, until the roughness of the fracture is removed, and it is made smooth: and it must not injure the tongue, nor corrupt speech.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the filing of teeth with gold threads.
When it happens to the front teeth that they are struck or shaken due to a blow or accident, and the weak person cannot hold what he eats lest it fall: and you have treated them with medicines for splints, and the treatment was not effective: then it is appropriate for them to be held together with a gold thread: because silver becomes green and rots after days, but gold never changes.
And let the thread be of intermediate fineness and thickness according to its quantity, which fits between the teeth.
And the form of filing is that you take the thread and insert its double between two healthy teeth: then you weave with two ends of the thread between the moved teeth, whether there is one or more, until you reach with the needle up to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then you weave again to the part from which you began: and tighten your hand with delicacy and wisdom until it is not moved at all: and let your compression, by which you hold the thread, be near the roots of the teeth, so that it does not escape.
Then cut off the superfluous ends of the thread with scissors: and bring together both, and turn them towards yourself: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moved tooth, so that they do not injure the tongue: then let it be so tightened until it remains.
If it is opened or cut open, bind them with another thread and let it remain in that condition for a period of time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of the intertwining of two healthy teeth, and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth or two teeth return to their respective places after loss, and are retained as we have said, and remain: this does not happen unless the skilled and experienced craftsman performs it.
And sometimes a tooth is fashioned from the bones of a calf: and it is made like the form of a tooth, and placed in the place where it is secured and bound as we have said; and it remains, and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Whenever this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural, when man is born, or accidental, from a healed wound.
The procedure in this case is to open the weak bone in his head within your pouch, and raise his tongue; then cut the nerve-ligament across width until it is released from its hold.
If there is something hard and knotted within it, and it comes from the consolidation of a wound; then throw an awl into it and split it across width until you cut the ligament, and the knotting is released.
And beware, lest there is a split in deep flesh, and you cut an artery there, and blood flows out.
Then it is washed with water and rose petals or vinegar or cold water.
Then place a flax cloth from linen under the tongue for the patient to keep all night so that it does not consolidate again.
If, however, there is blood flow, then place on it a piece of powdered hematite. If the blood overpowers you, then cauterize the place with a lentiginous cautery that suits it; then take care of him with the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
Chapter 35.
Whenever under the tongue there occurs an aposteme resembling a small frog that prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and it may perhaps grow so much that it fills up the bone.
And the procedure is to open the weak bone facing the sun and examine the aposteme.
If you see it (the patient) of a dark or black color, hard, who does not have a weak sensation: then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it is hollowed out towards whiteness, in which there is moisture: then throw in a hook, and cut it with a thin spatula, and free it from all sides. What if blood constrains you during your operation hour? Then place upon it a piece of burnt alum, until the blood is cut off; then return to your operation, until you extract it with its contents.
Then wash (it) with vinegar and salt; and take care of it with appropriate treatment until it is healed.
[Title: Treatment for an abscess of two tonsils]
Chapter XXXVI.
Whenever a swelling similar to goitre occurs near the throat, that is, glands, which are called double amygdalae: when you treat them as we have said in division, and they do not heal, then consider.
If the abscess is hard, dark colored, with few senses: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and its root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing blood flow, rather let it be until it matures. Then either pierce it yourself: or it will burst by itself.
And if it is white in color, round and its root is thin: then it should be cut.
And the operation on it is that you consider before the operation itself if the abscess of it has ceased to be warm and completed its quiet, or it decreases somewhat: then let the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should be in your lap: and open his mouth, and the servant holding him by hands, press his tongue downwards with the instrument whose form is as follows.
Let it be made of silver or copper, which should be thin like a knife.
When you press the tongue with it and the abscess is shown to you, and it falls onto it under your sight: then take a hook, and attach it to the amygdala, and pull it out as far as possible, taking something from the tunics with it.
Then cut it with the instrument whose form is as follows. It is similar to forks: but its extremities should be curved, so that the opening of each one is on a straight line, perpendicular to the other, thus care must be taken that it is made of iron or copper coated with aluminum.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, whose form is as follows: Sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after cutting one almond, cut the other in the same shape of the incision.
Then, after the incision, the sick person shall rinse his throat with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If blood flows, he shall rinse with water in which have been boiled the peels of pomegranates or leaves of myrtle and similar ones from boxwood, until the flow of blood stops; then care for him until he is cured.
And sometimes boils other than almonds grow in the throat. Cut them accordingly as I said in the incision of two almonds equally.
I myself have already been treated by a woman from a boil that was born in her throat, which drew towards the neck, with few senses, which almost closed her throat; and the woman breathed through a narrow nostril, and had already prohibited food and drink; and she was almost at death if she remained for one or two days.
And the boil rose only so high that it had sent out two branches until they came out over two nostrils.
Therefore I rushed quickly and fixed a hook on one of them. Then I pulled it out, and a large part came out with it.
Then I cut off the part where I had grasped it from the nostril.
Then I did what came out of the other nostril.
Then I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue; and afterwards I fixed a hook on the boil; then I cut off a part of it, and no more came out except a little blood; so the throat of the woman was healed, and she immediately began to drink water, then received food.
I did not stop cutting from that ulcer for a long period of time: and the ulcer succeeded in its place which I was cutting, until it was extended too much and with it that (something).
I therefore cauterized the ulcer located at the throat.
Therefore it stood still after addition: then I walked away from there, and I did not know what God had done with it after me.
Chapter on the incision of the ulcer in the throat.
Chapter XXXVII.
When the catarrh descends to the throat, and an ulcer forms, and it is long: then it is called a perpendicular; and if it is thick and round at the lower part, it is then named as a boil.
When it is cured along with what I said in the division, and the cure does not work: and you see that the ulcer has become warm and has subsided, and is subtle: then it is necessary to cut it.
And what is attached to it, round, and not long, and is bloody or dark red or black, and there is no sensation in it: then it is necessary to make an incision of it. For there is fear over the weak (one) in it.
Therefore when you see it according to the manner which I said from whiteness, and its length: make the weak person sit before the sun; and press his tongue with the tool whose story preceded; then put a hook in the throat, and pull it downwards: and cut it with one of two tools which I said in the incision of the two salivary glands.
And it is necessary not to cut from it, unless what is added exceeds a natural limit without addition.
For if you cut more from it, you will damage the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what was said about the incision of the two salivary glands: and cure it until it heals.
If the sick person is afraid of incision: then it is necessary that you use your skill in the cauterization of him without fear and dread.
The method of cauterization is not otherwise, except with sharp water: and it is that you place the head of the sick one in your armpit. Then press his tongue with the instrument which we said. Then take water which I told you in the chapter on cauterization and make a not-extinguished ladle with it, and do not make it thick or thin, and fill this instrument's hollow with it, whose shape is as follows: (Here, there would be a drawing of the tool)
Let the end where the medicine is placed have a hollow like that of a snail's shell.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the wound itself: and let the sick one lie on his side, so that saliva runs out of his mouth from the internal medicine, so that nothing comes down from it to his throat, and it does not harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from the first apply it to the wound in quantity of half an hour, until you see it already turned black and quieted the biting of the medicine.
And if you want to receive a cup and cover it over the end of the radius, and pour the cup with the medicine, and insert the radius with the covered cup on top, until the cup adheres to the wound.
Do this many times, until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound. Then let it go: for it will burn and fall off after three or four days.
If you need to apply medicine again, do so: and after cauterization wash the wound around it with a cup immersed in butter, and cleanse what is around it from the medicine: and wash it with cold water.
And it shall be treated from outside with cupping glasses, and from inside with gargles, until it heals.
This method of treatment is healthier than incision and farther from fear.
And sometimes the ulcer is also treated with a method more subtle than cautery and incision: it is treated with fumigation, according to this method. Take calaminthe, hyssop, origanum, rut, sseah, chamomile, abrotanum and similar herbs: gather all of them or some of them in a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, and boil them: the pot should be coated well with clay, and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which you arrange an instrument concave according to this method.
Make it of silver or copper: and the end is inserted into the mouth of the sick one, until the vapor reaches the ulcer through a tube, until the ulcer is completely covered.
Then repeat this over and over again, until it burns.
And beware not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess. Usually, however, you add [something] to an abscess: it should not be done unless at the time of the decline of the heat of the abscess.
If this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and fill its tip with the bark of an ox's horn: so that the bone of the sick one is not burned: because the bark of the ox's horn prevents the vapor from burning the bone: and this is part of good treatment with safety.
Chapter on removing thorns and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Often a bone or a fish spine adheres to the throat.
Therefore, it is necessary to remove what appears from among them that lies beneath the sight, after you press the tongue with an instrument near the sun, and it becomes clear to you that there is something in the throat.
And what is not apparent to you and hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make a man vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps therefore it will come out attached matter through vomiting.
Or the sick person swallows a piece of nutmeg, or the root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread: or let him take a piece of dried sea sponge that is gentle: and tie it up with a thread, then let him swallow it. When it reaches the place where there are thorns or bone, and it is pulled out, then it comes out.
If it does not come out as we said: then use an instrument made of lead in this shape.
Let it be thicker than the radius by a little, and at its end let there be a bent part, which he introduces into his throat easily: and let him himself hold his head raised up.
And let him avoid touching his epiglottis, so that he does not get a cough, and push with it the bone or thorn, or introduce it himself with his hand.
But what the sick person introduces is better: because of his knowledge of the place of the attached matter: and let him push below or pull his hand with the instrument upwards, all of it according to the size that is prepared for him, until it comes out.
Chapter on the extraction of Leeches.
Chapter 39.
When the leech is cured with what I said in the division of cure with medicines, and it does not work: then examine in the throat of the sick person facing the sun, or after pressing his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
If your sight falls upon the leech, extract it with a small hook or with pointed forceps well placed.
If it is not possible with them (the instruments): then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the sick one, up to near the throat; then insert into the concavity of the cannula hot iron with fire. Do this often: and let the sick person abstain from water all day.
Then let him take a vessel full of cold water, and open his mouth in it; and wash his mouth with it, and swallow nothing from it; and move the water one hour after another with his hand. For leeches it falls immediately when they feel water.
If it does not come out with what I have said, then fumigate the sick one with bedbugs, or with ash with the instrument that I have mentioned for fumigating the ear.
Do this often, because it will fall by itself.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot, in which there are live prunes with fire; and let the pot be covered with a cover, through whose middle there is an opening; and arrange the end of the instrument in it.
Then throw the fumigation, and let the sick one place his mouth at the end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not come out, until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech. For leeches fall immediately.
If it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation often.
Let the sick person endure thirst, and eat salt and other things, and drink no water.
Therefore it is necessary that it comes out with this regimen.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which a leech is extracted from the throat, when it falls on its face.
It resembles forceps, as you see; except that there is a bend in it which enters the throat. The end of it is similar to the mouth of an owl, which is called a ciconia, in which there is roughness like a file. When it grasps something, it does not let go of it completely.
On the opening of abscesses and their cutting and treatment in general.
Chapter XL (40).
The species of abscesses are many, according to their recollection, that is, one kind and one kind only in this book; and they are diverse in the perforation of them, and cutting of themselves from two ways.
One kind is a type of abscess by itself, and that which it grasps from moisture.
And the second way is due to places, where it happens from the body.
Because an abscess occurring in the head is different from an abscess occurring in the anus; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from an abscess occurring at the joints; and each of them has its own judgment according to the operation.
And among the abscesses are those that should not be perforated unless after the maturation of pus in them and its completion; and there are those that must be perforated while they are raw and do not mature according to their completion.
As abscesses which are near the joints.
Because an abscess when it occurs near a joint and prolongs itself until it rots what is around its circumference, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted; therefore it is the cause of a more pronounced contraction of that member.
Or is an abscess near the main member; because if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, it will harm either him or through the main member itself.
Or it is near the anus; therefore perforate it immaturely. And it is not necessary to perforate a raw abscess, not fully digested, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not rot deeply and extend to the interior of the anus, and become a fistula or remain in its end which cannot heal.
It is necessary that you know the hour of perforation of the abscess, which has matured according to completion; and it is at the sedation of pain, the recession of fever, and the diminution of redness, and pulsation, and acuity of the head of the abscess; and the remaining signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower part of the abscess and of greater protrusion; and the perforation shall proceed along the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of hands and feet, shoulders, necks, tendons, nerves, arteries, and ultimately in all places where there is no reflection.
In those which reflect, proceed with the perforation according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better to wait for the perforation of its digestion, as we said according to completion.
Because if you perforate it before that, the course of the virus from it is prolonged and there are many filths and putrefaction, and possibly its edges harden and its depth increases.
And some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the body when necessary; or according to that which the member needs.
And it is necessary that you administer a small perforation to small abscesses and a large perforation to large abscesses; or many cuts according to the similarity of the size of the abscess.
And among abscesses, there are those in which the skin should be hollowed out; and it is cut when it has become like a cloth and reached the end that is already dead; as what happens often with buboes and swellings.
And among those, there are some which are cut with a section having three angles. And from them (the instruments) is one, when it is cut as in the figure of a myrtle leaf.
As an inguinal abscess.
And among them (the instruments) are those for administering round and crescent-shaped sections, and similar ones for other sections.
But that which has no head, such as superficial abscesses, should be punctured with a superficial lancing or only by incision.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, it should be punctured so that it does not burst and all the pus is drawn out at that hour; rather, draw out a part of it from it. Then wait for another day before operating on an abscess. Then draw something more from the pus again.
Do this repeatedly according to degree until it comes out; especially if the patient is weak or of poor strength, or a woman in pregnancy, or a small boy, or an old man decrepitus; for animal spirits are often resolved with the release of pus; and perhaps the weak one may die, and you will not benefit.
Be careful therefore, for this chapter requires great caution.
And after your puncture of the abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound; and be mindful. If the wound of the abscess is small or the incision is flat, then administer linen cloth or an old bandage. And if the abscess is large and there are many cracks of puncture, then it is necessary to insert linen into each crack until they meet.
And if you have removed a piece of skin from an abscess or hollowed out the surrounding area, then it is necessary to fill it with an old bandage, as when fabric is woven or flax is combed without moisture; and bind it for three days.
Then cut it open and care for that which is necessary with an ointment until it heals.
If there should be a flow of blood at the time of your operation, then give cold water and vinegar, after it has been soaked in cloths; and place this over the area of blood flow many times.
If the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary that you give a regimen, treatment and powders, which I have described in many places of this our book, and from division.
If it is in winter time, and the place of the amputation is of many nerves; then it is necessary that you pour powder with wine and warm oil, and place them over the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy; then it is necessary that you place powders soaked in water, or oil, or wine and oil, and cool everything. Until the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary that you remove the amputation, clean it, and administer for its treatment whatever suits it, until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the treatment of amputations universally.
According to the method of distinction, I have already said about every amputation, how is the way to its treatment separately chapter by chapter.
Chapter XL (40).
Chapter on the sectioning of amputations that occur in the skin of the head.
Pustules small, of the nature of knots, occur on the head's skin, which are contained by sacs like they were pouches of a hen.
And their appearance is manyfold.
Some of them are fatty: some contain moisture similar to paste: some contain moisture like that of a scab and plaster: and those alike, and from them there are hard stones.
And in the cutting of all [of them] and their extraction, there is no fear, as long as it does not cause opposition to an artery at their cutting.
And the operation in cutting them is to try it with the instrument whose shape comes after these words, which is called "Intromissum," until you know what it contains.
For if it is what contains moisture, then cut it with a transverse surface-cut along its length in this manner: according to this shape.
And begin with the cut from line b to line g. For when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off the cyst that contains this moisture, and do not leave anything inside of it.
For often it returns if something remains from it.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with it, and let it remain until another day. For that which remains from the cyst corrodes itself.
Then repeatedly over the wound with Egyptian ointment second and third times, as often as needed, until you believe that nothing remains from the cyst; then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If the pustule contains a fat knot: then cut it according to this shape, with a transverse cross-cut; and thrust needles between the folds of the cut, and scrape off all of it from every side: and strive in extracting the skin that contains it.
If however an artery opposes (you), then do what I shall tell you afterwards.
And similarly do in cauterization (if it is a stone), by cutting and the same cure, as we have said before.
Cutting over a stone-like aposteme is easier; because it has little blood and moisture. Sometimes there are some of these apostemes in the head in certain men, with which there is no moisture.
This is because I have cut over an aposteme on an old woman's head and found the aposteme to be as hard and solid as a stone, rough, white, which could not be broken; and if anyone struck it with force, he injured himself.
In other cases of apostemic occurrences in the head, with the exception of these specific apostemes that occur in children's heads and at the roots of the ears, the incision of all of them should be a superficial incision.
Or make a perforation of theirs always from the lower part of it, so that the flow of pus is directed towards the lower areas.
Then care for these with what fits them in terms of cure.
Section on Straphules (boils) in the neck.
Chapter XLII.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, under the buttocks, and in the groins; and sometimes they occur elsewhere in the body.
On the abscesses that occur on the neck, there is one, and many; they are generated from opposite sides; and every boil from them is within its own layer, as it is with knots and abscesses of the head, as we have said.
The types of these boils are numerous. For from them are the stone-like ones; and from them there are those containing moisture; and from them are the malicious ones, which do not obey treatment.
In the good disposition of that boil which you see in touch, whose evident is near to the skin color, and moves towards every part, and is not attached with the neck muscles, nor with the groin, nor with the artery, nor is deep: it should be cut off by superficial section from above to lower part of the body along the line, b. to line, g., and scrape it from all sides; and stretch two layers of skin with a knife or with several knives if needed, as we said in the abscesses of the head, and draw it out gradually.
And it is on caution, that no vein or nerve should be cut.
Let the knife not be very sharp; so that your hand should not hurt with the incision, or disturb the sick one, and cut what is not necessary.
If you cut a vein or an artery, it prohibits you from operation, then place in the wound linen soaked with powder that removes blood, and tighten the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess subsides and the wound softens; or it begins to rot.
The blood is to be cut through the skin, therefore return to your operation until you are finished.
Next, ask with your index finger if there remains anything of the straws (stitches) small: therefore cut them and clean them.
If there is in the root of the stitch a large vein, then it is necessary not to cut that stitch from its root: rather tie it with a strong double thread and leave it until it falls by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with an old patch that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of yourself.
If the stitch is cut entirely, then gather together the edges of the wound and sew it up immediately after you see that there remains no superfluity.
If, however, you see that there remains superfluity due to the size of the stitch, then it is necessary to stretch out to cut its root and pull it out: and apply the suture as we have said.
And what contains humidities from the stitches, pierce it with a superficial puncture to make its place appear to you: and place the puncture below that which follows lower in the body, as we have said.
Then apply linen with ointment after the puncture and similar things to burn what remains from corruption until you see that the wound is clean: then take care of yourself with a more potent ointment for flesh until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
Section on Epiglottis after amputation within the throat occurring.
The ancients said this section on the Epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it: this is their writing.
In those with synanchias, it is necessary to be cautious about section of the Epiglottis: as no help is provided by that; because all veins and lungs are weak.
In those who have a hot boil in the mouth, throat or both amygdalae, when there is no illness in the canal, it is necessary to use section of the Epiglottis to avoid ruin which happens through strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the Epiglottis, it should be done under three or four circles of the Epiglottis with a small section along its width, in that which is between two circles by quantity; this should be a section in sifac, not cartilage; and indeed this place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and blood vessels are distant from it.
If the physician is afraid, then it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he shall incise the skin until he reaches the canal; be cautious of blood vessels, if he sees any from them.
Then he shall cut the sifac as we have said; it is indicated by the phlegm that comes out from there, with what is burst and separation of voice.
And leave an open wound for some time.
When the hour comes when strangulation is feared, gather two lips of the wound skin, and the skin itself alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it heals.
Says Albucasis. The sum of the speech that I have related is not exposure unless they see that one of these boils has already choked the throat of a weak person; and he has risen up sickly near to death, and wishes to cut his breathing; they go to cut the Epiglottis so that the weak one may breathe over the place of the wound with some kind of breathing, and be saved from death; and for this reason they have commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed, which lasts three days or so itself; then therefore they have commanded to sew up the wound and take care of it until it heals.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a maidservant received a knife and sent it into her own throat and cut a part of the trachea of the lungs.
And I was summoned to treat her, and I found her gasping, as is the gasp of the dead.
So I examined the wound, and I found that blood had come out from the wound in a small amount. Therefore, I suspected that she had not severed an artery nor vein; and a wind was coming out of the wound.
I therefore approached the wound and cured it until it healed; and nothing happened to the maidservant except a cough; and she returned after days to a better condition of her health.
Therefore, from this I say that there is no fear in the tracheotomy (section of Epiglottis).
Chapter on the tracheotomy (section) of a hernia of the throat.
Chapter 44.
This called hernia of the throat is a large aposteme (abscess), according to the color of the body; and it occurs more in women.
And it is according to two modes: for it is natural, or it is accidental (acquired).
In the natural one, there is no inborn defect.
The accidental one is according to two modes: of which one is similar to fatty nodes (nodules).\]   Et hic nullo modo debet procedi ad operationem, nisi sit necessarium; et illud debet operari a magistro, qui hab And the other mode is similar to an abscess caused by nodulation of an artery.\[ Et hic nullo modo debet procedi ad operationem, nisi sit necessarium; et illud debet operari a mag And there is fear in this one, and it should not be proceeded with operation unless necessary; and if it must be operated upon, it should be operated on by a master who has\[ Et hic nullo modo debet procedi ad operationem, nisi sit necessarium; et illud debet operari a mag\] skill in inserting (instruments). If therefore you find the same sort of fatty lump and it is not suspended with any vein: then cut it off, as knots are cut off; and draw it out along with what it contains from the chest, if it is in the chest: and if not, then examine all around it. Care for the place with whatever is necessary for healing, until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Chapter on incision regarding lumps (knots).
There are many types of lumps (knots), and I have already said all their species in the division; and it is necessary that I here explain the difference between a knot and an exitration (excision) when there is doubt.
Therefore, when the exitration (excision) is accompanied by heat and fever and intense pains until the boiling of superfluity subsides and the rotting is complete: then the fever and the heat cease.
When the knot is not accompanied by heat, fever or pains and contains them in a chest (cavity) which is its proper sac: it is closed like a chickpea, and made like a gourd (melon), and larger or smaller.
And they are according to two species: either fatty: or containing moisture. The colors of the moisture (humidity) are many, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you approach the healing of a knot, you should examine it first with an instrument called "Intromissum", according to its form which will come in the chapter that follows this one.
The method of examination of abscesses and all knots is to take this instrument, and insert it into the moistest place which you find in the abscess: and you shall turn your fingers gradually with it until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then, your last hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Extract (it), and observe what comes out with its trace.
If (it) comes out running moisture, whatever its color is: then cut it with a superficial incision, according to what I said about other abscesses.
And if no running moisture comes out in the trace of (the foreign body), then you know that it is fat: then cut over it with a section having the form of a cross, according to this form, as I taught you: and hang it up with tweezers, and strip off the skin from all sides easily: and keep a pot on it if possible, in order to extract it along with the knot.
If it breaks during the operation from the pot and cannot be extracted whole, then extract it piecemeal until nothing remains of it.
For if something remains of it, little or much, the knot returns most of all.
If it overpowers you, and something remains of it: then fill the wound at your completion with certain corrosive powders: and stitch up the wound, and put on top of it what sits on the abscess, hot, and take care of it with the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
If therefore the knot is large, then separate its two lips, and take care of it with that which makes it grow together.
If however it is a pulsating vein or not pulsating to you: then flee, and fill the place with boiled pitch, and leave it tightly sealed for two days or three, until the wound rots, and the boiling of blood subsides: then return to cut what remains of the knot.
De usu fori in sectionibus et perforationibus.
Exterior instruments for cutting and perforating.
Of the forms of instruments introduced, there are three kinds.
For one is great, and one is medium, and one is small.
Let them be made from iron of square tips well-balanced, so that they enter smoothly into the wound.
And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and it is called perforation; and one of them is named bery, that is, piercing; and there are three kinds.
Amongst them there is a large one, a middle one, and a small one.
They converge so that they may be incised through abscesses, boils, fistulas, and buboes because they are among bones.
And some are made round, smooth, blunt, like the large needle that is set in handles, either from citrine or brass, iron, or silver.
Those which are made of citrine are better.
They are also made of black lead, which converge so that they may be used to probe fistulas, the concavity of which serves as reflection, so that they reflect with their smoothness along with those reflections.
And again, there are three kinds. Because amongst them there are long ones, medium ones, and short ones according to the size of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma of vaginas, and there are many kinds.
Because amongst them there are simple ones, that is, those which have a single curve; and there are three kinds as you see, large, medium, and small.
And amongst them there are blind vaginas; and there are three kinds.
And amongst them there are vaginas with two curves; and there are three kinds: and amongst them there are vaginas with three curves; and there are three kinds: and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels with which knots and abscesses are cut and scraped; and there are three kinds because amongst them there is a large one, a middle one, and a small one.
The extremities for making a section are sharp, the other extremities are not sharp: they are not placed thus unless to provide help during excoriation of Nodules because of fear of incision of vein or nerve, and so that the sick one may be healed by it, and find some tranquility briefly as in burning which is found during excoriation of an abscess.
They are made of copper and resemble a thermometer, with a hidden spatula-like hole at one end; it runs through to the inside or outside as desired, as you can see.
The shape of spatulas hidden among the fingers during incision of an abscess; the sick do not feel these; they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The forms of vein-tied bandages for cutting blood flow; they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Make them of copper or citron, round, slightly long, as you can see; they should be fine.
And it is necessary that these vein-tied bandage forms be large and small with you; so that you can cut blood with them quickly when there is need, and then when medicine is not present with you.
However, do not use them for cutting blood in any part of the body, nor use them except in fleshy parts; such as thighs, hips, arms, breasts, stomach, groin, and similar places, from fleshy areas, moist.
And sometimes they are made into small instruments similar to the covers of fists, according to their form; with which blood is cut when it flows from the place of phlebotomy or incision of vein or artery; and sometimes they are made round in this shape.
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of human breasts resembling those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell during sleep (that is, when they begin to dream) until they resemble those of women; and they remain foul smelling afterwards.
Whoever abhors this (condition), it is necessary that he cuts the breasts with a lunar incision according to this form along the line, 'b' to the line, 'g'. Then scrape off all the fatness. Then fill the wound with a ointment of resin. Then join two lips of the wound with stitches, and take care of it until it heals.
If the breast, however, droops downwards and becomes soft due to its size, as happens with women; then it is necessary that it be opened in two lateral incisions on both upper sides, each similar to the shape of the moon, one contained within the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller one, according to this form from line 'b' to line 'g'. Afterwards scrape off the skin that is between the two lips and remove the fatness, and administer what I have said about stitching and powders, which is necessary for treatment, until it heals.
If the incision is not complete as required for you to make it, either due to the restlessness of the patient or due to bleeding; then fill the wound with a cauterized substance submerged in a corrosive ointment, and leave it until it corrodes what remains from the fatness. Then take care of it until it heals.
Chapter on the perforation of a boil that occurs under an armpit.
Chapter XLVIII.
These ulcers that occur under the titillico, are of the species of hard worms, which contain cysts, and among them are those containing moistures.
Among those containing moistures, it is necessary that they be cut with a lunar section according to this form, from line b to line g. When everything within the ulcer is evacuated through pus, then fill it up with an old cloth and leave it until another day.
Then remove the cloth, and treat it with a suitable ointment until it heals.
If the ulcer is of the species of hard worms resembling knots, then cut it across, as we said in the section on cutting off worms equally.
If the wound extends so as to discharge pus, then administer cautery to it, according to what we said in that which was previously mentioned.
Chapter XLIX.
[Paragraph on the sectioning of ulcers due to an artery or vein.]
When an artery is torn and the skin above it hardens, there often occurs an ulcer; similarly, the same occurs with veins so that an ulcer and swelling occur in them.
And the signs by which it is recognized that an ulcer and swelling are due to an artery or vein, are: because when an ulcer is due to an artery, it is long and gathered in the depth of the body; and when you press the ulcer with your fingers, it feels as if there is a grinding sensation.
And that which is due to a vein, is round and apparent on the body.
And cutting into this ulcer is a mistake, and particularly when it is under the shoulders, groins, neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great. It is necessary therefore that his care with iron should be avoided, and what is also from them (the iron tools) at the extremities, or at the head, it is necessary to avoid.
Over that which is from them due to swelling of the artery opening, find in the skin incision along its length. Then open the incision with scissors, afterwards the artery: and release it from the tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert beneath it the awl and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread at two places, according to what I taught you regarding the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
Then prick the place which is between two ligaments with a lancet until all blood comes out, and dissolve the abscess.
Then administer a treatment that produces pus until the ligaments fall off: afterwards treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
If it is an abscess due to a vein cut, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what is possible from the abscess with skin. Then insert the awl beneath the place that you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and let there be a double thread in it until you pull it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess with a good ligament: according to what I said to you regarding ligating a vein, from two parts with double ends of thread.
If you fear that the thread may be pulled out, then insert another awl with another thread beneath the entire abscess near the incision: press and tie your threads at four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle of it until when it comes out what is in it: then cut off excess skin and let go of that which was tied from it.
Then place on top of the smallpox blister that you have submerged in wine, and oil. Administer the treatment which is made with linen cloths and ointments until it heals.
Head L.
On paralysis that occurs due to twisting of the nerves.
As an aposteme occurs in arteries and veins, so does it occur in nerves; this happens to them due to a blow or excessive labor, or similar causes; and they mainly happen in places of joints, heels, and in any place where the connections are moved; and this aposteme is severe.
It resembles its color to the rest of the body and is found in many forms without pain; and when it is tightened with violence, it feels weak, like in a state of numbness.
And the aposteme is not gathered deep within the body, but it is under the skin; and it moves to all parts, and does not reach forward or backward.
Therefore, what is found in joints should not be pierced with iron. Perhaps it will cause a contraction.
In the one that is found on the head or forehead, puncture the skin with a lancet. If the aposteme is small, then hold it with forceps and cut it off at the root.
If it is large, then hang it up with a hook and pare it; afterwards remove it, and sew the wound with suture; and treat it until it heals.
Head LII.
On incision of an aposteme that occurs in the abdomen.
Occasionally, certain men have recurring boils in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies, which are called "Fungalia," due to their similarity with mushrooms.
Their root is subtle, and the head of them is thick, and they have turned-over lips on them. And from it there is a small one: and from it there is what can be magnified greatly.
I myself have seen a man whose belly had two boils, which were more like mushrooms than other things: there was no difference between them; they were white, with thin roots, and their lips were turned-over, and they burst, and moisture always flowed out of them.
I then cut them, and found that one weighed about X and VIII ounces, and the other about VI ounces. The operation for cutting them is this: if the patient is weak and the boil is white, moist, with a thin root, then cut it with a wide spatula, and have cautery ready in your presence.
For often blood is expelled at the cutting of it: so beware if you are overcome by blood, then cauterize it.
If you see a weak, fearful and timid person afraid of cutting with iron, then take a well-made silk thread, and bind it with it: its method is the one I have said, and let him go for two days.
Then add to the binding of the silk thread. Therefore do not cease to bind the lead thread as often as it presses on the boil until it is cut off and falls out without effort.
If the boil is large at the root, then there is a fear and terror in cutting it, especially since it is in the belly.
It is possible to cut it in half. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then cure it, until the wound heals.
And beware of cutting what is black and has few senses, with a foul appearance; for it is a cancerous aposteme, and I will pay (for) this when reminded of Cancer afterwards.
Chapter LII.
Chapter on the treatment of the protrusion of the umbilicus.
A protrusion of the umbilicus arises from many causes. It arises either from fistulas (sifac) above the abdomen and out comes the althub or the intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. It arises either from blood flowing from a vein, or from an artery, as mentioned before. It arises from a constriction of wind there (in the navel area).
But if it is due to a fistula (sifac), and the passage of pus: then its colour is like that of an abscess; it is filled with pus without pain; and its position appears different. And if it is due to the passage of the intestine: then its position, as previously mentioned, is of a much more pronounced difference. When you press it with your fingers, it disappears; then it returns and perhaps there is a sound; and it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath, and there is much pain.
But if it is due to moisture: then it is soft; when you press it with your hand, it does not disappear, nor can it be constricted, nor does it increase in size.
If it is due to blood: then with these signs (inflammation and swelling) the abscess appears black at the navel.
But if it is due to fleshy matter: then the abscess is large, hard and solid, and its size increases by a single degree.
If it is due to wind: then when touched, it is soft.
And the operation in this case is to examine whether the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or wind: then it is necessary to forbid treatment of it. For in this case there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I spoke of abscesses due to an artery or vein.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia: then it is necessary that you instruct the patient, so that he holds his breath and stands still, extended. Then make the signs with encaustic around the entire navel. Then instruct him to lie down on his back between your hands. Then surround with a broad spatula around the navel on the place you marked with encaustic. Then extend the middle of the incision upward with a large hook. Then tie him up around the navel with strong thread or silk cord: and let the knot of the ligature be alexandrine.
Then open the extended incision above the ligature. If you then find it already captured by the ligature: then extract the hernia, and introduce your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen: and if you find a hernia, then take it with a hook, and cut off its excess.
If however, it is an artery or vein opposite to you: then surround it much. Then return to your operation. Then take two needles and insert two strong threads into them: and insert two needles into the circle you made around the tumor in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then string the tumor in four places on the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave room, until the extended flesh rots away by itself: or cut it when it becomes tender and rots.
Then take care of him with what is necessary from ointments until he is healed.
If the protrusion of the navel is from a sore in him, or from moisture: then it is necessary to hollow out the tumor, as we have said. And draw out the blood, or moisture, that you find in it.
Then take care of him with whatever solidifies the place.
Chapter LIII.
[Title: On the Treatment of Cancer]
We have already said about the species of Cancer in division, and the way to treat it with medicines; and beware when treating it with iron, not to ulcerate it; we have said that Cancer is generated in the matrix, and cautery should be avoided in its treatment.
The ancients said that sometimes Cancer is in a place where it can be eradicated; such as Cancer which is in the breast or hip and similar limbs, to extract the entire thing of it; particularly when it is beginning small.
When however it becomes old, and is large, it should not be approached [for removal].
For I myself was unable to cure anyone from it; nor have I ever seen anyone else who has reached that point.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is to precede [the patient] and dissolve the weak from black choler several times. Then, if you find a phlebotomy with a clear overfilling.
Then prepare the patient with a preparation, in which it is located during the operation.
Then throw hooks that fit [the cancer] into Cancer. Then hollow out Cancer from every part with the skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots; and let the blood run out, and do not cut it quickly, but rather press out the places and remove all the coarse blood by hand or as possible there with instruments.
If however a flow of coarse blood from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you; then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
[Section on the care of hydrophysis.]
Chapter LIV. [44] We now speak of the classification of hydropic conditions, and how water accumulates; and the signs of every type, and its treatment with medicines.
That which is treated with iron, is only the scrofulous type; it should not be treated with iron for the tympanic condition; nor deeply for the hypersarcous condition, for that is fatal.
When you have been treated for this hydropic condition of the tympanic type with medicines and the treatment has not helped, then consider it. For if weakness has already come to the sick person or there is another illness besides hydropic condition, such as cough or loose bowels, and similar ones, then beware not to treat it with iron, for that is dangerous.
If however you see the sick person with excessive strength and no other illness besides hydropic condition; and if he is not a child or an old man, then there is room for operation in him. You raise the sick person standing between your hands, and the attendant presses out his belly with his hand to force water down towards the lower part of the chest.
Then take a splint with thorns, in this shape. Let it be made of two sharp parts, long, and with pointed ends like a splint. However, let there be something short within it, so that it does not penetrate as far during the operation to the intestine and injure it.
Then consider it. For if the hydropic condition is generated from the intestines, then it should be extended by cutting with a measurement of three fingers below the navel towards the lower parts above the breastbone.
But if the hydropic condition is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side, three fingers below the navel.
If its generation is due to the spleen, then make a section on the right side: and it is not necessary that there should also be a section on the side toward which the sick person will lie, so as not to run superfluities to that weak place.
Then, perforate the entire skin with an instrument. Then insert into that incision and elevate your hand with a spatula beneath the skin, as if you are scraping it; and let the quantity that is scraped off be about the size of a nail or slightly more.
Then pierce the spatula until the spatula reaches an empty place: and that is the location of water. Then remove it (the sponge), and insert into the opening an instrument with this shape. And it is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver or copper or brass, polished; at its lower part there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes, two on one side and one on the other; and its end is cut like the end of a reed, as you see; at its upper end is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches water, then it (the water) immediately descends upon the instrument, therefore evacuate from the water an amount equal to a half hour.
Since if you evacuate more than is necessary from it, perhaps the sick person will die of a resolution of his animal spirits; or an approaching syncope occurs which approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to its potency and according to what the signs of the sick person's condition indicate to you by the force of his pulse and by the quality of his humors.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
Because it (the water) is retained immediately because of the skin which holds the hole that is on the sponge; about which I told you to pierce it in this way.
Then on the second day, if you see the patient can bear it: extract also a small amount from water.
Carry it out for some days without fear, and be careful to avoid error until there remains in the water only a little.
If you fear the patient, and let out a large amount from the water: then take care of him with warm sand, much sweating in the bath and sun, and wait for his thirst: and take care of him with very dry medicines, until he is cured: and cauterize over the stomach, spleen, and liver, after the extraction of the water: as I told you in what went before.
On the care of infants who are born in places where their urinary passages have not been pierced.
Chapter 50.
When someone from among the infants emerges from his mother's womb, and his head is not pierced, or the opening is narrowed, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore, assistance must be given to the piercing of it immediately upon birth, with a very subtle spatula, according to this form.
Then place a thin nail of lead into the opening and bind it; hold it for three or four days.
When therefore he wishes to emit urine, remove it (the lead), and mix (it with something). Then return him (to his mother).
And if you do not place lead, it is now possible that the urine flowing over the place will not allow him to be closed off.
He who has a narrow opening is treated with lead, as we said, for many days, until it is widened.
Those in whom there is an opening in the wrong place are injured. Because from those who are born, the opening is at the end of the spinal column; therefore, he cannot mix at the front until he raises the spine with his own hand to higher parts. There is no generation for him, because semen cannot reach the mother according to rightness; and it is a very foul disease.
And the method of treatment in this case is that the sick person should lie on his back. Then extend the head of his spine with your left hand using a strong extension, and cut the head of the spinal column from its place at the tip, with a sharp knife or pointed spatula; as is the incision of a reed, or like a radish so that its middle comes similar to the head of the spine: and that the opening falls in the middle according to what is necessary.
And be careful during your treatment lest you have a flow of blood. Many times that happens. Apply pressure to the wound when he is cutting blood, and take care of the wound until it heals.
On Albather that occurs in the prepuce and head of the foreskin, and corruption, blackening, and adhesion.
Chapter LVI.
Many times these Albathers occur in the penis, and it is an eminence of foul flesh.
And from this one is malignant, and one is not malignant.
Do not let the non-malignant one hang with a thin hook, and cut it off until you clean it entirely. Then put on top of it a warm pad soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it afterwards with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.
If the Albather is malignant and of a foul color, then it is necessary to apply cautery after its incision and its removal.
But if the Albather is within the foreskin that has not been circumcised, and a part of it is inside the foreskin, and a part outside: then remove the Albather that is inside first, until it consolidates, and then take care of it externally; since when you treat it together, the foreskin will not heal unless it breaks open.
And now they also occur in the testicles, and blackening and corruption of the foreskin. Therefore, it is necessary that you hollow out everything that has already blackened, and what wants to rot, or is already rotten.
Then line it over with honey that has been beaten up with flour of walnuts and sieved grains of various plants.
Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs, then apply cautery with a lunar cautery, according to this shape.
The cautery is beneficial for two purposes at once, namely for the flow of blood, and for a wound when it is damaged.
If the head of the probe is corroded and completely destroyed within an hour, then it is necessary to insert a cannula made of lead into the penis's meat, so that the weak one mixes on top of it.
However, in the adhesion of the prepuce with the head of the penis, and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose prepuce is healthy, and circumcision is not required on it: and sometimes adhesion occurs due to a wound, or an abscess: therefore, it is necessary to remove the adhesion with the Spatulum obtuse until the ligament is loosened, and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish it accurately, then it is necessary to remove something from the head of the penis, and from the prepuce. Because the prepuce, when it is subtle, may be perforated quickly due to its subtlety.
Then separate the prepuce from the head of the penis with a thin linen cloth that has already been made in cold water, so that they do not adhere again.
Then it is cured with wick alcohol until it hardens.
Chapter LVII.
Chapter on the cleansing of infants and the treatment of errors that may occur to them.
Circumcision is not a solution to continuity, like other wounds: but since it is from our operation, by our will, and its use is specifically for boys, it is necessary that we mark the better procedure, and the lighter way leading to health in it.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws, and there is only what we have acquired through experience.
I have found a larger part of artificers and phlebotomists using purification, circumcising with scissors and forceps; they use bandages, tie with thread, and make incisions with the nail.
I have already proved all these methods, and I did not find a better purification with forceps, nor bandaging with thread.
Since in circumcising with scissors, the skin is often missed. Since the foreskin has two layers of skin: perhaps it cuts the upper one and damages the lower one; therefore, it is necessary to make an incision for the other, and pain will result. And with the purification that is done by the thumb, that is to say the finger, which tailors use, it does not cut off the end of the male member: since perhaps it enters into its orifice.
However, in circumcising with the nail, perhaps iron goes in and corrupts your operation; and indeed the skin of a child is short by nature, and often such cases occur that do not require purification; and I have already seen this.
Purification with forceps and bandaging with thread has proven to be good for me; because scissors are proportionate to the incision; therefore, the sharpness that is on top is like the sharpness that is below. When you press your hand, therefore, the two sharpnesses are proportionate, and they incise according to one operation in one time; and a compression is made with a similar shape, containing the skin of the penis from all sides, with which no error occurs at all.
And the method of your operation is that you should make the boy who understands a little more, whom you do not do unless you tie thread on his penis only; and you release him until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy as much as possible for you from that which he receives his intelligence. Then place him standing before your prepared height, and he should not be seated: and conceal the scissors in your sleeve or underfoot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his member and blow on the skin, and pull it upwards, until the head of the cudgel comes out. Then clean it yourself from that which adheres to it due to dirt.
Then bind the marked place with double thread. Afterwards, bind a little lower with a second ligature. Then hold it with your index finger and thumb, and press well the place of the lower ligature, and cut between two ligatures. Then peel off the skin quickly upwards and extract the head of the cudgel. Then let the blood run out slowly (for it is better) and place ashes on top of it; and above the ashes put a cloth in which the boiled calf's lung has been spread out and crushed with fresh rose oil: and let him lie on that until another day; and care for him with the rest of the treatment, until he is cured.
The form of the scissors for cleaning is as follows.
Let there be two sharp points at the ends, and let them be bent inward so that the nail does not come out on them: and let the length of the two sharp edges be equal to the length of two handles evenly.
But if an error falls in cleaning, it is because perhaps the entire inner skin escapes or part of it near the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary to stretch it with your nail from your hour before the location is cut, and cut it evenly.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a tweezers and cut it.
If it lasts for more than three days and remains inflated under the buttock, this is an abscess; then leave it alone until the abscess becomes warm, peel it off easily, and cut it according to how you are prepared; be careful from the head of the vein. It will not harm him that.
Therefore treat that wound with what consolidates the ulcer from the powders which we have mentioned in the treatise on powders; and if it is cut beyond measure from the skin and goes upwards, it will not harm him even then.
Therefore take care of that until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
Chapter on the extraction of retained worm in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by packing made from stone, frozen blood, pus, flesh born, and similar substances from those which we have mentioned in the section on treatments.
And if urine is not relieved and you see that its retention is due to a stone already present in the neck of the bladder; then it is necessary that he be sick on his knees bended. Then place his feet on top of him and let him extend his stomach from the upper part of his back, and make him hold his breath as much as he can. Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is pressed towards the back; then the urine is relieved.
And if it is not relieved with what has been said and the case is severe for the sick one; then it is necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called syringe, whose shape is S, made of silver, thin, soft, concave like a bird's feather cannula in its subtlety, long like the palm of one hand and a half: to which there should be a thin cannula at its head.
The method of exit for the bladder stone is such that you take a doubled thread, tie it at its end with wool or cord, a good ligature: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut with scissors if there is any excess from the wool, but insert forcefully into the cannula as with an alembic.
Then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and albumen of egg: and make the patient sit on a chair, and rub the bladder and the stone with moist oils and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the urethra gently until it reaches the root of the stone.
Then fold it double from the upper part of the navel.
Then push the syringe into it until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it has reached a hollow place: and this is not done according to this order unless because the passage through which it goes is twisted.
Then gradually extend the thread with wool. For a bladder stone follows wool.
Then draw it out and let the bladder stone pass through the urinary way: and repeat the syringe, and do not cease to do this until the bladder is emptied, and the patient finds relief.
[Paragraph on the quality of cleansing the bladder with a clepsydra (water clock).]
Chapter LIX.
When a sore occurs in the bladder or blood congeals or suppurates in it and there is a desire to distill waters and medicines into it: then make use of an instrument called a clepsydra, and this is its form.
It is closed, that is, sealed. And within it (the bone) are three holes, two from one side and one from the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, in which is that which thrusts it (the bone), should be according to the quantity that it requires without addition, until when it is pulled along with something, it is attracted by humidities; and when it is pushed, with it is expelled to a distance: according to which it does the clepsydra, which throws up naphtha, that is, Greek fire in warfare of Mars.
When you wish to throw out the humidities into the bladder, insert the end of the clepsydra into the humidity and pull with it that which pushes towards the upper parts, for the humidity is drawn into the depression of the clepsydra.
Then insert its end (the end of the clepsydra) into a rod, as we have said in a syringe. Then push the humidity with it (the rod), for that humidity immediately reaches the bladder in such a way that the sick person feels it.
The shape of the clyster (clisterium) is subtle, with which the bladder is cleansed.
Make it out of silver or gold; its head should be higher like a syringe with a small cavity below it in which a cord can fall.
Then take the bladder of a ram and put humidity into it with which you want to cleanse the bladder. Then tie her between two cavities with a strong ligature with double thread and warm up the humidity slightly over fire.
Then insert the end of the clyster into a rod, then press your hand on the bladder with the humidity in a suitable tightening until the sick person feels it, because that humidity has already reached the bladder.
If the bladder is not present to you, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and pierce it completely from all its roundness. Then insert a thread into those holes as they are rolled up. Then gather the circle as a wallet is gathered: after you place in it what you wish from moist substances, and oils, and waters.
Then bind it in an instrument: and make with it as you did with the bladder by squeezing it with your hand, until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter Sixty.
Chapter on the Extraction of a Stone.
We have already said about the types of stones, and their cure with medicines; and we distinguished between a stone generated in kidneys, and bladder, and its signs; and we explained that an operation is performed on the stone when it is in the hand or sectioned; and this stone specifically arises in the bladder; and that which is formed in a rod; and I am telling you this with clear explanation and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that a stone generated in the bladder, happens most often to boys.
And among its signs is that urine comes out of the bladder like water in its subtlety; and there appears in it white sand, and the sick man rubs his rod, and he labors with it, and often hangs down. Then it stands up, and comes out with it together with the anus in many of them.
And the healing of boys is easy until they reach fourteen years of age. And it is difficult for the elderly. However, it is moderate in young men, because it is between the two; and for that person whose stone is larger, healing is easier; and if small, the cure is difficult.
Upon reaching the cure, it is first necessary to clean the sick person with an enema, which draws out all the feces that are in their intestines; for it sometimes prevents the discovery of a Stone during examination.
Then the sick person is to be taken with their feet and shaken and moved downwards; so that the Stone descends to the depth of the bladder or leaps out from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands, and his hands should be under his loins, so that the bladder becomes entirely tilted towards the lower parts.
Then examine him and touch him from outside.
If you feel a Stone in a place, then immediately approach with cutting upon it.
If it does not come out upon your touch entirely, then it is necessary to press the thumb of the left hand against it if the sick person is a boy; or the middle finger if he is an adult male; and introduce it into his anus, and examine from the Stone, until it is under your finger; and gradually turn it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it outwards against the place where you wish to make the incision; and command the attendant to press on the bladder with his hand, and command another attendant to lift the testicles of his right hand upwards; and let him remove the skin that is under the testicles in the part where the incision is to be made.
Then insert a probe cutting, whose shape is as follows. And find the place between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, on the side of the left hip; and make the incision upon the Stone, and your finger should be in the anus; and make the incision transverse, so that the incision is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the amount by which the exit of the Stone from it will not be greater.
Perhaps a finger, which is within the anus and presses against the stone during surgery, comes out easily.
And know that from the stone are its angles and edges, wherefore its exit is difficult because of this.
And it is soft, similar to a gland, and round; therefore, its exit will be easy.
To him who has angles and edges, add the incision (or fissure).
If it does not come out thus, then it is necessary to fumigate (or cauterize) upon it; or to bind it properly with a string whose end is like the moon, which should be wrapped around the stone and not slip off: or to introduce an instrument under it that is sharp and curved at its tip.
If you cannot (reach) above it, then enlarge the opening slightly. If something stops you from proceeding due to blood, cut it with a scissors.
If the stone is more than one, then forcefully push the largest towards the bladder. Then cut upon it (or make an incision). Next, forcefully push the smallest one after it; and similarly do so if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then ignorance is to cut above it with a large incision. Because it happens to the weak that one of two things occurs, either he dies or there is a continuous discharge of urine; therefore, because the location does not consolidate at all.
But administer its expulsion until it comes out; or fumigate (or cauterize) the fracture of it with forceps until you remove it piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with thyme, aloe, and dragon's blood; bind it (or close it) and place upon it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water; to let an abscess heal warmly.
Then turn the sick person over on his neck, and do not loosen the ligament until the third day. When you release (it), anoint the place with water and much oil.
Then care for him with dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until he is healed.
If a hot abscess or corrosive is added to the wound, and similar things: as if blood congeals in the bladder and urine is forbidden from it; and this is recognized by the exit of blood with urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound, and draw out the blood. For if it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder and its rotting.
Then clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and apply to it everything that agrees with its healing until it is healed.
And it is necessary during the entire healing time that you tie together both hips, and bind them, for the reason of the medicaments placed on the site.
If the stone is small and it is in the bladder and presses on it, and urine is forbidden from it; then care for it with what I told before until you reach cutting (surgery). For many times you are excused from surgery through this healing method, since I have now proven that (it works).
And it is for you to receive the Perforatorium from iron-pointed (Perforator), whose shape is triangular at the end, sharp and fixed in wood.
Then take thread, and tie it to the rod under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the rod with ease until the Perforator reaches the stone; and turn the Perforator with your hand in the same stone gradually; and you grind the perforation of it until you make it penetrate from the other side.
Urine is immediately discharged.
Then press your hand on the remaining part of the stone from the outside of the shaft. For it breaks up and is discharged with urine, and the ill person is healed.
If this treatment is not prepared for you for some reason that prevents it: then tie a string under the stone and another string above the stone. Then cut across the shaft above the two bindings. Then extract it (the stone). Next loosen the bandage, and clean the frozen blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a string under the stone unless to prevent it from returning to the bladder: and another string above, unless so that when the string is loosened after the stone's expulsion, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you to lift the skin above when tying the upper string, so that it moves upwards towards the surface, and returns to its place and covers the wound as we said.
Chapter 61.
Chapter on the extraction of stones in women.
Stones are scarcely generated in women.
If a stone happens to any of them (women), then the treatment is difficult and it is forbidden on account of many reasons.
One reason is that the woman may be a virgin.
And secondly, you cannot find a woman who will reveal herself to the doctor when she is chaste or married women.
Thirdly, you cannot find a woman well skilled in this art, especially the operation with hand.
And fourthly, the distance from the location of the stone is great: therefore it requires a deep incision, and there is fear in this.
If necessity compels you to do so, then it is necessary for you to take a skilled woman as the doctor, and such women are scarcely found.
If [the stone] should be located privately, then seek a clean physician, subtle, and a present midwife well-learned in the matter of women, or a woman who knows this art partially: make her present, and especially instruct her to do everything that you command her concerning the examination over the stone.
Firstly, that she looks to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary for him to insert his finger into her womb and search for the stone.
If he finds it (the stone), let him grab it with his finger and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the weak place of the bladder and search for the stone, after she puts her left hand on the bladder and presses it with a good compression.
If he finds the stone, then it is necessary that he gently moves it from the bladder opening towards the lower parts with all his strength until it reaches the root of the hip.
Then he cuts across it (the stone) near the middle of the bladder at the root of the hip from whichever side he is prepared, and feels for the stone in that place: his finger should not be removed from the stone, grabbing it; and the cut should be small initially. Then insert the ray upon that cut.
Then insert the ray upon that cut. If he feels the stone, then he should enlarge the cut according to the amount proportional to the stone's exit.
And know that the shapes of stones are many. For these (stones) may be small or large, smooth or rough, long or round having branches.
Know its shape so that it is signified to you about the stone in question.
If blood conquers you, then add to the place crushed pomegranate seeds and hold it for an hour until the blood is removed.
Then return to your operation until the stone passes out: and make sure you prepare yourself with the instruments, which I mentioned for the removal of a stone in men, to assist you in your procedure.
If the flow of blood overpowers you and you know that the expulsion of blood is from a cut artery: then place powder on the spot and tie it with suitable sutures; do not move it, and leave the stone alone, and do not remove it. Perhaps an unwell woman may die. Then take care of the wound.
When the sharpness of blood subsides after several days and the spot putrefies, then return to your operation until the stone passes out.
Chapter LXII.
Section on a watery hernia.
A watery hernia is not anything but an accumulation of moisture inside the albido sac, which is under the skin containing the testicle and egg: and it is called the albido sac.
And sometimes it is within its own panniculus, which nature has prepared for it near the egg, until it appears as if it is an egg; and this is another egg, and it is between the albido sac of the testicle, which we have said: and this does not often happen.
And indeed the generation of this [watery hernia] is due to weakness that happens to testicles: therefore this matter flows into them. And sometimes it occurs from a blow on the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or it has a color that is sloping towards citrinitas, or it is blood red, or feculent, black, or watery white: and this is what is more common.
And the signs by which one knows where the accumulation of water is located are these. Because if it is in the albido sac as we have said, then it is a tumor round and slightly smaller than an egg's length; and the testicle does not appear because moisture keeps it from all sides.
If there is moisture within its own sheath (sac), then the boil is round with part of the eye, and therefore man fears it because it is another egg.
If there is moisture between the skin of the testicles and the scrotum, then it falls under the sense (feeling or touch).
When the eye perceives the knowledge of the moisture's color, then to test the color of the moisture in a boil with an inserted square probe, whose shape precedes it. Therefore, according to what comes out in the footprint (impression) of the inserted probe, judge about that which is between it.
When we come to the cure with iron, then it is necessary that you command the patient, if possible for him, to be bled and see his body full (swollen).
Then he lies on his back on a raised bed, and place many cloths under him.
Then you sit on his left side, and command the servant to sit at his right side, who extends his stick to one of two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the scrotum.
Then take a broad spatula, and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length, up to the groin: and make the incision according to the straight line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the scrotum covering: and scrape it off and observe it, or be careful not to separate it: and your scraping should be on the part that hangs more with the egg: and examine carefully with the scraping according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then pierce the scrotum full of water with a wide piercing, and drain out all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with spatulas (unguis), and stretch the scrotum to the top, and do not touch the skin of the testicles enclosing it: and cut the scrotum as you can, either completely or in pieces, especially on its thin side. If you do not examine nor scrutinize, there is no certainty that water will not flow out in the incision.
However, if an egg comes out externally from its skin at the hour of your operation: then when you complete the section of the sifac, return it. Then gather two folds of the scrotal skin with suture.
Then take care of it as other wounds until it heals.
If you find a rotten egg due to other discoloration, then tie containers that are suspending, fearing blood flow.
Then remove the testicle with the suspension and extract the egg; afterwards take care of it as we have said.
If however water is gathered in two parts, then you know that there are two branches; so cut the other part equally as you did with the other.
And if it appears to you that the operation should be one, then do it; afterwards remove the blood. Insert a submerged wool in oil or rose oil; and place another wool that you have soaked in wine and oil on the outside and expand it over two testicles, and look for the intestine; and put double cloths above it and there are fleeces: and tie them above with a ligament having six knots.
Then take two cloths, wash them, fill them with linen soaked in a dye, according to this likeness: and make the edges which are pressed by the loom, or wet wool; and join them together at the waist; and one edge should extend from the anus to the back, and the second should extend to the part of the neck; and two edges below on the thighs, and two other edges above on the groins; and bind them all together at the waist of the arms.
And sometimes artificially this ramie stalk is medicated with a cautery in place of a section with iron: and it is to receive the subtle cautery-knife and cut the skin of the testicles with it: and it is to be heated, according to what we have narrated: until when the sifac album containing water is revealed: then receive the cautery, according to this form.
The letter forms resemble Greek letters.
Then pierce it with that sifac, and let it be heated until all the moisture comes out.
Then spread the sifac with a hook, and burn off its coating with a fine cautery and cut it as much as possible for you until you remove all of it.
And be careful not to let fire touch the egg.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from bleeding than the operation with section, and better.
If however this operation causes you difficulty during the hour of section or the hour of cautery, or an abscess, bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary that you treat what causes difficulty for you from that with the appropriate cure, according to what was mentioned earlier.
If however the sick person is afraid and does not await this operation due to its horror: then administer piercing according to what I narrated there, and it is.
When you are certain for yourself according to what was said about the meanings that this ramie stalk is watery: then it is necessary that you make the sick person sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the abscess at its lower part with a large spatula: and place the piercing according to the length of the body, and let it be an open wound wide enough for water to flow out completely.
Then place a cloth over the wound and tie it, and let the rest of the water flow out: then treat the patient until the wound heals.
If there is opposition to the exit of water at the hour when you perforate it (the bladder), and this is not for any other reason than because a white membrane causes opposition in the wound opening, preventing the outflow of water: then it is necessary that you insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which the water from hydropic individuals is extracted, whose shape has been previously described: or add, during the operation on the wound, a little.
And know that the water returns and collects after six months, or approximately those. Since it has collected, then it is to be punctured in the same manner, and the patient shall pass through his illness days.
Chapter LXIII.
Treatise on the care of fleshy roots.
Know that in the section on this fleshy root, there is danger of slipping into ruin in many positions. Therefore it seems to me that its release is saved from that.
And I am remembering the operation on it and the appearance of the incisions.
Therefore I say that many incisions occur in bodies which are composed of testicles: and this happens due to many causes, namely.
Or from an excess of sharp or acid fluid which flows towards the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of the incision is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found there; and it is a severe incision.
And perhaps it is a stone-like incision, whose color is dark, and no sensation is felt there.
And sometimes it occurs from the knotting of the arteries and swelling of them; as has already been remembered before: or from the swelling of veins.
What is caused by the swelling of the arteries can be recognized by the position of the incision, when you compress it with your fingers. Do not touch him entirely.
What is done by the swelling of the veins, is not dispersed from it under pressure with fingers.
Now it is possible that a cutting can be made on this type and on other flesh; and it is to cut the skin of the testicles. Then stretch the egg upward and take it out along with the white albumen; and free the suspensors from the bladder, and seal the bladder; and cut the suspensor after you have freed it from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is consolidated with those born-together fleshes, then it must be pulled and cut.
And if there is an adhesion between something from the bladder or within it, then it must be released completely and cut with a circular incision.
If there is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind, then it must be cut entirely and the egg must be taken out, as we have said.
When your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; afterwards take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
Chapter on the care of branches that are related to vines.
A tumor is enrolled with a certain enrollment, similar to a bunch of grapes, when the testicles are softened; and it is difficult for movement, exercise, and walking on weak persons.
And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear due to the recollection that preceded it.
But we must say the operation according to what the first ones did.
Therefore, I say that you must make the weak person sit on a raised seat. Then pull down the suspender of the testicles. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, and with the instruments that are near to the rod: let another servant hold it, and stretch it with a forceful extension.
Then cut with a broad, sharp, transverse incision directly into the vessels, until they are exposed.
Then, remove all the fat from every side, as I have told you when extracting arteries in the temples.
Then insert a needle with a double thread into them and tie it at the first places where vessels appear; and tie it again at the last of these. Then cut it in a straight midsection along the body's length and extract what has accumulated from foul, corrupted moistures.
Then take care of the wound with treatment for other wounds from which pus is generated, so that the vessels which nourish one testicle fall off. For it is not bad in that way.
But if vessels appear in all the vessels, then they must be extracted because of this testicle with the vessels: so as not to deprive it of nourishment due to the incision, and it rots or burns, and is no use with them.
Chapter LXV.
Chapter on the care of Intestinal Roots.
The outlet of this root is from an incision which occurs on the extended sigmoid colon in the inguinal part of the stomach.
Because the intestines descend through that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from the sigmoid colon or its extension.
And these two types occur due to various causes: either from a blow, a jump, a shout, lifting a heavy object, and similar things.
And the mark, when it is from extension of sifach. It happens gradually over a long period of time and does not occur suddenly; it is an abscess deep in the direction of the extension; therefore, because sifach compresses the intestine.
And its sign is when it is from section of sifach, because it causes a sudden intense pain at the start; and it is an abscess different, appearing under the skin close by; and that is due to the outflow of intestine and its course towards exterior sifach.
And sometimes it comes out with the intestine called zirbum; and this is called an Intestinal Ramification, and zirbia; and sometimes it happens with flatulence.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine with feces and is retained there; and that brings about the peril of the sick person; because it causes a bad pain, especially when it is compressed.
And in treating the affliction of this disease with iron there is fear; therefore, one must be careful about the occurrence in it.
And the method of operation is to order the sick person to push his intestine back with his hand towards the hollows of its own cavity if he obeys the command. Then he lies down on his neck over your hands and elevate his legs.
Then stretch the skin that follows the skin to the upper part, and cut the entire skin of the testicles in length. Then make two cauls on the lips of the incision according to what you need to open the incision with them; and the incision should be according to the quantity, so that it is possible for an egg to come out from there.
Then scrape the sifach, and what is under the skin of the testicles until the white sifach appears hard from all sides; then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, in that which is between the white sifach, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the sifach and the abscess, without adhesion to it that is in the back part of the egg.
Then move your right hand towards the inner skin of the testicles, and as you do this, extend the albumen upward with your left hand, and lift out the egg with the albumen to the part of the incision. And command the servant to stretch out the egg upward. You solve the adherence which is behind complete solution.
Ask your fingers if there is nothing there from the intestine rolled up in the hard albumen. If you find something from that, then push it down towards the lower belly.
Then take the probe, in which is a thick thread made of linen from ten threads, and insert it at the last albumen, that is, the membrane which follows the incision: namely, under the skin of the testicles. Then cut the ends which project from the thread until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them over others in the shape of a cross, and tie the thread we mentioned (the strong ligament under the skin of the testicles) to them until it cannot let any of the secretions which nourish them pass through to them, so that no hot abscess occurs there. And place another ligature beyond the first ligature, at a distance from it less than two fingers. And after these two ligatures, release the thread which is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity equal to the size of a finger, and cut the rest in a rounded manner and remove the egg.
Then cut at the lower part of the skin of the testicles with an incision from which blood and pus flow, as we said in what was mentioned before.
Then apply the thread soaked in oil and place it on the wound, and apply the ligature we mentioned. And sometimes cauterize the hard albumen which we said before, after the incision of it, fearing from the flow of blood. Multotiens enim accidit illud. translates to "It happens often that this occurs." in English. "Let go of the ligament until it falls by itself." (in English)
"If the case does not proceed, then boil it with hot water; and place on top of it what I said until it falls." (in English)
"Then take care of the wound with the usual treatment for wounds, until it is healed." (in English)
"Chapter LXVI" (in English)
"[A Case] On a Wound from a Bladder" (in English, title of the case
"In this type of wound, I have not seen anyone who dared to treat it with iron." (in English)
"And the first [people] said that it happens as I mentioned in a wound from a bladder and a vein." (in English) "That is, to tie vessels after the incision below easily; then cut in the middle, and then treat afterward with what opens it up, until the vessels fall off; and take care of the wound, as I said before, until it heals." (in English)
"Chapter LXVII" (in English)
"[A Case] On a Rupture that occurs in the groins" (in English, title of the case)
"When a rupture occurs in the groins, as I have said, and there is an empty place, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles; and if it does descend, that is not enough, and it returns in all hours; but if it lasts for a time with this, a tear is added in the sifach [hernia], until the intestines descend into the sifach." (in English)
"And this occurs due to extension of the hernia, which is in the groins, as I have said." (in English) "That is because the hernia extends; then it is softened and the place is stretched out, and it emerges." (in English)
And its treatment is with a cautery, as his previous narrative states.
And sometimes it is treated with iron, according to this method: and there is [a way] for the sick person to lie on his back upon your hands. Then cut the place of the rupture and protrusion, with a cut across its width, according to the size of three fingers.
Then tie the alsi-fak and whatever is beneath the skin until the white al-sifach appears, which is beneath the skin that follows it.
Then take a probe and place it over the protruding part of the al-sifach and press it to the depth of the belly.
Then make two incisions on the extremity of the radius from the al-sifach and sew them together with a stitch; then remove the extremity of the radius.
Do not incise the al-sifach at all, nor tear the ovum [yolk sac], nor anything else, as I have instructed you in treating intestinal branches.
Then treat that with wound treatment. When you make stitches, clean it and heal the wound until it heals.
The sisycon [certain type of plant fiber] contracts, and does not add to the protrusion of the rupture.
And the cautery is better for this place, because it is closer to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
Chapter on softening the scrotal skin.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, on account of which the meats between them are softened and its appearance becomes foul.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat it (the testicles), that he makes the sick man lie on his back and cuts off all the softened skin that is on top of the natural skin.
Then gather two lips together with stitching: and if you wish, or even more so, remove the excess of the softened skin by three or four stitches, and make a firm stitch.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then care for the healing of the remaining wounds until they are healed and the threads fall off.
Chapter LXIX.
[Title: On Castration.]
Know that castration is forbidden by our law: and therefore it would be appropriate for me not to remember it in this book of mine; and there is no need to remember it except for two reasons.
One reason is that it should be known by the physician when he is asked about it: and so that he knows the treatment for the one who suffers from it.
And another method is that we often need castration of certain animals, for the benefit of our needs through it, such as sheep, hyracids, and cats, and similar ones from animals.
Therefore, I say that castration is done according to two methods. Or by grinding. Or by cutting and separation.
In that which is done by grinding, the way of the operation is: what we should do is make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and relax and hang down; then grind them with your hand until they resolve and no longer appear upon touch.
In castration by cutting and separation, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the sack, and cut above all the egg in one section, until when two eggs come out: then cut what is left after you have scoured each one, and do not leave anything on it beyond the thin skin, which is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one by grinding, since grinding possibly leaves something from the testicles, which causes the animal to desire coitus.
Then take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
Chapter on the care of Hermaphrodite in two methods.
Hermaphrodite from men is according to two modes. One of them is that it appears in him in the space between the testicles or on the skin of the testicles, in which is located a figure resembling a female vulva with hairs; and sometimes urine flows out from the part that is on the skin of the testicles.
In women, however, there is one species, and it is a female vulva on the mons pubis like small testicles of a man, projecting to the outside; of which one is like the priapus of a man, and two are like two testicles.
And the treatment of three kinds, two from males, and one kind from females, is: because it is necessary that you make incisions in the added flesh, until the impression of them flees away. Then treat those wounds with the remedies used for other wounds.
Furthermore, in the second kind of male, which originates from where urine comes out that is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment for it at all.
Chapter 71.
Chapter on the incision of Tentiginis and the protruding flesh in women's wounds.
A Tentiginis may be added beyond what is natural, until it becomes foul and ugly to look at; and sometimes it swells so much in certain women that it spreads like in men and reaches copulation.
Therefore, you must hold the excess of Tentiginis with your hand or with a probe, and make an incision; not deep into the incision, especially at the root, so that there is no bleeding.
Then treat the Tentiginis itself with the remedies used for wounds, until it heals.
The flesh that arises is the flesh that is born in the opening of the womb until it fills it; and perhaps it comes out on the outside, similar to a tail; and therefore some call the condition 'caudated'. Therefore, it must be cut like the Tentiginis is cut and treated until it heals.
Chapter on the treatment of an abscess in a woman that has not burst open.
Chapter 72.
An abscess in a woman that has not burst open or has a small opening is called Alratic. And it may be either natural or accidental.
An abscess caused by a preceding illness is accidental; and it may be formed from added flesh, or from fat or pus; and it may occur in the deep parts of the womb, or on its sides, or above or below it; and it prevents copulation, conception, childbirth, and perhaps menstruation.
And the knowledge of it is obtained through an obstetrician's examination, if the circumcision is apparent nearby.
If it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
If the circumcision is from a subtle sifach and is close to two lips: then pull it out, and tear it apart.
And it should be placed on two lips (lips of the vulva).
Then place your index fingers of both hands together, and let the woman be on her back with her legs spread apart. Then stretch the two lips with force until the subtle sifach tears and the circumcision opens up.
Then take wool and moisten it with oil, and place it on the site; let the woman apply it every day to prevent the area from healing in another way.
If the sifach is large and thick: then it should be cut off with a broad spatula or a leaf of myrtle.
If the circumcision is of flesh born, then suspend it with hooks and cut it; have medicines with you that stop blood flow without causing pain, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and onion juice mixed with egg white.
Then administer a wide cannula made of lead to prevent the wound from healing quickly, hold it for several days; then apply linen cloth, then treat the rest of the healing process until it heals.
And sometimes a birth of flesh (of other creatures) occurs in the womb: therefore, they should be cut according to this method: if there is no cancerous abscess, do not make any contrast with iron at all, because it may cause harm.
Head LXXIII.
Chapter on the treatment of hemorrhoids, by Athehelil and Botheor for women.
Hemorrhoids indeed are the opening of the vein's outlets, as long as much blood continuously runs from them.
If hemorrhoids become chronic, they become piles; and I have already said about their species and their signs in the division of them, and here I will say what receives treatment from them and what does not.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb and do not appear to the sense, then there is no treatment for it with iron.
But those which are on the opening of the womb above where the sense falls upon them, are those that can be treated.
Therefore it is necessary to introduce a woman into a cold house. Then stretch out the piles with forceps or rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle powder over them near the flow of blood from one of the incisions without biting; such as alum, dragon's blood, sulfur and similar things.
Then press his feet against the wall at the hour of one. After that, place her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, rind of pomegranates, and walnuts, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on his back.
If the blood is cut off with it, that is good; and if not, make adhesive windbags and breasts, without scarification.
Then take wool, immerse it in the juice of tarathith, or the juice of arnoglossum, or the juice of the branches of aalaulatus (that is, alanthe), Pontic wine and make it adhere to the wound.
When the abscess becomes quiet, then care for the place with ointments until it heals.
Albarth is red and resembles the heads of a scallion (alhaasse), and has a rough appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary to excise what appears from it, as I said regarding the onion (thelil), equally; and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter LXXIIII.
[Chapter] On the Perforation of the Extrusion that occurs in the Womb.
In the matrix (womb) various appearances of abscesses occur, such as cancer, stone abscess, ulcers, adubelati, alekilati (herpes), fistulae, hemorrhoids, ragadiae, thelil, and hot abscess.
And I myself have already said all these illnesses and their appearances, their signs, and their cures are divided. It is necessary that in this treatise I speak about the hot abscess in the matrix (womb) which occurs among the abscesses which gather pus, and you should know how to open it with iron.
Therefore, one must consider. Then if the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with beating and burning and fever, and it appears red; if it lies upon the sensation, then do not puncture it; and cure it with what gives relief according to its maturation, until the acuity of the symptoms subsides.
Then one must make the woman sit on two seats with a gap between them and recline or lean against her back, and place her feet to the lower part of the belly; and let her hips be spread out, and put her arms under her knees and tie each arm with a bandage connecting them to that.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and administer the instrument for opening the matrix (womb) orifice.
And it is necessary when you are to administer this instrument that you form a point with the rod deep into the woman's matrix (womb); so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the matrix, and does not harm the weak.
If the instrument is more than deep, then one must place powder (pulverized charcoal) on top of the depth of the matrix; so that the entry of the instrument is not to the full depth of the matrix; and one must place a weight (lead) which runs in the instrument from the upper side, and hold the instrument and rotate the worker (assistant) with the weight, until the depth of the matrix is opened.
When it appears to be excised and touched by hand, and is soft and yielding: then it is necessary that you cut it off at its base with a broad spatula.
When pus is discharged, then it is necessary to place a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, which has some styptic property, on the wound; and then make an incision into the matrix deeply.
And place outside [the body], on the matrix and on the comb, a clean wool soaked in water in which bitter apples have been boiled.
Then it should be treated with an appropriate ointment for two days until it heals.
And at times the matrix and the wound are cleaned so that it is cleansed with water and honey; then with water in which the root of the lily has been boiled, or long aristolochia; then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the matrix, then it is necessary to refrain from treating it with iron; rather, treat it as we have said for division.
Chapter LXXX.
Book of Obstetrics: How to treat living embryos that have emerged abnormally.
It is necessary for an obstetrician to first know the shape of a normal delivery.
From the signs of this, it is known that when you see a woman pressing downwards and she desires to smell the air, and urine is passed over her in childbirth, and she hastens the exit of the embryo: then know that this delivery is according to its natural shape, and the outlet is above the head and second outlet with it; or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press the abdomen of the woman so that the embryo descends quickly.
When it [the instrument] descends upon his head, it [the second one] also descends with it, and it is to be cleansed from those superfluities with good purification.
Whoever is beyond this delivery is unnatural, inaudible.
Because sometimes the fetus comes out with its feet first, and its body comes out before its head, and its feet or one hand: or the head comes out and one hand: or the intestines come out: and perhaps it turns over on its neck, and similar unnatural figures.
Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be prudent, subtle in all these matters and to guard against error and deception; and I am showing every figure of them, and how there is skill in it, and it will be indicated by that, and it will stand upon it.
When the fetus comes out with its head in a natural delivery, and it becomes violent upon the woman, and the delivery is difficult for her, and you see its strength already weakened: then make her sit on a stool, or women hold her; and have her take deep breaths with fennel water boiled, and with moist oils.
Then the midwife introduces a small spatula between her fingers, and grabs the second one with it, and cuts it with her nail until it runs out of moisture; and she presses the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with mucilage of fennel, with oil of sesame.
Then command her after the cleansing to press down; and make her sneeze with pepper, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. The fetus will come out immediately.
If two hands of the fetus emerge first, it is necessary to reduce them gently and gradually. If it does not obey at the entrance [of childbirth], then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet upwards; then strike the seat upon the ground; and hold the woman, so that she does not fall during the shock.
If the hands do not emerge and the fetus dies; then cut them off, and extract the remaining fetus; and bind its hand with cloth, and extract it equally; for it will come out by itself.
The emergence of the embryo is upon the feet of itself. When the fetus emerges upon its feet, then it should be pushed upwards; then it should be slowly turned; afterwards, it should be delivered equally.
Then, take one of his feet and stretch it out gradually.
When they [the legs] emerge up to the hips, then command her [the woman] to bear down and make her sneeze with a blow; for it will come out if God wills.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then draw the fetus back gradually until you place it in its natural position. For it will come out then with an easy delivery.
If it is prevented from coming out as we have said; then take some mucilage of aloe, and oil of sesame, and dissolved gum; and grind it all together in a mortar with good blows; afterwards, apply the paste to the woman's vulva and below her belly. Then make her sit in warm water until the uterus descends [to its normal position].
When you see that the lower parts have become warm, then give her something to drink made of myrrh; and place it [the myrrh] beneath her. When therefore the hour is one, then make her sit on a chair. Then make her sneeze: and pinch her own nose and nostril: and press the lower part of the abdomen gently with compression. For the feces will come out immediately.
Delivery on the knees and hands. When it comes out in this manner, then insert your hands gently. Then the woman lies on her back with her head down and legs hanging: and she remains lying on the bed and folds her hands. Then press gently on her abdomen. Then take out what is under her feet from the bedding, until it is prepared below. If the fetus does not come out, then take hold of her feet and move them vigorously. Then press gently on what is above the pubic bone until the fetus rises towards the upper parts. Then insert your hands and guide the fetus gently: and command the woman to press until the fetus is born.
Delivery of the fetus, hanging sideways from the hands. Insert your hand to reduce [the size]. If it cannot be reduced, then lift the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed: and strike her legs with a violent blow.
Then apply the ointment you have prepared from gums [of certain trees].
If she gives birth, then make her sit on a chair. Then strive to reduce the hand [or arm] and guide the fetus according to its natural shape: make her sneeze and command her to press until it is born.
The outcome of the fetus is above its neck, with open hands, and its face is towards the back of its mother. The midwife must hold the baby's hand, then gradually turn it, and adjust it easily.
When it is adjusted, then place it over the mouth we previously mentioned with oil and mucilage.
Then command him to move slowly. When you have done that, then make her sit on a seat, and command her to lean towards the right side. Then command her to compress (the birth canal), and cause her to sneeze with a strong blow.
The prepared baby comes out on the side. When the second child descends into the mother's birth canal in this manner with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your nail until it is expelled due to moisture.
If the baby hangs over the face and its neck, then cut it from the navel so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the baby inside until you place it as required; and command the woman to compress herself several times, for it will come out easily.
The birth of twins or multiple babies. Know that twins often give birth; and sometimes they give birth to three, and even four. However, that is unusual and rarely occurs.
Five is indeed an abnormal thing, and they do not live long; it contains them, even though there are many afterbirths; and they are separated by the cord, distinguishing between them tied at the navel of each one.
Sometimes they come out like a single baby does naturally and easily; and sometimes they come out in an unnatural way as we have described.
If some of them are difficult during childbirth and reach what we said in unnatural figures, then treat them as we have described: it should be subtle and do what is done with ease and slowness, and adapt according to every figure with what is prepared for him guided by his intellect towards recovery.
¶ Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it is already verified by me, that a woman, while giving birth, has emitted seven, and another fifteen, all of them formed.
What was done through the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore, all of this should be in the knowledge of Obstetrics. Perhaps it will reach a similar one: oppose to it, as necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
¶ On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus with what was said in the division of medication and it does not leave, and you will be forced to use an operation with hand, then it is necessary that you consider.
If the woman is of good health and has no accident from which her death is feared: then it is necessary that the woman lies down on the bed, on her back, and her head should be inclined lower, and her legs raised: and the assistant should hold her from two sides, or she should be tied to the bed, so that her body does not be pulled during the extraction of the fetus.
Then, the womb is moistened with oils rich in moisture (humid oils) with almond mucilage and fenugreek seeds, and linseed.
Then the midwife shall insert her hand along with those oils and mucilages; then she shall introduce it into the womb with ease. Then let her seek a place where to fix hooks on the fetus, and locations suitable for that.
Then consider whether the fetus is prepared to descend upon its head: then fix hooks into its eyes, or at its neck, or mouth, or palate, or under its beard, or at its armpit, or near the ribs, and below the hips.
If it is a descent upon its feet, then fix hooks in the chest, and at the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary that she holds the hook with her right hand; and let her place a loop on it between the fingers of her left hand; and introduce it with her hand with ease, and fix the hook in one of those locations which we mentioned, until she arrives at the emptiness.
Then fix another hook, or a third one if necessary, on the opposite side: so that the contraction may be equal and not incline to any side.
Then it shall be extended with an equal extension, and the extension should not be straight only, but rather moved to all sides, so that the passage may be alleviated: just as it is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And let there be softened at that place the extension. If a part is held back from it, then the midwife should insert some fingers with oil on that side, to turn what is being held back along with them.
If a part of the fetus is coming out, then the hooks shall be changed to another higher location; do this until the entire fetus comes out.
If a hand or another part is coming out and it cannot be returned because of its constriction; then let a cloth be wrapped around it. Then extract it completely until it emerges wholly, cut it either at the joint of the foot or at the elbow; and so it must be done in one hand, and in both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large or it encounters dislocation during birth, or water has accumulated around its head; then one must introduce a spiny spatula between the fingers and crush the head with it, and extract the water, or rupture it with the instrument called Almisdac; whose form comes among the forms of other instruments in the chapter following this.
Likewise, if the fetus is of large head nature, then one must make a cut with scissors (algengematu); or extract it with forceps (misdach), as we have said. Then draw out the bones with forceps.
If the head emerges and becomes dislocated at the neck; then it should be crushed until the moisture within the chest is released.
If it does not twist and does not comply for birth; then cut the head piecemeal, as far as you can manage.
If below the abdomen there is an apostema or it has hydropsy; then one must puncture it until the moisture runs out from it.
If the fetus is above its feet, then its extraction is easy and its guidance towards the birth canal is light.
If it becomes dislocated in the abdomen or chest; then one must extract it with a swaddling cloth that you have wrapped over your hand; and puncture the abdomen or chest until what is within them runs out.
If the rest of the body is removed and the head returns; then the midwife must introduce her left hand. If the birth canal is open, then introduce your hand deeply into the birth canal and search for the head, and extract it with your fingers up to the birth canal; then insert a hook or hooks and extract it with them.
If the bone of the matrix is strained, due to a hot abscess that has happened to it: then it is not appropriate for him to be operated upon on it, but rather it is appropriate at that time to administer an infusion of moist substances, oily; and apply plasters; and sit in waters which soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on his side, then it can be turned: then administer what was said for a living fetus.
If that cannot be done, then cut it in pieces and extract it.
And it is necessary not to leave anything from the second part inside at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what was said for hot abscesses that occur in the matrix.
If bleeding occurs, then descend into waters of sulfur, and administer the rest of the treatment.
And indeed I have seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus; then she became pregnant again on top of it, afterwards another fetus also died within her. After a long period of time, an abscess occurred in his navel, and it became swollen until it was opened; and he began to discharge pus.
I was therefore summoned for his treatment, and I treated him for a long time; but the wound did not heal.
Therefore, I placed on it from some strong plasters of attraction; and the bone came out from that place. Then a few days passed for him, and another bone came out. I was astonished then, because there is no bone in the womb.
Therefore, it occurred to me that they were bones of dead fetuses.
I therefore asked the wound, and extracted many bones, the woman being in good condition; and she lived thus for a long time, and scarcely discharged pus from that place.
And I did not bind here this foreign one, except because in it is knowledge, and assistance to that which the healing artist administers with his hand for treatment.
Chapter LXXVII.
On the forms of necessary instruments for extracting the fetus.
The form of the screw (screwdriver) that opens the cervix (matrix).
Here is the form of the Tortoise-shaped forceps (Stricture), which equalize books, having equally two screws at the ends of two pieces of wood. Moreover, this Screw should be finer than the forceps: and to make it so, either from ebony or from boxwood.
And the thickness of all the wood should be as two fingers: and the edge of each of both is as one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half: and in the middle of two pieces of wood there are two additional parts made from the same kind of wood, which have already been firmly attached to each, whose length is half a palm or less: and the width of each of them is as two fingers or less.
And these two additional parts are inserted into the cervix (matrix), so that it opens with them when you rotate the screws (two vertical screws).
Another form similar to it, finer and lighter.
Make it from ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the forceps. Moreover, at the end of it (the second form) there should be two additional parts as you can see here above: and the length of each additional part is approximately a palm: and the width of each of them is as two fingers.
When you wish to open the cervix with it (the second form), then make the woman sit on the bed, with her legs apart, opening what is between her thighs. Then insert these two joined additional parts into the cervix: and you hold the end of the instrument below, between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, equally according to the degree of opening of the cervix, until the midwife does what she wants.
Form of Vertigo different from that which the ancients called Form of Pushing, by which the fetus is pushed.
The form (instrument) of Moldac, with which a large head is crushed, resembling a pair of forceps, as you see, having teeth at the end.
And sometimes it becomes hook-like, like forceps in this form, as you see, having teeth like the teeth of a saw, with which it is cut and crushed.
The form (instrument) of Uncus having one spine.
The form (instrument) of Uncus having two spines.
The form (instrument) of Spathulis having two ends for cutting off the head.
The form (instrument) of two wider Spathulis.
All these instruments are applied, and the more varied their forms become, and the more prepared they are by the craftsman, the faster they are in their action, and higher among humans, due to their quantity.
Therefore, do not disregard one of these instruments as being prepared for you. Indeed, it is inexcusable for their necessity.
Chapter LXXVIII.
Chapter on the second extraction (cesarean section).
When Second is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary to command the weak one to hold her breath. Cause her to sneeze when you bind [her]: and press your hand upon her nose and her own nostrils. If it comes out by this means, that is good.
If it does not [come out]: then take a pot and make a hole in the covering [of the instrument]; and put into it herbs opening the womb, such as camomile, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia bark, centaury; take all these herbs or some of them, and immerse them in water, and place them over fire.
Then place a wick made of reed over the hole of the pot, and hold the other end upon the womb; and let it be until vapor reaches the concavity of the womb.
Then make her sneeze as we said before. For Second will come out easily.
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then order the midwife to dip her hand in sesame oil or marsh-mallow mucilage. Then insert [the instrument] into the cervix and seek Second with it. When you find it, then take it out gently.
If it is attached deeply in the womb, then insert your hand as I told you before until when you find Second and draw it out gently so that it does not fall down the womb with violent attraction; on the contrary, it should be moved easily from right to left; then add more to the amount of pressure. It will follow as a result, and she will conserve [the child] and it will pass from the adhesion.
If a bone of the matrix (womb) is dislocated, as we have already said: treat it with inducing cough and medication from an oil pot with herbs.
If it does not come out with everything that we have mentioned, then beware of exhausting yourself in the repetition of extraction.
It is necessary that what comes out from the bone of the matrix to her, you tie it to the woman's hip. Then enema her with four-ingredient ointment. For this reason it will rot her within days, dissolve and come out.
However, when it rots, the bad smell is raised to the stomach and head, and it harms the weak one (the woman). Therefore, suitable fumigations must be administered for this purpose.
Some of the ancients have already experienced that fumigation with nasturtium and dried figs is effective.
The form of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated during retention of the second delivery and menstruation.
Make it like a vessel similar to an alcama, or from zere: and let the wide end be above the fire: and the fumigation should be placed over plums: hold her until the fumigation is consumed: and repeat another one.
Chapter LXXIX.
[Section heading] On the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born, and the anuses of some of them are not perforated, which have already been circumcised with a sharp scissors. The obstetrician must therefore pierce it (the cervix) with her finger; and if she cannot, she should pierce it with a spatula sharp (instrument); and let her be careful not to touch the muscle (with it).
Then place warm wool soaked in wine and oil on top of it (the wound). Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If there is a fear that it may close up again, then place a lead cannula in the opening and remove it when the child wishes to be born.
And now, obstruction of the anus also occurs from the hardening of wounds or abscesses. Therefore, it must be cut (the obstruction), then treated with what was previously mentioned from treatment and lead.
Chapter LXXX. (80)
Chapter on the cure of fistulas that occur in the lower part (of the body).
Fistulas that occur in the lower part (of the body) are nodosities and swellings that occur near the anus outside; or in a space of one part; and there is one fistula, or more than one.
When the nodosity becomes old (hard), it opens and there runs from it a watery whiteness, or thin pus.
And sometimes they penetrate these fistulas. Therefore, they are recognized by what comes out during the discharge and wind, when a sick person uses it; and perhaps worms come out of them.
And there are fistulas (when they are) in spaces penetrating up to the bladder and to the intestine. And there are fistulas that penetrate up to the hip joint and to the coccygeal node.
From this (fact) it is known that a fistula penetrating up to the anus, even if not penetrating, is when you insert your index finger into the anus; and insert a thin probe made of copper or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting (of the intestine).
If there is a twist in it, then insert into it a slender probe made of lead or a horse hair, until you feel the probe, or a hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it fully or if nothing comes out through the opening nor any wind nor worms as I mentioned, then you will know that it is not penetrating; therefore, proceed to treatment.
When the fistula penetrates to the bladder or the membrane of urine: then its sign is the outflow of urine from it, and its prevention is that the location should be sealed with medicines.
But if it penetrates to the junction of the hip or to the hip bone: then its sign is that the probe reaches it, unless there is a twist in it up to the bone; and the discovery of pain around the area, and that pus always comes out from it; and that medicine does not work in it, nor does it heal with an ointment.
And in all these fistulas that penetrate there is no cure at all; and the cure for them is futile effort upon a fool, over whom it forms.
But in the one that does not penetrate and is not old, recovery is hoped for with a cautery; according to what I tell you, and I have already proven it: and there is, as I inform you, that the patient lies weak on his back between your hands; and you lift his legs up to above his hips, and his hips are inclined towards his abdomen. Then insert a probe of lead or copper if there is a twist in the fistula, until you know where the probe has reached.
But if the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe penetrating by itself through what you have detected with your finger, beyond what you feel between your finger and the fistula or the flesh; then you will know certainly that it is penetrating; therefore, do not labor in it, because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
They say, however, that flesh heals in some men, and from the medication that is expected to be of help, it is, to apply a subtle cautery according to the size of the Fistula, as previously mentioned, and to introduce the ignited one into the Fistula until it reaches the anus. Then do this twice, or three times, until you know that all those added fleshes filtered, which are similar to the feathers of a bird's quill, have been burnt.
Then care for it with linens rolled in butter until those burnt fleshes come out; then care for it with ointments that generate flesh and consolidate it.
If therefore it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
And if it comes out and does not reach your finger that is in the anus, and there is a thick membrane of flesh or sifac between it and the probe; and you see the fistula following the skin surface, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you go cutting with the probe until the incision reaches the end of the probe tip, and the probe is released and falls off.
Then clean those filtered fleshes similar to the feathers of a bird's quill, so that no part remains from them.
If however blood prevails over you and loosens between you and your operation, so that those fleshes fall off; then it is better what is done, and more expedient for help, to cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Because the cautery with fire brings good results, the burning of those added fleshes and the removal of blood, and the drying out of moisture.
Then treat that with linen wound dressings soaked in butter, or boiled calves' horns, until the place emits pus, and the burnt flesh emerges into the pus.
Then treat the wound with hardening ointments that cause tough skin to grow: there are remedies which contain styptic and astringent substances.
For when it is being restored, then it will heal; do not fear repeated treatment.
If the fistula has reached into the deep of the anus and is extending from the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
If you feel a tumor between yourself and her, and it is covered with skin or flesh, and is near to penetration: then the operation should not be performed on that, except according to the way of trust and hope.
Because it is treated in one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to cut it off, until you follow the depression of its hollow so that it is possible for you to insert linen and treatment from close by. And do not proceed too much with the cutting, so as not to cut the muscle containing the anus, and an accidental discharge of excrement without will occur. Then treat it with what I have said.
Perhaps it will heal itself; or stretch the skin, and cleanse it after you have cut it as we have said, either when there is a tumor, or with another tool of sharp point. Then cleanse the fleshy parts that are cut, until you can with examination.
Then attempt the restoration of the entire wound with cutting and the upper opening where it is consolidated; and the fistula remains open in the inner part of the anus, and it will be easier on the weak side.
And sometimes a fistula is drained in this manner: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula, which is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and the edge of the anus. Then take a probe with perforated tip, which is like the aleskef point, that is, prepared from leather, in this shape. And insert into it a thread rolled up from five strands, and around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its concavity.
If it penetrates the edge of the anus internally, then pull out the thread from that hole in such a way that you insert your finger into the anus and draw out the end of the thread, and gather both ends together: and tighten each one, and let it go for one or two days: and the more the thread enters the flesh, tighten it well, until the flesh between the two ends of the thread falls out and drops: then take care of the wound until it heals.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate in any way that you can prepare it, as long as it is not too deep. For you have no reason to do this for the sake of saving flesh, if you cut into it.
Then proceed as we said until it heals.
The form of the spatulis-spined probe for draining a fistula, whose sharpness is very acute on one side and the other side is not sharp, as you can see.
Chapter 81.
Chapter on the sewing of hemorrhoids from which blood flows upon their incision, and care for fissures.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds. Within the anus are things resembling charcoal or plums; or as if they were grains of wheat. They are small and large; blood flows from them constantly, and there is one, and there are many of them. They are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are usually of a little moisture, from which runs citrus water or not much blood with a constant flow; and they are according to the body's color.
The treatment of that which is within the anus is to instruct the patient to take a laxative; and it is expressed until it appears from the anus, and the athelia becomes apparent to you. Therefore, hang them with hooks; or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
If they are not held by hooks due to their moisture and softening; then take them with a rough cloth or with a glove made of double wool, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them and sprinkle some hot powders over them after cutting to keep the area hot for cauterization. Or cauterize them according to what was stated in the previous chapter on cauterization. Then treat them with the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
If the anus does not obey the expulsion, then administer a laxative to the patient with a small purge, so that it cleanses what is in the anus, and the expulsion quickly obeys when the patient empties himself.
If the athelia are outside the anus, then their situation is light and easy; you take them with your nail or take them with a hook and cut them. Then take care of them as we have said, until they are healed.
If the incision is with iron, then one must administer suture in this manner. Take a thread rolled up and insert it into the point. Then pull out the athelil towards the upper part and make it penetrate with the point into the root on the other side; and roll up two ends of the thread, one on the lower part of the needle, and they should be broad; and tie the athelil tightly with a strong knot. Then tie the thread and draw out the needle.
Do this with all the athelils and leave one; do not sew it up, so as to avoid excess bleeding.
Then place a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch over the anus and put it on the anus; and order the sick person to rest. Then let him go until he falls asleep.
When the athelils have fallen, take care of them with ointments, and with the remaining treatment, until they are healed.
Chapter on the Treatment of Fissures. For many times it happens due to drying of feces and constriction of nature.
If they have hardened and medicine does not work for them: then one must shave with a razor or with the nail until they become moist and remove the superficial layer that prevents their consolidation. Then take care of them until they consolidate as required.
If they do not consolidate: then shave them again with a stronger razor than the first, until they bleed a lot and then take care of them until they are healed.
Chapter on the Treatment of Worms and those not affected by worms; and on the Scurfy and Ants.
Head, LXXXII.
You should know that Almirmar is not anything other than a round knot resembling the head of a nail; it forms in the whole body but especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers, and it causes pain during walking.
Therefore, it must be cut what is around the nail head and held with forceps or a tweezers and removed from its root.
Then take care of that (the wound) and, if you wish, cauterize it as described in the previous chapter.
From the athelil (a type of wart), one is a small, rough, filtered outgrowth that is round on the surface of the body. And they frequently occur in children's hands.
And its treatment is to stretch the athelil, cut it; or stitch it with silk thread or wool until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or a sharp medicine, as mentioned before; and the inverse athelils are now removed and not the normal ones with the tool I will mention.
A formica (ant) is also a small, filtered outgrowth, thick, on the surface of the body, extending deeply; when cold is felt, it feels like an ant bite and appears throughout the body; and they most frequently occur in hands.
And its treatment is to take a reed from the goose feather or strong vulture feather; and place the reed on the formica (ant) until it holds the circumference of the reed with its parts. Then turn your hand with the reed until you cut what is around the formica (ant); and place it in deep flesh and remove the formica from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a reed of brass or iron in this way.
The cannula should be placed above, drawing it upwards so as to loop around the finger for its relief and its own reversal.
And if you wish to cauterize a scabies, as previously mentioned in the cauterization of Athilih in the chapter on cauteries.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Chapter on the shapes of instruments used for enemas in diseases of the anus, and the dissolution of the abdomen, and colics.
When an enema is made from silver, or gold, or brass melted down, or mallet-work.
And sometimes these instruments are small, and large, according to those in whom they are administered.
Therefore what is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and those with weak or painful anuses, so should their enemas.
Large enema.
The cannula of this, i.e., the upper part where the uterus is tied, should be wide according to this method; and it should have a distinction so that the uterus can be tied as you see, and its lower end which is inserted into the anus, should be closed, i.e., not open, soft, very thin, drawing towards subtlety; and in one of its sides there should be two holes, and in the other side one hole.
And the size of the hole should be according to the thickness of rods, and slightly smaller, and the uterus in which the medicines are placed should be from the bladder of an animal; or from a sheep's parchment, which should be small like a little ewer; whose root should be one palm.
And it should be pierced with many holes as it is turned, and the space between each hole should be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a thread, for example, from raw flax, which should be from ten threads or about that much, and tie it together with the bladder like an ewer. When a bladder is placed within it (the patient), tighten at the neck with a strong constriction of a clyster, using two distinct parts. Then clysterize it afterwards.
And this is the form of the circle depicted here and the holes (or perforations).
The quality of clysterizing it is that you should fill the bladder or the urinary bladder with medicine which is heated according to the tolerance of the sick person: and be careful that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then the sick person lies down on his back and raises his legs towards above: and place under him a sheet, that is skin upon which men lie or linen.
Then anoint the end of the clyster with oil, or with white egg yolk, or with mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances. Then introduce it (the clyster) into the anus with care. Then let the attendant take hold of the bladder with both his hands at once, and squeeze it with force, until everything that is in the clyster passes into the intestines.
Then remove the clyster, and let the sick person raise his legs towards the wall (or side of the bed).
If the medicine forces him to evacuate, then hold it as much as possible. And if he sleeps all that night with it, it is more beneficial for his recovery.
But if you clysterize him in cases of the disease of the bowels (or intestines) and his evacuation is hastened: then repeat the clyster until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful sores in the anus, then let the clyster be very subtle, soft, from the clysters with which children are clysterized.
And this is the shape of a subtle clyster over which the skin is to be tightened.
Head LXXXIIII. (This seems to be a Roman numeral, which is not
I have previously spoken about the division of treatment for wounds in another book; here I will speak about their treatment with hands and remedies as a supplement.
Therefore, I say that wounds are classified according to the cause of the wound and according to the place where the wound falls.
Therefore, the kinds of wounds are as numerous as the blows of a stone: either an incision with a sword or knife: or a blow with a spear, log, arrow, and similar things from many other objects.
Wounds that occur according to the parts of the body are such as a wound on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, or back, and similar from these members.
And I am the one telling the treatments for some wounds, in order to set forth my reasoning and rule for the remaining wounds.
And I shall begin with simple head wounds, because the description of compound wounds will come at the beginning of Chapter Three.
Therefore. (It appears that this sentence does not follow any previous statement When a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no bone fracture, consider whether it was caused by a blow of a stone or something similar, and the skin is only broken; the wound is large and one fears an abscess forming from hot suppurations; then rush, and make a cephalic vein let-down at once; and do not delay this; and draw out from the blood according to the strength of its potency; if there is nothing prohibiting venesection, especially if the blood flowing from the wound is scant. And let the venesection be from the opposite side of the wounded part. (This could mean letting blood from the unaffected or healthy side of the body, to help reduce pressure on the
And let the venesection be from the opposite side of the wounded part. (This could mean letting blood from the unaffected or healthy side of the body, to help reduce pressure on the And let the sick avoid filling himself with food and thick drinks.
If something forbids reduction (diet), then reduce from food, not approach meat or wine.
And place on the wound if it happens to him an abscess that is hot, a hot mustard poultice soaked in rose oil alone, or with wine containing hysop (hyssop).
If you are secure from a hot abscess, then place on the wound if it is new with its own blood and has not changed the air around it; and if already the air around it has changed, then place some ointments on it until it heals.
If the wound is large or from a sword cut, and similar: do not gather its edges together with stitches, then gather it with ligatures, as I will tell you about for wounds of the belly concerning their suturing.
If the wound has been detected to be from a bone and hangs and there is no retention of it except for a small suspension, then cut it. Then take care of the wound with medicines and restore the hard flesh to its place where there is skin; and order the sick one to be fed with foods that are thick, such as heads, cooked wheat, until it becomes soft; and similar things.
If you find decay on the skin that does not adhere to the bone: then cut off all the decay and throw it away; then take care of it.
If in these wounds there is an artery or a vein from which blood flows and it cannot be cut off with medicines, then search for the artery. If you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula or tie it. If necessity compels and it does not comply with what was said, then cauterize it until the blood is cut off.
If the wounds are small and simple, their state is easy and light; in this way, you should sprinkle this powder on them, because it solidifies them before the air alters them.
Method of the powder for healing. Take one part of olibanum, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime; grind it all well and sieve it; then fill the wound with this powder and apply a good bandage until it sticks well to the wound, and coagulate it with blood.
Then bind it on top with small bandages, and let it remain unopened until it does not come off. For the medicine will not be removed from him until he is healed.
And sometimes lime alone does this, when there is no olibanum or dragon's blood available to you; it performs the same operation on many large wounds, when it must be placed over them and bound, and the wounds are recent with their own blood which has not been altered by air.
If the air has already altered [the wound] in some way, especially when it is during summertime, then this powder's purpose is not suitable; so take care of it with what I said, namely by placing something soothing on them, such as certain ointments; or place poultices made from barley flour, boiled with water and honey over them until they release pus. Then take care of the rest of the healing, until they are healed.
But if a fracture happens on the bone with the wound and it is small, then extract it using Gesthi; and I will now say the treatment for fractures of the skull that will follow.
Chapter on Neck Wounds.
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple wound of the head.
If the nerve of the neck or an artery has already been cut, if it is a nerve: then there is no skill in treating it except to divert its cure along with that which causes violent stiffness, such as ziniar and zegi and similar ones. Since nerves are harmful and contract them.
And do not put anything cold at all on the wound: since the substance of nerves is cold and their continuity is with the brain, which is above the organs; and let it be treated with soft medicines such as lime mixed with sweet water several times infused with oil or with rose oil, or turpentine when it is washed even with sweet water; and other mineral stones in this way, and moist unguents.
If the wound is large, then administer suture or sew its edges with strips of skin (or fat). Then care for it until it heals.
If the wound is deep or a cavity appears at its lower part where pus accumulates, then pierce it in a more depressed place.
If the artery has already been cut in the wound and blood flow follows: then separate it, or cut it off, and tie it; or cauterize it if necessity requires this.
If a fracture of the neck of the mandible or the entire mandible has occurred and the molars have been saved: then attach strips of skin to it with suture above the cervix of the throat, and do not touch the throat, but instead lay it down, and reduce it to its natural shape. Then tie it with a suitable suture and leave it for some days. Then take care of it yourself with ointments containing styptic and astringent properties until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then inspect it thoroughly. If there are any bone fragments in it, remove all of them, or as many as possible: and what cannot be prepared, leave it until the wound rots, separates, and heals by itself.
If the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder on it as I previously mentioned. If it appears that a bone is present in the wound and a fistula forms, then treat it as described in its respective chapter.
Chapter on Wounds Treated with Spatulas.
If it is a wound made by a lance or knife and you see its depth, then assess it. If pus is coming out of the wound when the person who has been wounded breathes heavily, then you know that the wound is fatal.
If the depth is not great and the wound is fresh with blood, then do not put powder on it for the first hour or compress it, so that blood does not accumulate in its depth and return to the heart and kill the wounded person: instead, apply astringent ointment and solve it twice daily.
If astringent ointment is not available to you, then place a piece of old cotton over the wound opening to absorb what comes out of it due to moisture: and make sure that the wounded person sleeps on the wound so that what accumulates in it runs off.
If three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and the wounded person does not experience spasms, no bad heart tremors, no constriction of breathing, and the rest of its conditions are good: then you know that the wound is healed. Care for yourself and with linen cloths, and the rest of the treatment, until you are healed.
If it is cut open for healing and already opens up always, then know that it has become a Fistula. Care for it from its own chapter.
And if it is a wound from sword or knife cut, and simple on the surface of the chest or back, then care for it with what has preceded from stitching, if it is large; or with dust, if it is small.
If it has already made an impression on the bone and cut out fragments from it: then examine the wound, and hasten to extract those fragments, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them until the wound rots, for extraction of them is painful.
For wounds happening to other parts of the body, the judgment in treatment is the same as what we have said.
Chapter on abdominal wounds and the outlet of the intestine, and their evacuation.
A rupture that happens to the abdomen is large, medium, or small.
From a large rupture, at times, the intestine comes out, or the number of intestines.
Therefore, their insertion and suturing is required, and their stitching is more arduous and difficult.
And even a small rupture may be difficult in another way. Therefore, the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not hasten to their insertion to their place immediately; because it swells, opens up, and becomes enlarged; therefore, the entrance of it is difficult.
Therefore, a medium rupture is more advantageous because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is with these two types.
You should know that suturing a vein is according to four modes.
Two common sutures meet in suturing the abdomen, and in suturing other wounds of the body; and two other sutures communicate specifically with the remaining wounds. However, they are more appropriate for suturing the abdomen: and I tell you one each with an explanation and a declaration.
Therefore, when a wound is small and something from the intestine comes out of it, and it becomes difficult to reduce it; then it is due to one of the two modes. Either because of the small size of the rupture, as we said; Or because there is an inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
When that is the case, then it is necessary to heat it up, so that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in warm water alone. Or boil in water squill, cumin, fennel, and wormwood with the intestine until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes it does vinegar in which there is a stoppage; and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflation.
When you see that the inflation has been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which wormwood or mallow was boiled. For this reason, the entry is stimulated with it when the wound is small.
If, however, the return occurs after this treatment, then plug the rupture with a little, with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared, than cutting; and no pressure to cut is made after necessity and lack of instruments.
Let the part of it be twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and let the fine end not be as subtle as a spatula, but rather slightly blunt; and this is the one that resembles a thorn, as you can see.
When the wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its own place, if possible on top of it: because it is better.
When the wound is wide at the lower part of the abdomen: then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then put his head and his chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly if the wound is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then direct your attention and thought always in this: that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other part.
And so, it is necessary to insert this into large wounds and into medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds, place it according to what you have prepared.
Then cause a faithful servant to be present between your hands, who holds the entire wound with his hand and binds it up. Then cut out some thread following something for the one who follows to sew; and this is the common method of suturing one.
And it is that you receive a needle or a number of needles according to the size of the wound. Then cut off from the end of the wound a length equal to one finger of a ring, that is to say, of a doctor; and insert one needle beyond which you introduce thread in both edges of the skin, with both edges of the sifac that is under the skin from the inside, until it penetrates through another part; and you have already bound together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the sifac; and there are four rows.
Then sew with double thread around the needle several times from both parts at once, until the two edges of the wound are bound together properly.
Then release the thickness of the finger also, and tie another needle: afterwards draw it straight with thread, as you did with the first needle. Do not cease to do that with the needle that you need until you complete the constriction of the whole wound.
Let the needle be of medium thickness between thickness and subtlety, because subtle needles deeply penetrate flesh quickly; and large ones have a difficult entrance into the skin; for this reason, they should be medium in subtlety and thickness.
And it is not fitting that the needle be shaped at both ends near the skin closely so as not to penetrate the flesh quickly and open the wound before its consolidation, and so that they do not elongate even with suturing, preventing the wound from consolidating.
Then cut the tips of the needles so as not to hurt the weak when sleeping; and place small pieces of cloth from all sides that hold the tips of the needle; and release them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this form of suturing with needles in this manner is more suitable for small wounds. Because it suffices for their suturing one or two needles or around them.
The second kind of suturing is common, namely when you gather with suturing the four extremities; the four skin extremities, and the two sifac extremities as one, with a needle on which the thread is rolled equally in subtlety and thickness.
Then when you penetrate with the needle these four extremities, draw back the needle from the part where you started so that the thread falls down from the upper part of the wound; thus it is a suture, just like the suture of cloth when they are sewn together, and place between every stitch a quantity equal to the thickness of a little finger.
Humans know this stitch.
And with this stitch, I myself sewed the wound that had happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the wound was larger than one palm: and from the intestines there came out about two palms from the middle intestine, and the tear was in the middle of the abdomen.
I then brought it back after his intestines were set outside for 24 hours.
The wound therefore healed up in a space that was about 15 days: and I cured him, and he got well: and he lived after that for many years, turned back to his ways.
And the doctors had judged that he would not get well.
And it was a miracle that I did not cure it with an ointment. Because I was in the place where no ointment could be found, nor any medicine. Therefore I put over the wound a warm cloth twice a day, and I washed it with water of honey until it got well.
However, I shall speak about two kinds of stitches according to the report in speech.
And it is to begin with sharp stitching: and you insert a needle from the outside to the inside part.
When the needle goes through the skin and along the length and width of the whole body: then release the end of the sifac on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate to the end at the other side from the inside out at the opposite end.
When you make it penetrate in this way, then make it penetrate thus in the same end: and release the end of the sifac on that side, and let the needle penetrate to the end from the inside out at the other end: and let it penetrate with your penetration where you are causing it to penetrate into the sifac end, which is in that part, until it enters entirely.
Then also start from this same side, and take it together with the end that is from sifac on the other side, and pull out the point from the skin which it has penetrated.
Bring it back to the same skin, and take together with it the end of sifac that is on the other side with this end of mirach: pull it out from the skin that is on its side, and do this alternately and in reverse order until you have pulled it all out according to this example.
The sum of this suture is that you should make the sutures of skin, which are the skins themselves: thus, you should sew one end of sifac with one part of the skin's edge: and you should release it with the other part, until you have finished.
The second species of suture mentioned by Galen.
This discourse is told as if you should tie it up in the same way as some healers do, that is to gather all parts that are fitting by nature and bring together: and apply one end of sifac to its other end, and apply one end of mirach to another end of it. And this is done as I tell you.
You should bend the point towards the end of mirach that is near you from the outside part, and make it penetrate to the inside: and release both ends of sifac. Then bend back the point, and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside in both ends of sifac.
Then turn both (of them) back and make both penetrate from the inside to the outside in two ends of mirach that are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common easy suture and is the suture that was mentioned earlier.
This is therefore the saying of Galen.
And some said. The repair of the abdominal suture is done with two needles. What is to be done, insert one thread into each of them, and begin with the introduction of the needle from what is near you, and make it pass through until the other side, according to the equal stitch of those who sew leather equally.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than the other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the medicine for wounds is the judgment for other wounds.
What is to be done, when you seize a recent wound with its own blood before it changes through air, and you reduce the bowel, and tie it, and make it fit, then place it on powder of lime.
If the air has already altered the wound: then place on it certain ointments which are present to you, until they make pus; and let the threads fall, and bind with sifac, and press with a mirror. Then care for it as is the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
If there are no medicines present to you, then immediately place on it, as soon as it begins to emit pus, old cloth; and change it twice a day, as I taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need another medicine in many positions when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound communicates with the main parts in injury, then it is necessary to immerse a soft wool in oil of temperate heat, or rose oil; and place it in the girdle around the parts which are between the groins, and under the armpits.
If he feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then clisterize him with warm stiptic wine: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine, and an opening has been made penetrating to the concavity of it.
And know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal; and what is from the small intestines is more difficult to heal.
The jejunum intestine, which is named so, does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and the size of them, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of the proximity of its nerves to nature.
If what proceeds from the wound is pus, and you find it fresh: bring it back as you bring back the intestines equally.
But if time has passed and it has become green or black: then you must stitch it with a thread above the place that has become blackened, so that there is no bleeding. For in pus there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of the thread hanging from below on the lower part of the wound outside it: so as to relieve your pressure upon it, and the extraction of the pus at the site of the wound, and the emission of the wound's pus.
Chapter on the Wound that Occurs in the Intestine.
When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small: then it is possible for it to be restored in some people: because I have seen one who was wounded in his abdomen with a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old: and it became a fistula, and exuded feces, and gases.
I therefore placed the treatment, until I was confident of its healing; neither did I cease to investigate it, until it was healed and the location was consolidated.
After I saw the location already consolidated, I feared something bad might happen to the sick man concerning his stomach; and it did not happen to him from that bad thing. And he remained in better dispositions for himself, eating and drinking, and urinating, and went into the bath, and was trained in his own diet.
And some of the experienced men said, when a wound occurs in the Intestine and it is small, then it should be tied thusly. And it is to receive ants with large heads. Then gather two lips of the wound and place one ant with an open mouth on both lips of the wound. When its head is upon them, and it closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it will stick to them and not be removed.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease to make this with an ant according to the size of the wound in its entirety.
Then reduce it and sew up the wound. For those heads remain attached in the intestine until the intestine is eaten and it heals, so that no harm comes to the sick man completely.
And it is now possible to tie the intestine even with fine thread; what has been taken out of the intestine of the animal and attached to it when inserted into the point.
And it is to receive the end of this thread from the intestine and scrape off much flesh. Then tie a thin linen thread at its end. Then insert the thread into the point and sew up the intestine with it. Then reduce it to a dislocation.
This method of stitching with worms and intestines is not except by faith and hope.
Know that a large, wide wound, especially if it is on one of the slender intestines, has no other remedy except subtlety. There is no healing of it at all.
Chapter on the care of ulcers and fistulas.
Know that every wound or abscess when it becomes old and chronic, turns into an ulcer and does not consolidate, but always emits pus and does not separate: then it is called universally in whatever member it may be a fistula, and we call it a Zuchimen.
And a fistula indeed is in truth a knotted filter, hard, white: with which there is no pain, to which there is a hollow of the bird's feather: and for this reason some call it Rasa, that is, the feather.
And in certain hours it is moist, which emits pus. And perhaps the moisture is cut in certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and little; and it is thick, and fine.
And I have already stated in the division, then when I said wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal and is not generated in it flesh, is not for any of the nine causes.
One of the reasons is that because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or because it is bad; or because there is hard flesh within and above it, preventing the generation of flesh; or because it is full of dirt and filth; or because the ulcer itself is rotten, and the matter emitted to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for its healing; or because corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence, as happens in Caesaraugusta; in which difficult digestion of diseases occurs, and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone in it, or a number of bones.
I have already shown you all those causes and their signs, as well as the treatments of them with medicines in division: it is necessary here that I make you know the treatment for Fistula and Ulcer, which is done by the way of surgery with the hand.
Know therefore that Fistula occurs in all the members of the body. For among these are Fistulae that reach to great veins and arteries, or nerves, or tendons; or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs: or to any of the vertebrae in the back, or to any of the joints composed of bones; such as hands and feet: and among these are those that approach the proximity of a main member and similar ones.
What therefore among these Fistulae is according to this method, is difficult to heal from sickness and does not receive treatment, and the occupation with it is labour and ignorance.
If there is any of these Fistulae whose depth does not reach to the places which I have said: and you hope for, trust in its treatment, and desire to reach knowledge about it, then take a probe made of copper or iron, if the Fistula goes straight, and explore it with that.
If there is a twist in the Fistula, then investigate it with a probe made of delicate lead. Since lead being softened and curved towards twists.
If the Fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to sign on it with a probe. Then close one of its openings with clisteria from among them.
Since the moisture that you clisterize it goes backward to other openings and runs out of them.
Then carefully investigate according to how it is possible for you: so that you may know whether there is bone or nerve there, and whether the hollow is a long or short fistula, or whether it is a fistula with many openings, which is on top of it all, with the strength of your hand: with the questioning you ask of the sick person, and the discovery of pain under pressure with your hand, and similar signs and causes from accidents.
When you have thus established yourself in a true position, then proceed with treatment according to your confidence: and it is for you to consider whether the fistula appearing near is in a place safe at a distance from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the places I mentioned to you: then cut the fistula according to what has been said in my narrative, and remove what is in it by filtering, and corrupt flesh that arises in its opening, or pus, and similar things: and treat it until it heals.
If the fistula is deep, and is straight: then it is necessary to cut it as deeply as possible for you. Then cleanse the fistula from all corrupted flesh.
Then administer linen wound bandages filled with sharp medicines: and insert it into the hollow of the fistula that you grasped with iron, do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that remains in the hollow of the fistula due to corruption.
Then restore the fistula with ointments that promote healthy flesh until it heals.
If it does not heal through this, then cauterize the fistula as we have said before.
If the cause of the fistula is bone, and you are certain of this: then ask for it, and cut the bone as I have told you: if nothing prevents you from doing so in a vein, nerve, or main member, as we have said before.
If therefore a bone is discovered in you, and there is something corrupted within it, and blackening: then scrape it off, until the entire corruption of it is removed. Then care for it with it, until it heals up.
If it does not heal, and discharges pus as before: then know, that you have not achieved a complete removal of the corruption.
Then dig into it again, and carefully investigate its reason, and cleanse it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, it is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in a deep remote part of the body, which you have not reached. Therefore, there is no skill in it for you, except to let it go to nature.
If a small bone is corrupted and if it can be drawn out with fine forceps which suit to that purpose: draw it out with them.
If there are many bones: then carefully investigate the drawing of all of them, and do not leave anything in them with your strength.
If something from the moist areas opposes you and there is no fear or mistake in the cutting of them: then cut those moist areas and flesh, if they are present, and release the bones.
If there is no preparation to remove the bones from your time: then place over the wound something that rots it; and leave it until it rots what is around their bones from flesh and moistness.
And watch the wound so that it does not close up. And bind the incision which you cut during your operation. Or place over it, if you fear, cotton soaked in soft sulfur oil; or cotton soaked in the Egyptian ointment, or some green ointments.
When those [humidities] in question rot, and the bones are separated from them, let the excision of them be anointed, and their attraction as well.
If it is a large bone such as the leg bone or hip bone and similar [bones], and what has rotted from it is a large part: then shave it down with the finest file until that blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
If what has rotted within it is a large part, and corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it must be cut through, and it must be sawed all the way to where the corruption ends: then treat it until it heals.
And I tell you this secret, which happens to a man in his thigh: place it before yourself as an example and aid for your operation.
A young man of about thirty years had pain in his thigh, caused by something that moved within him from the inside until the matter reached the thigh, and an abscess was formed with a large abscess: there was no external cause for him.
So the time passed with the error of physicians until the abscess was opened, and many materials gathered there with him. And his treatment was delayed until the thigh became fistulous, and many openings were made in it: which all discharged pus, and humors of the body.
Therefore a multitude of physicians treated him for about two years, and there was no skilled person in the art of surgery called until I saw his thigh, and the materials that ran out of those openings with great flow: even the entire body of the man had become wasted, and his color was jaundiced.
So I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached the bone.
Then I have examined all the openings and found that they lead to each other from all parts of the leg.
I have dug deep, and cut through one of the openings, until I exposed a part of the bone: and I found it corrupt, already rotten, decayed, putrid, and pierced through, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
I have then sawed what was exposed to me, and prepared it from the rotten bone.
And rejected that which was not in the bone except for this corruption, which I cut off and sawed. And I had already pulled it out (the pus or infection).
Then I placed the wound dressing with solidifying medicines in a long space. And it is not healed (yet).
Then I tried again, and exposed over the bone second above the first opening: and I found continuous corruption with the bone: and I sawed what appeared to me also from that corruption.
And then I attempted to dress it (the wound). And it is not dressed (yet).
I then exposed it again, and did not stop cutting the bone in pieces, and trying to dress it: and it is not dressed, until I cut out about a palm's length of bone with its marrow.
Then I dressed it with medicines, and it healed quickly, and was cured: and this repetition of the operation and section of it was not necessary except for the disposal of weakness, the frailty of the patient, and my fear of death: since it happened to him at all hours from excess evacuations with bad syncopes.
He is therefore cured completely: and flesh hard has grown at the place of the bone, and good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he has turned back to his dispositions: and it did not cause him any harm in walking at all.
If the projecting bone in the body is already fractured, then it is necessary that you sew it up in this manner: and it is as follows: take a ligament and bind it at the end of the projecting bone; and command someone to stretch it upward; and place another thicker ligament on the first one. Then sew it to the flesh that surrounds the bone; extend its end so as to pull the flesh towards the lower parts; and remove the flesh from the place you wish to sew, so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
Place a log or board under the bone below in a good position; for when you do this, it is not forbidden to cut corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the saw be over the corrupted place slightly, so that there is no corruption in the hollow of the bone; and it does not appear to the senses in its view, and compel another [part] to serve in its stead.
If the bone is corrupted and not projecting, but rather continuous with another part; and corruption is in its middle or in a part of it; then remove the flesh from all parts completely. Then place a log below.
Then saw it from the first part where there is corruption, until the saw has reached the other side; and let the saw be slightly longer than the corruption, as we said before.
If the corruption is at a joint, cut away the corrupted joint itself and saw the bone where it joins with another part.
If the corruption is at the joining of two joints, then there is no remedy but abrasion [to remove the damaged tissue].
If the corruption is at the beak of the hand or foot, then there is a great difficulty in it. It is necessary for you to examine the appearance of the corruption. And grind it (the tumor) away and clean it as much as possible for you, and when it is corrected with any tool: if it does not create opposition to the Vein or the Nerve.
And know that there are many cutting and sawing tools for this bone, according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their hardness, their size, their smallness, their density, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare every kind of instrument suitable for each operation.
And know that these operations signify for you the type of instrument you require, when your study is prolonged. And the knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the methods of illnesses: then you will indeed find for yourself what suits it from instruments for every sickness.
And I am confirming for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments, which you will place examples on for cutting, and proof on others.
The form of another saw.
The form of a rasp for joints. The head of this rasp should be in the shape of a star-headed nail and its points according to the shape of the points on a nail file.
It is not suitable unless it scrapes with it the heads of joints when they are broken or a large and thick bone.
The form of a larger rasp.
Wide Razor Form.
Concave Razor Form.
Shape of a finer razor.
Shape of a curved-tipped razor.
Shape of a small, flexible razor.
It resembles a saw and its end is like that of a chisel: it is used in many places for the reason of bones.
Shape of a razor suitable for cutting through bone.
Its end is triangular and sharp-edged.
Made of ivory. And similarly, all that I have said must be made from razors, chisels and saws.
Section of limbs and setting of bones.
Rottenness occurs at the extremities, either from an external cause or an internal one.
When you have been treated for that corruption with medicine, and the treatment does not help; and if you see corruption attacking a limb which is not struck by anything: then it is necessary to cut through that limb until the corruption passes away through it, or death, or a greater evil affecting the member.
And the sign which occurs is that a limb becomes dark, until it is thought to be rotten; it has been burnt by fire or rot sets in after it has turned black; it is cut through until the rot reaches what follows that limb and creeps over the entire body.
Approach with the incision of that limb, and similarly if the cause of the rot is from certain venomous animals such as the marine scorpion, viper, weasel, and similar creatures.
If corruption or a blow occurs at the end of a finger, then cut off the finger, and do not leave any space for the rot to spread, so that it may spread over the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it occurs in the hand, then cut off at the root of the fingers, and do not leave any space for the rot to spread until it reaches the arm bone.
And if it enters into this [joint], then cut off the arm at the elbow joint.
If the rot passes beyond this [point], and you see it approximately at the elbow: then death is approaching for the sick person. To administer treatment beyond that point is the strength of the medicine.
And similarly do with the foot, when rot sets in at a toe; then cut off that toe at one of the joints; and if it reaches the ankle bone, then cut off the entire foot. If it goes up to the knee, then cut off the leg at the knee joint.
If corruption has already reached the knee, then there is no skill in it, except for release and leaving the sick one to die.
The method of cutting a limb or sewing it is to tighten the ligament below where you wish to cut, and to tighten another ligament above the place. And extend one servant ligament downwards, and another servant ligament upwards towards the top. And you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments with a broad knife until all the flesh is exposed. Then it is cut or sewn.
It is necessary to place a linen cloth over all the parts so that the knife does not touch a healthy place; and a wound must be added to the sickness, and a hot abscess.
If there is an internal bleeding while you are operating, then quickly cauterize the place; or else place some powder on it that draws blood. Then return to your medicine until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with an appropriate ligament and take care of it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man on his foot, this same thing happens to you.
Because there is a blackness occurring on his foot similar to burning by fire; and corruption first begins in one of his toes until it reaches the entire foot.
Therefore the man cut himself, after seeing corruption occurring on a limb with pain and burning; and he cut himself at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long period of time, that same corruption occurred on one of his fingers on his index hand.
Therefore he came to me and tried to recover that loss with what I put on his hand from remedies after cleansing his body; and the excess was not found, and it began to spread to another finger until corruption reached his entire hand.
He therefore called me to cut his hand; and I did not want it, hoping for reimbursement from him for the excess; and I also feared death itself during the incision of his hand. Because the man's virtue was above his fall.
Since he had given up on me, he returned to his own land; and he came back to me about it because he hurried, and he cut off his entire hand; and he was healed.
And I did not bring this story unless it is an aid for that which falls under the genus of this illness; and it is to show what needs to be shown, and according to how it should be done.
Chapter on the care of the sinuses, and the quality of cleansing with medications.
When a boil occurs in certain fleshy parts and the space of the boil extends until it collects pus; then it breaks or perforates and whatever is in the pus exits and leaves an empty spot as if it were a vessel; and the skin that is on top of it, like a cloth that has been made thin; and it does not reach final corruption nor press against bone, nerve, or ligament: it is worthy to be called a Sinus; and it is not called a Fistula, but if the space prolongs until corruption presses into one of these organs, then it is called a Fistula, or zukh.
And its care is to cut the entire skin as it rolls; especially when it has been made thin and resembles a cloth; and you trust that it will not adhere due to its own corruption.
If you hope that the skin will adhere and this final corruption does not follow as a consequence; and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then treat it with Clisterium; and be aware of this for the Sinus.
Then if it [the wound] is large and the pus that is emitted from it has a foul smell: then cleanse him with a clyster of Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and honey, portions being equal, mixed in a vessel; and boil it over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes thick like honey.
Then take what is necessary from it [the substance]: and dissolve it with water and honey, and cleanse the bladder with it; and sew up its opening, and let the medicine be poured into it to the quantity of two hours.
Then remove it with pressure: do this for several days until the bladder is purified and the foul smell is removed.
And sometimes the bladder is cleansed with water and ashes when this medicine is not available to you; and it is for you to take the ashes of vinewood or the ashes from oak wood, and pour water on it. Then wash it and cleanse the bladder with it until you are confident that the bladder has been purified.
But if the patient is not able to tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water and ashes, then cleanse the bladder with water and honey, to which something has been added from crushed honey. Or cleanse the bladder with honey and wine mixed together, because it is a property of honey to purify and wash; and wine makes the bladder adhere, especially when there is an excess of hardness and dryness in the wine.
Whenever you do this and are confident that the corruption of the bladder has been removed: then cleanse the bladder with it that causes flesh to grow within it.
And it is for you to take from the plaster of dyafinicon; and dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic wine, or cleanse the bladder with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
If the orifice of the Sinus is narrow and cannot take a cannula for clysters: then expand it slightly with iron; or place linen wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or Basilicon ointment until it expands.
And similarly if the orifice is also wide, then gather its lips with suture; and let the amount that the clyster can enter go in without addition.
And similarly if the orifice from which pus flows is elevated towards the higher parts: then cut it at a lower place that is within it, so that the pus runs out below; because pus, when constrained in depth of Sinus, prevents flesh generation in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the Sinus around its lower part as desired: then try to prepare a member in such a way that pus runs out from it with ease according to how you are prepared. Try not to retain anything from the pus within it; and take medicines for consolidation that are put on the mark, suitable for what you want. Spread them out on a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such a size that there is communication throughout the entire Sinus. Then cut with scissors a hole directly in the orifice of the Sinus, wider than the orifice of the Sinus by a little. Then spread out on a cloth soaked with soft ointment of such size as the hole; and place it above at a distance from the orifice of the Sinus to ease the discharge of pus from it; and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days, once.
The one who is above the orifice of the Sinus is the one you remove at every hour, to expel what accumulates in it from pus; and know that, whether the discharge from it is much or little, digested or undigested.
And again consider the place of the sinus, if its lord feels pain there, or if there is no pain in it, and if there is an abscess in it, or if there is no abscess in it.
When your treatment is extended thus, and you see the matter that comes out through the opening of the sinus, then you know that the sinus is already adhering or is approaching adherence; then dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change the linen, and renew the ointment.
If however a subtle vapor comes out from the sinus after a long time, then do not despair of its adherence, for its healing approaches, since there are people who act slowly in the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act contrary to this.
If however an undigested pus comes out of the sinus after many days, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its case prolonged: then add drying medicaments, but let the physicians do so, that the medicaments are humid in substance and dry in potency; such as unguentum dyafinicon, when excess is added to it from zegi.
And from the more distant cure that is applied, it is that you take unguentum dyafinicon, and dissolve it with rose oil, and mix upon it old wine equal in substance.
Then compound it with the above and use it.
And now make something similar to this action, when you do not have unguentum dyafinicon, honey, when you boil it until it thickens, and use it. Or take myrrh, aloe, and olibanum; grind all of them, and powder it over honey while it is above the fire. Then draw a line on the skin above the tumor and sew it onto the abscess; and draw a thread with honey that you have boiled, until it swells up; then pulverize its substance and place it on the linen cloth and sew it.
Sometimes Aristolochia longa, the root of celestial lily, and lily are administered; and flour of the plant, and knotgrass. Use them (the simple or combined remedies), crush and sift them; and pulverize the honey that I have mentioned, and use it.
If the abscess prolongs and is not cured by this treatment, then you know that there is corruption in its depth; either it has already made an impression on the bones or on other hard parts or ligaments; then cure it with fistula treatment, as previously mentioned.
Chapter on the treatment of corns and calluses, abrasion of the finger nail, and incision or section.
A corns is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb or big toe, or perhaps arises in other fingers.
When it prolongs and is neglected without treatment, and it becomes an abscess; or it rots and discharges pus until it corrodes the nail root; and perhaps it corrupts it completely, and perhaps corruption reaches the bone until it has a fetid smell; and the tip of the finger becomes broad, and its color becomes dark.
When you treat it (the corns), and your treatment does not produce the desired effect; then you must cut away all excess that remains from the nail with an iron. Then cauterize the wound after that. Indeed, cauterization is very beneficial.
If the bone is healthy and the nail also is healthy, and empty additions of the nail are pressing the flesh towards the inside and it begins to pierce and hurt it; then it is necessary that you place subtle Radium under the angle of the nail which is piercing the flesh, and push it up; and cut the flesh with ease, and put on top of what remains of the flesh from burning medicines, corrosives, until all of it is removed. Then take care of it with ointments, until it heals.
If corruption is already pressing into the bone, then it is necessary that you cut that bone and extract it; for the bone will never heal while there is a corrupted bone present.
If you see corrosion and corruption advancing on the finger, then cut it at one joint, according to the previously mentioned memorization. Then take care of it until it heals.
If, however, the nail is worn or struck and a violent pain occurs, then it is necessary that you use the lancet first on the weak. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatulate section from above to sight.
And keep the cut from reaching the flesh that is under the nail, for you will cause excessive painfulness over the weak by this and there will be a cause added to the growth of the skin in the place.
Then take care of the place with what eases the pain.
A finger that is born in some human hands may be entirely fleshy; and it may have bones in some of them, and it may have a nail in it; and some of these are born at the junction of the root, or its birthplace is in some joints of the finger. Therefore, the one that is born in some joints of the finger does not move; and the one that is born at the junction of the finger may move.
The operation on the fleshy one amongst them is easy. Cut him at the root with a wide spatula.
But for the one whose birth is in the junction of roots, the treatment is difficult. Therefore, avoid cutting him.
However, when he is born on the digit at the end of tendons, then one must cut the flesh of him first with a round incision up to the bone. Then, using one of those saws fitting for that, saw the bone. Then care for him until he is healed.
However, consolidation that happens in fingers often occurs either at birth of a person, meaning he is born with it, or from consolidation of a wound, or burn by fire, and similar conditions.
Therefore, one must cut away that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place a cloth or gauze soaked in rose oil between them, so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate them; or place between them a thin sheet of lead until the location heals as required.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in certain fingers with the palm, then cut away that consolidation according to its preparation and the shape of the member.
Chapter on Defects of Incisions.
Uites are swollen veins filled with melancholic superfluities that often occur in various parts of the body; and their outcome is most common in legs, especially in those traveling or working or carrying heavy loads.
Therefore, one must administer a vigorous purging of the body from black bile on several occasions.
Then make venesection from the patient using a basilica vein.
Treatment of those (afflictions) with iron is according to two modes. One of them is, that it should be scented and the black blood drawn out. And another mode is, that the vein should be elevated and everything should be drawn out.
Cutting (it) however is according to this mode. First, the leg should be embroced with much hot water until the thick, foul blood is resolved. Then bind the weakened leg from the upper part of the hipbone of it, as far as the lower part of the thigh with plaster. Then cut the vein in one place or two or three in a wide incision.
Then elevate, that is, draw blood from the lower part of the leg with your hand upwards, and it is necessary that the lancet be applied to the weakened person first. Then cut the nail downwards until there comes out from the blood a quantity that you see is sufficient and that the strength of the weakened person can bear.
Then tie it up and tell him to abstain from foods that produce black bile; and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and this will harm the weakened person.
Elevation (of the leg) however is according to this mode. Shave the weakened leg if there are many hairs on it. Then immerse it (the leg) in a bath or embroce the leg on its own with hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell; or exercise it with vigorous movement if there is no bath present for him, until the limb warms up.
Then make an incision along the vein directly for its length; or at the end of it by the knee, or at the lower part of it by the heel.
Then open the skin with awls and scrape off the vein from every side until it is apparent to the sense; and there appears at its appearance that it turns from red to blackish-blue. When it comes out from the skin, it appears white as a cord.
Then insert the Radius under it until it is raised and comes out from the skin; hang it with a blind hook, soft.
Then cut another section near that section with three fingers. Then scrape the skin from above the vein until it appears. Then lift it with radii as you did before and hang it with another hook as you did first.
Then cut another section or several sections as needed. Then scrape it and make an incision on the last section at the heel.
Then extract it to the section above it.
And do this until you extract it from the section above or from all sections when it comes out completely; then make an incision on it.
If it does not obey you to extract and lift, then insert a pointed probe with a strong thread and tie it and extract it; or insert a radii under it and rotate your hand on all sides until it comes out. And be careful not to cut it. For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult for you to lift it and harm results from it on the patient.
When you have extracted it completely, place linen soaked in wine and rose oil or olive oil over the wound site and take care of it until it heals.
If the vein is contracted and twisted with a winding in various parts, and it is not as we said according to rectitude: then you must make an incision over all parts of its twisting and the winding points of itself.
Then hang it with hooks until you lift the entire vein; be careful not to cut or wound the vein at your incision site, for it will be difficult for you to lift or extract it. Preserve therefore your prudence.
The shape in which a wound heals is the vine.
The shape of an incision in a blind man.
The scarring in this type of incision is not like that of other incisions, nor does it have a sharp point to damage the vein; rather, it has a thick folding, soft; because if it were delicate, it would pierce the vein with its delicacy; on the contrary, excess thickness is superfluous, as we said.
On the extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs on hot lands, as Alizegi says, and in the land of Arabs, and in dry, hot lands of little softness, that is, where no grass grows nor tree.
And perhaps it is generated in other places of the body apart from the legs.
Indeed, its generation is from the putrefaction that occurs beneath the skin, as it happens within the bodies of snakes and roundworms and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the emergence of this vein is that which happens when there is a violent inflammation in the leg. Then the place is blistered. Then the vein begins to emerge from that blistered spot, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When it appears from that spot, then you should wind around it a piece of lead whose weight is half a kentenarie and the same number of knots; and let the suspended lead hang down from the leg.
Whenever something comes out of it towards the outside, wind that up in lead and knot it. If it prolongs itself much, then cut off a part of it and wind up the rest. Do not incise it rootwise before it entirely comes out. If you cut (it), it contracts and enters into the flesh: and causes an abscess to occur, and corruption at the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it is necessary that it be gently treated and slowly extracted until it entirely comes out and nothing remains of it in the body: and from this vein comes forth in some men what is along its length five palms and ten. And now it has come to me, because it came out of a man of twenty palms.
If it is cut during your treatment hour: then insert a probe into its opening and perforate it with a long hole, along with the body, until all that is in it from matter has been evacuated: and administer the corruption of the place with medicines for some days. Then take care of it with treatment for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot, or in the foot itself: and there are many openings to it, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Take care of it, as we have said in the division, and with what was previously mentioned.
[Chapter heading:] Section on worms generated beneath the skin, and this is called Bouina's Disease.
This disease is called Bouina's Disease in a certain land among us: because it often happens to cows, and there is a small worm born between the skin and flesh.
It moves throughout the body, going up and down: and it is noticed by the senses during walking from one limb to another until it bursts at any place where it bursts through the skin and comes out.
The generation of it (the tumor) is from the putrefaction of certain humors. As worms and snakes, that is, earthworms and ascaris, occur in the abdomen.
And it (the stone) is feared from its malice. Because when it (the stone) moves within the body and rises to the head and reaches its location, then perhaps it opens there, and exits, and destroys the eye; and this happens frequently.
Since therefore you wish to cure it (the stone) and remove it, this can only be done during its movement (or passage) and appearance to the sense of sight.
Therefore, what is above it (the stone) must be compressed with a strong bandage and what is beneath it with a compression of the ligature. Then cut above it, and remove it.
If it (the stone) has gone deep into the flesh and you cannot find it, then place a cautery on its location with fire until it dies.
The larger one (the stone), which is feared, is its corruption that destroys the eye, as we have said.
If you see it (the stone) has already reached the head near the eye, then compress above it with a good bandage. Then cut above it, and remove it.
The sick person must use self-cleansing of the body with medications that dissolve bad humors putrid.
Let him avoid foods causing putrefaction.
Section on the pain of Nakir (a medical case or disease).
This disease is known as Nakir in our land; it is a pain that occurs in certain members, then changes from one member to another.
And indeed I myself have seen it, as I am telling you. I was summoned to a sick woman in certain villages. And she had rolled up her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And after staying for an hour, I saw the swelling moving with a probe, as a worm moves, ascending to her shoulder more quickly than it could: like living silver when it runs from place to place.
Therefore, the pain left that place, and it was fixed in her shoulder.
Then she sat for an hour, and ran through the rest of the body until it reached another arm.
Then she told me that she was being turned over in her entire body, as I had seen.
Therefore, I marveled at the swiftness of her change from member to member. And indeed, before that, I had not seen this illness appear in my eyes in such a way as described above. Nevertheless, I have seen many who find pain changing from member to member; but I did not see it with my eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think that this is the case except for the reason that the woman was one of those who are from the dry bodies with detected veins; hence, it appears to the sense that the windiness has been changed.
And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and with bodies that are moist, of the hidden veins.
Since you wish to cure it and the patient feels that pain; then if it is visible to you as we have said, then press on it quickly and under it; cut above it as soon as possible, until that windiness, constricted, comes out; and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your eyes: then take care of it by excision of the body, and with that which expels wind, and soften them with fetid pills, and with pills of serapeo, and similar ones.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows are classified according to their types and the places in which they fall on the body.
The diversity of arrows is as follows: for there are some that have large points, and small; concave, and blunt. And among them are those that have three corners. And among them are those that have tongues.\] And among them are those with stars.\]
But as for those that fall on the limbs, they are classified into two ways.\] Either the limbs are cavities like the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar ones.\] When a arrow falls into any of these cavities and appears to you as signs of death, which I will tell you later, then it is necessary that you take out the extraction of this arrow from them, for death follows it wherever it may be, in many situations.\] And when these signs of evil do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the cavity, then take out the arrow itself, and care for the wound.\]
The signs of the brain are as follows when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the bone, and exits through a hole above the brain: for there follow from this sweat, dizziness, fainting, reddening of the eyes, swelling, reddening of the tongue, spasms, confusion of mind, and vomiting of cholera.\] Blood may come out from the nostrils, or the ears. The speech may be cut off, and the voice destroyed. White moisture comes out from the wound's place, like pulp. And it comes out from it resembling serous fluid of flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and draw out the arrow if it does not come out by itself.
The signs of an arrow in the heart are when it falls near the left breast, and it feels as if it is fixed in a hard thing, not in an empty one. And perhaps the arrow has a motion similar to the pulse: and black blood runs from the wound. And this is followed by coldness in the limbs, cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore that death approaches without doubt.
The sign of an arrow in the lung is the exiting of frothy blood from the wound: and the containers that follow the neck are to be emptied, and the color of the patient is changed. And it exhales a large, deep breath: and it seeks cold air.
If the arrow falls into the pleura, which is in the chest: then it is near small ribs: and a great panting with violent pain, with sighing: and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
If the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested comes out from the wound.
If the arrow falls into the abdomen and is fixed there: something fecal comes out from the wound, or pus, or an already disrupted intestine. Therefore there is no hope for his recovery nor in drawing out the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and comes out urine: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger on the patient: then know that it is mortal.
The remaining members, such as the face, neck, throat, spatula, help, dorsal spondylus, furcula, hip, leg, and similar members are saved according to several dispositions when the arrow does not strike an artery, or nerve: and the arrow is not venomous.
And I tell you what I saw regarding these arrows, so that you may understand it in relation to your treatment.
That is, because a man had an arrow fall into his tear duct of the eye, at the root of the nose. Therefore I removed it from the other side, under the ear fat of him; and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye as a result.
And I removed another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen upon him in the fat of his eye beneath the lower eyelid; and the arrow was already concealed, and I did not obtain any part of it except for its small end that adhered to the wood; and the arrow was large among arrows of the Tartars, with a soft iron tip, in which there were no feathers.
Therefore the Jew was healed, and no harm came to his eye as a result.
And I removed another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
The arrow was Arabic and it had feathers. Therefore I cut along the same (line), between two gullets; and already it was submerged in his throat. I therefore sharpened myself with that (instrument) until I removed the arrow; and the Christian was healed.
And I removed another arrow from a man who it had fallen upon his abdomen; and we thought that he was going to die as a result of it.
After thirty days had passed without any change in his condition, I made an incision along the arrow; and I opened it up, and removed the arrow; and he was healed, and no harm came to him as a result.
And I saw a man who an arrow had fallen upon his back, and the wound around it had consolidated. After seven years it came out of the root of his hipbone.
I have seen a woman to whom an arrow fell into her womb, and the wound has healed upon her, and the arrow remains within her; and none of her conditions were changed, and the woman did not find harm in any of her natural operations.
I have seen another man to whom an arrow fell on his face; and the wound has healed, and remains, not causing him much pain; and many similar things have happened.
And I extracted an arrow from a nobleman of the king, which had fallen upon him in the middle of his nose, and had already started to descend slightly towards the right; and the arrow was completely hidden.
Therefore, I was summoned for his treatment after the loss of the arrow until three days. Then I found the arrow wound to be very narrow.
Therefore, I examined it with a fine probe and did not feel it; but he himself was finding a puncture and pain under his right ear. So I hoped that the puncture was at the end of the arrow.
Then I applied the place with an ointment containing attractant and softening properties, confident that the wound would heal and the sign of the arrow would appear so that I could cut it; but this did not happen at the desired location, indicating that the arrow had healed.
Therefore, I applied the ointment for many days upon him; but it did not happen as desired, and the wound healed in the meantime; and the man remained weak from extraction of the arrow until a certain day when he felt the arrow within his nose. And he told me this.
And he told me this. Therefore, I placed a strong medicine, a corrosive upon the wound for many days until it was opened; and when I examined it with a fine probe, I felt the sharp end of the arrow which had stuck into the wood.
Then I added the sharp medication to the wound opening until it became evidently visible to us the end of the arrowhead; and it passed with that space of time approximately four months with it.
Then when the wound was expanded and I was able to insert forceps into it and move it, but it did not obey to come out; then I did not stop trying to refine and work on it with various means until on one day with well-made forceps, according to the shape that came in the end of the chapter, I pulled it out. Then I healed the wound.
And certainly the physicians judge that the nose cartilage cannot be healed. So I healed it (the wound), and the wound became sound and healthy again with strong health; nothing harmed it at all.
And I tell you the quality of the extraction of some arrows: so that you may place the rule and significance on that which I did not say.
Because the parts and divisions of this art are not grasped with the narrative; neither does the book comprehend it, and the wise craftsman compares little to much; and with what is present, over what is absent: and finds a new operation and new instrument for descent of foreign matters in this art when they occur.
Therefore I say that arrows do not come out from the limbs to which they are fixed except in two ways. Or by attraction from the place from where it entered. Or by means of the opposite part.
And that which comes out where it entered is either an arrow proceeding in a fatty place; and it attracts and comes out.
If it does not obey to come out at the hour when it falls; then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it decomposes; and the attraction of it will loosen and its exit.
If it is punctured into a bone and does not comply with you for drainage, then let it be for some days; and repeat it daily with attraction and motion, until it drains out.
If it does not comply with you for drainage after some days, then it is necessary that you pierce through the bone from all sides with a sharp awl until the sutures swell up. Then draw it out and remove it.
If the arrow has already been hidden in the body and concealed from feeling: then search for it with probing. If you feel it, then draw it out with certain tools that are suitable for drawing it.
If you cannot reach it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow in depth, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein there: then mark it until the wound swells up, and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
If it is fixed in the ears with which it is held: then cut away the flesh attached to them from all sides as much as you can, and proceed, if you cannot reach the flesh by cutting through the fracture of the ears or by twisting them, until it breaks out.
When administering the extraction of an arrow, wherever it may be, then use twisting of your hand with forceps to all parts until it comes out. And, with utmost subtlety, so that the arrow is not broken and the attraction and extraction of it become difficult for you.
If you are unable to extract the arrow within an hour, then let it be for a number of days until what is around it becomes rotten. Then repeat the process. For indeed, a bladder will be formed around it. If, however, it causes bleeding against you, then administer what we have said in its chapter for cure: and keep your strength from cutting the vein, nerve, or sinew.
And administer every method possible for the evacuation of the arrow: let it be with ease, calmness, slowness, or firmness, as I have told you.
It is necessary that when you pull out the arrow, it should be as weak as it was at the time of the arrow's wounding in the same figure. For it is more advantageous. If, however, this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
The arrow that comes out from the opposite side of the other part or has already started to come out towards the outside, or makes a hump at the end of the arrow by the sensation of the skin above it and you see it protruding: then cut above it, and make the incision according to the size that the forceps can grasp.
Then pull it out: for indeed, it becomes easy to come out.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness until the arrow presses into the bone and swells: then pull it out.
And if not: dismiss her for some days; then return her, until she exits (heals).
If the wood of the arrow is within her, then push her along with it.
If however the wood has fallen out and there is a desire to administer a thrust: then insert into her a concave instrument so that it enters the concavity of the arrowhead; afterwards push her with it.
If however the arrow is concave, then push her along with the instrument entering into it. The arrow will be absorbed by that (medicine).
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to remove all the flesh in which there is the venom; if this is possible for you (to do so). Then take care of her with whatever suits that (medicine).
If the arrow falls into the chest, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side; and is close to that which you touch with a probe, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut it, and beware of the vein, or nerve, and extract it.
Then heal the wound, if you see it, and take care of that (the injured area) until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are extracted.
The tips should be similar to the beak of a bird, which are made of iron; when they grasp the arrow, they do not let it go.
And there are many shapes made of them, large, small, and medium-sized, according to the size and smallness of the arrow, and the width and depth of the wound.
The form of the pusher with a concavity.
And the form of the deaf-pusher (the one used to push an arrow that has no head
This is the tip of a deaf-arrow (without a head) like a rod, to be absorbed into the concavity of the arrow and pushed along with it.
On the Bloodletting of Veins.
The veins to be bled, which course through the body, are thirty.
Of these, in the head there are sixteen: two pulsating veins, which are behind the ears, called the Two Herbs; and two arteries, which appear in the two temples; and two veins that are in the ducts of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the end of the nose. And two Guidi veins, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are the veins called Algecherich. And two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins to be bled in the arms, are five in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic, and it is on the side of the wood: and the people call it the vein of the head. And Fusca. And it is the middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilica, and a branch of the Cephalic; and the common people call it the body's vein. And Basilica, and it is placed in the domestic side; and it is also called Titillicaris. And the common people call it the vein of the abdomen. And the cord of the arm, and it is placed on the elbow; and that is the one from which bloodletting is performed, and that is the one which appears above the thumb by a clear manifestation.
And Saluatella: it is the vein that is between the annular and cephalic; and it has two branches.
And in the arm and in the leg there are three veins. One of them is that which is below the thumb's curvature from the side of the wood. And the second one is the Saphena: and its place is at the heel from the domestic side. And the vein of Naessus: and its place is at the heel from the wild side.
And on the other arm there are three veins similar to those.
Chapter on bloodletting of two veins after the ears.
The bloodletting of two veins that are after the ears helps with old catarrhs, and hemigraine, and sahafati, and old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bloodletting it is according to what I have said. And it is that the head of the sick person should be shaved; and the nape of his head should be rubbed at the place of two veins with a rough cloth rubbing well. Then the sick person should bind his neck with a bandage until the two veins appear. And their places are behind the ears, in two depressed places of the head. Translate: Therefore, examine them (the lesions) with your finger, and where you feel the pulsation of them under your finger, there mark it with the cautery.
Translate: Then take a lancet for bloodletting, and this is called Incisor (Incising). Translate: Then insert it (the lancet) under the vein into the flesh, until the bloodletting reaches the bone. Translate: Then move your hand with the vein and skin upward, and cut the vein with an incising instrument (cut the vein along with the skin). Translate: And let the length of the incision be about the size of two fingers joined together, or roughly that much, and let as much blood flow out as you wish.
Translate: Then bind it (the wound) with threads and leave it, until it heals.
Translate: And now the incision of these (veins) and their cauterization has been discussed at the beginning of this book.
Translate: However, the bloodletting of the two arteries that are in the temples is helpful for old migraine: and for headaches (praua) and constant pain (obtalmia), and for the course of effused acute excesses towards the eyes.
Translate: And the quality of bloodletting them (the arteries) is as I tell you. Translate: The sick person should bind his neck tightly until two veins appear to the sensation by their obvious appearance and their pulse is felt under your finger. Translate: Then mark them (the veins) with cautionery.
Translate: Then move the skin over the vein upward with your finger and indicate, and insert the lancet incising from below, and move the vein upward. Translate: And cut it (the vein) as you did with the other two veins: and let as much blood flow out as necessary for your need.
Then unbind the constriction of the sick person, and place your finger on the hour one [vein]. Then place [your fingers] over it and let the leeches bleed [the wound], and tie it tightly above with a strong binding; and release it when healed.
And now the recollection of these [wounds], their incision, and their removal has ended at the beginning of the book.
However, the remedy for phlebotomy of the forehead vein is after the phlebotomy of the head (Cephalic), for old facial ailments: and for migraines, redness, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is as I have told you. The sick person binds his neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the tool called Fossorium (probe).
Place the sharp point that is on top of the Fossorii probe onto the vein itself and strike it with a mallet or some other tool in the same manner: and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish. Then dissolve the wound of the patient and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide leech. However, it is not necessary that the leech be of sharp point, as are the other leeches, but rather wide-mouthed. And the leech should be applied across the wound, because the bone is nearby and perhaps the leech will break when it is sharp.
The remedy for the two veins that are in the two tear ducts of both eyes is for eye itch and redness, and to relieve pain in the eye and facial discomfort.
And the quality of their leeching is that the patient should bind his own neck with a plaster. Then apply the leeches to them: and you should be standing over his head.
And the leeching should be done across, slightly shorter than the width of a small leech, and somewhat wider than a wide leech, because there is not much flesh at that spot. If the leech is too sharp, it may break.
Then let the blood flow as much as you require. Place them on top of it and bind them overnight, then unbind them.
The veins of the nose are useful for treating acute and violent fever, and facial ailments such as migraines and redness that occur on the face, particularly when it is old.
The nature of this phlebotomy is that it tightens the sick man's neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a fine, long phlebotomy lancet; and fix it in the middle of the leprosy itself, between that which separates the nose according to its correct alignment. Because the vein is not visible there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you hold the end of your hand with the phlebotomy lancet a little bit; and make the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it at night. For it heals quickly.
There are two benefits of phlebotomy according to Guidegium: for the constriction of shortness of breath, and the beginning of leprosy, and melancholic diseases, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and those that are corroding (herpes or eumenies).
And the nature of this phlebotomy is that it tightens the sick man under both his necks with a bandage; and the worker stands over the head of the sick man, and the sick man sits on a chair.
Then the phlebotomy vein is made slightly larger than usual for phlebotomy. Then draw out a measured amount of blood, or according to what you see according to the need that is there. Do the same with another vein.
Then release the bandage, and tighten two veins with a moderate pressure; so that the sick man is not choked. And leave it until morning. The wound heals.
Chapter on the Phlebotomy of Veins (Algebrichium). The veins according to Algebrich benefit phlebotomy because they contribute to alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums; and bad ulcers; and cracks in the lips, and bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of bloodletting for them is that you make the sick person sit before you, and tighten his neck with a bandage. Then roll back his lip, and look at the two veins: one is on the right side of the lip, and the second is on the left: the identification of each is through their blackness. And this is true because around them are small veins, dark ones. Make therefore an incision on each with a cutting incision.
If there is doubt about you and you do not know which one it is: then aim for a larger incision of them, and that one will be more visible.
And similarly do with the two veins that are on the upper lip: and most commonly is the custom with this: and cut the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Chapter on bloodletting: Vein under tongue after cephalic bloodletting. But of the two veins that are under the tongue, bloodletting helps: because cephalic bloodletting is for afflictions in the throat, and illnesses of the neck, and illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting them is that the sick person sits between your hands before the sun: and you open his mouth wide, and look under the tongue on one side, and on the other side a vein: and the color of each inclines towards blackness.
Bloodletting therefore both (veins): and be careful not to destroy your hand while bloodletting them. Because under his are the arteries, and perhaps there will be a flow of blood from these arteries.
But the three veins that are bloodletted on the arm (cubitus) have been the custom of bloodletting in all human beings.
And phlebotomy (of these) is done according to two modes. Either by pricking with a broad leech (myrtinus), or by cupping to thinness (oliuari), or by cutting with a surgical knife (cultellus), and this is called Alnsil. And this is its form.
And from these (are) the wide and the thin forms according to the size and narrowness of the veins. The form of leeching (phlebotomy with a leech) is wide, as you see. And it (Alnsil) meets for opening hollow, full, projecting, appearing, thick veins, and those which contain thick, turbid blood.
And this leech (phlebotomus) is of smaller width and more subtle in thinning.
And it (Alnsil) meets for leeching (phlebotomy) of fine veins which contain subtle yellowish blood.
But the basilica which is one of these three veins' leeching (phlebotomy) is beneficial. Because it draws blood from the ailments which are under the throat and neck, following the chest, and the stomach; and it is beneficial for leeching (phlebotomy) to the phlebotomist with the phlebotome, so that he may beware of it and be above fear, because below it is an artery. If therefore the leech (phlebotomus) misses and adds in the prick of the phlebotome, it will cut that artery and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore, the leech (phlebotomus) should not prick it with the phlebotome; rather, it should cut it with Alnsil.
If the basilica does not appear with a manifest appearance, then it is necessary to search for another one, or exchange it for another, or seek a branch of it; or use a cord of the arm in place of (the phlebotome). The thing itself is obvious; cut it open with Phlebotomus Anesil, as we have said.
If you wish for the phlebotomy of this same thing, then it is necessary before the constriction of the arm, that you touch the place until you recognize the place of the pulse. Then mark the place with pitch, afterwards arm, and cut the vein with a concave incision with Phlebotomus Alnesil, as we have said. And beware that the blow does not fall into the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tie the bandage, swelling at the place which you marked with pitch, then that swelling is swelling of the artery; avoid it therefore.
If you see blood at the phlebotomy rising, like urine in a boy, and it is subtle, red: then you shall know that it is from the blood of the artery. Therefore, approach, and put your finger on it at a long space, afterwards withdraw your finger. If blood is cut (for it is often cut), then tie the arm, and let it be; and let the weak avoid its movement; and beware of its dread.
And do not move it for a few days until it heals.
If blood is not cut and binds you: and if medicine is not present at your moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For its ends contract and blood is cut off.
Or take the bark of a fig tree, and boil it; take one half-part, and tie it on the spot where the vein is constricted with a bandage and powder until another day.
Then if blood is cut off, it is good. If not (the case): then care for the same person along with him, remembering the place of the dust causing bleeding flow from the previous one. And the removal of his blood is not difficult in many positions, due to the small size of the wound, and the possibility of tying it from the arm.
The phlebotomy of the Black Veins is beneficial because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower body; this is because it is composed of a branch of the Basilica vein and a branch of the Cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist to take care that this vein should be above fear of the phlebotomy, since a nerve is beneath it. If then the phlebotomist adds (blood) during the incision and finds a nerve, it results in numbness, and difficult is its healing, and perhaps it will not be healed completely.
And this nerve often appears to the touch. If it is hidden in some people and is subtle and does not show itself; then you must place your phlebotomy where the incision of Alnsil is, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
Book on the Cephalic Vein. The phlebotomy of the Cephalic Vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and contributes to eye diseases.
And in this vein it is appropriate, if you wish, for the phlebotomist to anoint it with olive oil or myrtle when pricking it; because it is more secure than all veins, because there is no artery beneath it nor nerve.
It is fitting for you at phlebotomy that you ask the barber only the head of the arm, and seek a more gentle place: it does not harm him if it is not found with the first strike, so repeat upon it with phlebotomy several times.
Perhaps an abscess may occur in some men when it is not bled at the first strike, but it does not harm the abscess in some.
Chapter on the utility of phlebotomy and the precautions to be observed. The quality of phlebotomy and its occurrences from which it needs to be corrected should be considered by you.
Firstly, you must know that phlebotomy is not administered unless for the conservation of health, and the persistence of this, and caution against the advent of illnesses.
And phlebotomy is to be made in one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely the Cephalica, the Fusca, and the Basilica. And phlebotomy is to be made at the beginning of spring after fasting, in summer and autumn, and during winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
Phlebotomy is to be made on the first or third day, after three hours have passed from the previous day.
However, phlebotomy administered in illnesses does not have a fixed hour: but when it is appropriate and necessary for that, it can be done at night or day, and at any hour, and at any time.
It is not fitting to bleed boys until they reach fourteen years of age. A pregnant woman should not be bled except from the fourth month until the seventh. Old men who have already passed sixty years should not be bled.
If anyone wishes to be bled for any reason whatsoever, it is necessary that he purifies his intestines before bleeding, if there is much fecal retention within them: so that during bleeding, the putrid superfluities from the intestines do not attract and harm the principal members.
The patient should not be bled when he has gluttony (toctina), that is, satiety or nausea: nor if drunk, nor still hungover from drunkenness, until that has been removed from them. Nor a sick person with dropsy.
And take care that bleeding is not repeated after an attack of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, increase in sexual activity, labor, exercise, wakefulness, fasting or any other thing that weakens the body's strength from a material or animal source.
Then consider in finesse the state of the humors before that (the bleeding), if the blood is thick due to foods and drinks, and medicines: if possible for him.
Then let a bath be entered, unless there is something preventing it: or exercise in some way, so that the blood may become finer.
And place the bleeding of that person in the chest on the third day, as we have said: and strive to evacuate his chest that same day from all bad animal incidents such as anxiety, anger, fear: and from all bodily incidents such as labor, punishment, superfluity and similar things.
And let him have present those things that are customary for mankind to use from aromatics, fragrances, music and similar things, in the amount possible.
Then let the blood-letter sit on a raised stool higher than the bed for bleeding: afterwards, he shall draw out his arm and rub it with his own hand twice or thrice. Then tie the ligament with a suture, and roll it twice.
And let the compression be even, because when the compression is uneven, either through excess in the compression, then it prevents the flow of blood; or through loosening, then it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then after the compression, it is necessary for the one who performs bloodletting to rub his hands together until the veins swell and become palpable.
Then the person who performs bloodletting cleans the place of bloodletting with a little oil, using an old and appropriate tool.
Then he places his index finger of the left hand over the vein at the place where he wants to perform bloodletting, slightly above it; so that the vein does not flee and the blow is cushioned. Because veins are like running strings at the place of bloodletting; and some are full of wind; and when you place a bloodletter over it, it contracts under the bloodletter, and the bloodletter is deceived, and does not open the vein; and if he opens it, it is compressed; therefore, for this reason, the bloodletter must firm his grip, and be attentive to all these matters.
Then place the bloodletter down. If then the vein is opened from one side, it is good. And if not, then repeat it on the other side at that place slightly below or above it with haste; if the spot is not pierced.
If it is pierced or the weak person shrinks back in fear, then dismiss him for a day or two; and do not tie the ligament. Perhaps an abscess attracts heat. Do not enter the bathhouse.
Then repeat the bloodletting if it is necessary.
If the opening is small or blood flows thinly; and you fear that not enough blood will flow out; then repeat the bloodletting in the same place correctly, and increase the procedure slightly.
Make it quickly before removing the location, for the location to be removed is in many people during a small operation.
If therefore you see it already removed, then do not go over it at all, for it does not excuse anything from you. And place something made of oil on top of it: because it softens the flow of blood. And it is better in this place than oil itself, and than other oils.
Similarly administer oil paste in every phlebotomy of yours, where you cut veins against the flow of blood; and they do it with Tyrian alfarach and sagzenea when placed on a spot.
For the blood is thinned and dissolved when it is thick.
If it happens in the place of phlebotomy that a large abscess occurs, which often happens, especially to him who is not a phlebotomist except for that time, or if it is an opening of small vein, then hurry and place on the spot a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated slightly; and squeeze it once an hour: because it dissolves.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood exits from the vein itself when it has completed its course, or from another vein.
If something remains in the place after several days that is black or greenish, it does not harm it; and if you wish, place on top of it something of aloes, or myrrh dissolved; or something from the juice of mint, that is, camphor or similar to it.
And abscesses and swellings often occur at the phlebotomy of the Basilica.
Therefore place your hand on it, then if you find softness under your pressure on it, then that swelling is bad. Be careful so that you place something on it from what I said. Perhaps blood from the artery will flow from it.
Make an ointment for it with that where there is a hardening, so that the place becomes firm. Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary to draw out every man's blood according to the quantity of its power. And what appears as a purple color appearing on top of the blood.
If the blood is black, then allow it to come out until it turns red; and similarly if you see it thick, then allow it to become thin; and similarly if it is sharp, then allow its sharpness to disappear.
And it is necessary for the one who is full, strong, and requires bloodletting once, that the venesection of the vein be amplified, and the venesector be on the side; and for the one who is weak, it should be the opposite of this.
And it is necessary to draw it out from the veins, and that the hole be narrow; and it is better for the venesection of the vein that the incision be transverse rather than puncture.
And this method of venesection is safe from bleeding and from the cutting of nerves; and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection by width and length.
And for one who often comes to venesection due to fainting, it is necessary to eat before venesection with a small piece of bread soaked in water infused with dates or pomegranate; or to drink if he is heated up; and draw blood from him in three veins, or four.
And if it is a cold constitution, then before venesection let him eat bread soaked in syrup of honey or in aromatic syrup with spices, or in aromatic scented syrup.
If it happens that fainting occurs during bloodletting and the cause is abundant bleeding, then it is necessary that water of flesh be taken for drink, and a subtle perfumed syrup; and it should be used with aromatics along with alum and the chest should be wrapped with it; and the remedies mentioned in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation should also be used.
Whoever wishes to cut his arm and let out his blood in the second way: it is necessary for him whose bloodletting is due to excessive evacuation, and the strength of his blood is weak, that he lets out blood gradually by the quantity of its strength over continuous days.
Whoever wishes to cut his arm and let out his blood in the second way, and is perhaps weak: then he should do it after seven or nine hours following his first bloodletting.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from his body towards the opposite side on which it falls: it is necessary for him that it be done on the second or third day.
In whose body blood is already very hot and sharpens, causing fever: it is necessary that the blood exit from him on one occasion, and a large quantity be drawn out; and the opening should be increased until fainting occurs: after you have observed all the conditions of bloodletting; and so that you place your hand on his pulse at the course of the blood, lest death occur in its place where fainting does. For it often happens when the bloodletter is ignorant and falls through negligence.
And it is not necessary when one wishes to cut the arm and let out blood in the second way, if the opening of the vein is already closed and the exit of the blood becomes difficult, that pressure be applied violently to it and it be quickly stretched open. It is very bad, rather let it be, until it is bled a second time.
Remove with sharpness the clot that is formed from blood in the vein opening, and place something of dissolved salt on it. And place upon it some tyriaca alfaroch or sagzenea, and press it gently until the blood comes out.
But if the vein has already been cut (or lanced), then let it be, and do not cover it up, until the boil settles down.
If there is need to draw blood a second time and there is no excuse, then either bleed the same place or in another vein of the other arm.
The arm is bled at the place of Fusca and Basilica, when they are not found and hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of the bleeding is that a weak person should insert his hand into warm water until it turns red, and the vein appears clearly.
Then bind over it with a bandage not too tightly. Then bleed it across (transversely), gradually and not lengthwise: and let the opening be wide, and your bleeding there should be only a small one on the junction of the hands.
If the flow of blood is prevented, then immerse your hand in warm water again, and let the blood flow into the water until you have satisfied your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then excuse yourself from immersing your hand in warm water. And most importantly, the flow of blood into warm water is put during winter time.
And this vein's bleeding is safer than all the others because it is not a pulsating vein nor a nerve.
Phlebotomy for the hand (Salvatella) of the right side, is useful for the diseases of the liver.
The quality of phlebotomy (for the hand) is that you tie off (the vein of) the hand with a ligature or with your hand, after introducing it into warm water, until the vein becomes inflamed and it is strongly felt. Then make an incision (across) the phlebotomy (vein). If you cut it completely, it will not harm him at all.
And be careful, lest you amputate the hand with the phlebotomy (vein). For under that are the nerves of the fingers exposed from the flesh.
Then put the hand again into warm water and let the blood flow out there. For if you do not repeat it (putting the hand into warm water), the blood congeals in the opening of the vein and prevents its flow.
Therefore, when you have taken out the required amount of blood from the blood, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not quickly coagulate.
And similarly, it is necessary that you do this with every tightened branch (vein).
However, the aid for this phlebotomy (vein of the left hand) is that it is useful for the diseases of the spleen; and similarly do as you did with the second one equally.
The aid for the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as the diseases of the uterus, and retention of menstruation, and weaknesses of the kidneys, and ulcers of the hips (pelvis) and legs old ones, and similar diseases.
The quality of the phlebotomy for the saphenous vein is that a sick person should introduce his foot into warm water; and he shall make friction on it until the veins become swollen, and tie above the ankle with thongs. The location of the vein is at the heel, appearing towards the thumb; and branches from it, on the face of the foot, many branches.
Therefore, the vein should be tapped at its larger branch or at the heel where it collects; since it is better and safer.
If one were to tap the vein on the sole of the foot, then take care to avoid the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot.
And place your lancet for tapping the vein across it, as if you were going to cut it; and let the tapper be named Nesil.
If there is a prohibition of blood flow, then immerse his foot in warm water; and release the blood to run into it until it has drained out.
If the tapper misses the vein in the first attempt, then he should return with the lancet to the upper part, for it is safe and there is no harm, as long as you are careful of the nerves, as we have said.
And likewise, with the Saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the Sciatic vein, as we have said, is at the heel from the forest side.
And the aid for this tapper is, in pain of the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of this tapper is that he should enter the bath when sick and hurry; and bind his leg from the side of the ankle to above the heel with a thin, long plaster; for it does not appear unless for that reason.
When it appears, then tap the vein according to whatever skill is possible for you; or across it; and it is better, either that you cut it with an incision, or sever it with a section. The place [of the ailment] is very harmful, and it is hidden in many people to a great degree.
The place [of the ailment] is very harmful, and it is hidden in many people to a great degree. If you do not find it [the ailment] and it does not appear to the senses at all: then make an incision of the vein in that place, and it is the one that appears on the back of the foot and turned towards the ear; be careful not to cut nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you wish.
Then dissolve the narrowing [of the vein], and place skin over the place of the incision, and tighten the place. It is cured quickly.
On Ventosation, and the quality of its use.
They [ventoses] are made from horns, copper, and glass.
And ventosation is done in two ways. With scarification and bloodletting; the other is ventosation without scarification.
And this ventosation which is without scarification, is done in two ways. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the places on the body where ventosation with scarification and bloodletting are administered are fourteen. One of them is the ventosation of Alnocrates, and it is at the back of the head; Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; ventosation of Alhagdahim, and they are two plates on the neck from both sides; ventosation of the brain, and it is under the lower jaw on the inside of the mouth; ventosation of two spoons; ventosation of Alachosos above the end of the tail; ventosation of two nails, and they are in the middle of the arms; ventosation of two legs; ventosation of two ankles.
And ventosation does not extract blood from the veins scattered throughout the flesh, and for that reason, it does not have the same effectiveness as in phlebotomy (bloodletting). It is not necessary to administer fumigation or with fire, nor without fire for any illness caused by congestion, until the entire body has been evacuated.
If necessity arises due to illness or custom for fumigation, it is administered at the beginning, end, and middle of each month, and at any time whenever necessary.
Because there are people who, when their blood multiplies, find a heaviness and swelling in the head, and a sore throat.
And from these people there are some who find congestion and redness on their face, head, and neck. And from these people there are some who find itching on their face and forehead, darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And from these people there are some who scratch the place of their fumigation. And from these people there is one whose laughter increases. And from these people there is one who finds a taste of blood in their mouth: or the tongue is scraped and the blood is spitted out. And from these people there is one whose sleep increases. And from these people there is one who sees blood and redness, dead people, wounds, and things similar to these in their sleep.
When we see something from these people, especially during the middle of the third month: then we command fumigation to be performed after two or three hours have passed since the day.
The benefit of fumigation to the neck is: because it relieves heaviness in the head and what drains from it goes to the eyes. But it must be after the evacuation of the entire body.
And this fumigation is in place of cephalic phlebotomy (bloodletting from the head).
It is not permitted to use [it] on one who has a cold constitution, or [on] one who has a catarrh. It causes him great harm.
And for this reason, it is not appropriate to use [it] on the elderly and on one who has cold diseases of the head.
He who is constant over it generates forgetfulness in him.
And for this reason, you must instruct the Windfinder to lower his hand with the wind for a moment towards the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Windfinding or Alkehel is in place of phlebotomy (Fuscus), and phlebotomy (Basilica), and for this reason it causes coughing, constriction of the breath, panting of the instrument, coughing, and congestion.
It is necessary to press Windfinder Alkehel briefly, because if it is placed lower, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
However, Windfinding Alhagdahim causes accidents of pain in the head, migraines, hemigraine, perforations, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy (Basilica).
And you must instruct the Windfinder not to press his hand during scarification, so as not to cut an artery, and there is bleeding.
However, Windfinding under the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in place of phlebotomy elsewhere, which are at the two lips.
However, Windfinding with a spatula causes alchafacha, which is caused by flexion and heat.
However, Windfinding of the internal parts of two forks causes help for phlebotomy of the three veins (Basilica, Fuscus, Cephalica); because it draws blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh; and these small veins draw blood from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
It is necessary that you warn the one who lances, not to proceed too much in scarification; because the place is stripped of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and veins.
The one who ventose (the anal area) applies to hemorrhoids of the anus and to lower ulcers.
It is necessary that you warn the one who ventose (the anal area) to have a large ventose and made of air; because the place needs strong suction and perhaps the delicate vents break; and it should be incised with a large scarification.
The diminution of the legs' ventose is evident; because they draw blood from the whole body, and cause old pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder; they provoke menstruation, bothor, and ademenul; and stand at the place of phlebotomy for two saphenas and alhorcobeni.
Nevertheless they weaken the body much, and cause fainting in many men.
And the help of anal ventose's alhorcobeni is near the help of anal ventose of two legs.
The quality of the position of ventose is that you put the ventose first in an empty place and suck with moderate suction; and do not prolong the position of the ventose, but place them quickly and remove them quickly, so that humors come to the place at equal arrival; and do not stop doing this and continuing until you see the place already red and swollen, and the redness appears as blood; then scarify, and repeat suction gradually. Then consider in the arrangement of bodies.
For the one who is among men has tender flesh and rare pores, it is necessary that you incise him once, not more; so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the Ventosator to enlarge the scarification and make it shallow; and regulate the suction in ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is thickening in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify it twice. In the first incision, an opening is made for the subtlety of the blood and its thinning; and in the second examination of the detailed extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is extremely foul, then the scarification should be made for a third time; to follow what comes last.
And when we wish to draw out blood little by little or in small quantity, one scarification is sufficient for us. If we want the extraction of much blood, we shall make many scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is thick; then it is necessary to scarify with deep scarifications; and the end equal in scarification, is the depth of the skin.
What is that which should be applied from the oils for the position of the Ventosator, and what the cautions are for the one who blows.
In the one whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and the pores of which are closed, it is necessary to anoint the places for blowing with oils that are opening, softening, resolving; if it is in summer, such as alkali oil or volatile oil or sweet almond oil or cucumber seed oil.
If it is winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or ointment: and similar things.
If excess is thick and cold, then use oil of amaracis, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of dittany: and similar things.
If the nosebleed is from large pores, of tender flesh: then it is necessary to forbid oil, and it is necessary that they rinse those areas after nosebleeding with rose water, or cold water, or salt water, or water of pumpkin, or water of purslane: and similar things.
He whose blood is of much moisture, rinse the nosebleed areas with vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and sumac: and similar things.
He whose excesses are thick, rinse the nosebleed areas with old wine, or with water of sage, or decoction of dittany, or chamomile: and similar things.
It is necessary to avoid nosebleed in the bath, or near the bath, indeed it is necessary to administer it after leaving the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
Nor should anyone sleep after a nosebleed.
Chapter on: What is required to control nosebleed or phlebotomy before a nosebleed.
And afterwards it is necessary to consider first: if nosebleed or phlebotomy patient is choleric, and sharpness and inflammation prevail over his blood, then it is necessary for him to receive cooling agents, such as grape must: also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secaniabin, and iuleb: and similar things.
Place his food for the birds, and roast the flesh of lamb, and prepared foods with vinegar: and similar things.
If it has a cold complexion, he should drink syrup made from honey, or almuiya, or asclepias made from seeds; and he should drink moderately fragrant wine, which is between old and new; and it is prescribed that he should eat sparingly. Put his food for the birds, and roast them; and passers, that is, small birds; and he should throw out the young pigeons.
It is necessary that the drink on the day of venesection and phlebotomy should be more than the food; and it is necessary to give in the drink in some people at times tyriaca alfaroch, or medicine from musk, that is, muscatel, or alexiseth before venesection; and before or after: so that the main limbs are strengthened, and the blood is made thin. And it is not necessary to drink it in heated (drink).
Chapter on Venesection without Scarification. Venesections that are without scarification are those placed on the liver, spleen, podagra, on the abdomen, umbilicus, and places of kidneys, and ankles; because these members do not endure scarification upon them.
Nor does it seek through these (veins), unless an attraction of blood from one member to another; as we place the venesection on the breasts in disease of the flow of blood in the nose. And we use them to remove the venosity of an unpleasant cold in the limb; as we place the venesection on the abdomen and umbilicus. For it makes the limb rare, and warms it up, and removes pain for this reason, because it has resolved that venosity.
Also placed over the kidneys when occur there abscess or stone. By its virtue of attraction perhaps it opens an abscess, or removes the stone from its place.
And similarly when it is placed over the spleen, and on both sides for the shaking of the liver or spleen due to wind.
These shakings are administered empty when there is just cutting. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered filled with warm water in cases of pleurisy: and that is to fill the Shaking, and it should be large, warm water alone, or water in which cooked herbs are steeped that agree.
Form of the Shaking administered with fire.
The width of its opening should be two fingers apart, as we have determined; and the depth should be half a palm; and on one side there should be a small hole, according to what size the needle enters it; it should be made of copper or citrine, smooth, equal edges, polished; so that it does not harm the body while placed on top of it; and there should be a transverse bar across it in the middle, made of iron or wood, where the candle is placed with fire.
And now this Shaking is made large, larger than we have described, and not much smaller than that, according to the sickness and age of the one who uses it.
The Shakings for children and weak ones are different from those for men and large bodies.
The quality of placing this Shaking with fire on a body is to burn linen with fire properly, or a small candle from wax; and place it on the middle bar that is in the middle of the Shaking; so that the fire is lit near the lower part of the Shaking, not to burn the weak body.
Then let it be placed on the limb, and a finger should be over the hole that I mentioned, until when we hold the abscess; while we need, remove the finger, and the abscess will exit through the hole, and the abscess will immediately burst.
Then let the linen be heated according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary.
In the abscess applied to the disease of pleurisy with water, there is no rod [or probe] crossed, nor hole; it is not given except because it is filled with water and placed on the limb only.
And this is its form.
And this abscess, the larger it is, so that it can hold much water, is better.
Chapter on Suspension of Sugar-of-Lead.
Chapter CXIX. Sanguisugae are not given in many cases except where the position of abscesses is not possible due to their smallness, such as lips, gums, and similar places. Or on a bare member, such as a finger, and nose, and similar places.
And the quality of using them is: that you come from Sanguisugas which are in sweet, clean waters, free from decay.
Then they should be released day and night into sweet water until they are hungry, and there remains nothing inside them. Then the body is evacuated first with phlebotomy, and with abscesses. Then wash the sick member until it turns red. Afterwards, they are placed upon it.
When they are filled and fall out, and it is possible to suck the place with an abscess, then it is more helpful for treatment; and if not, then clean the place with vinegar. Then with much water, it is rubbed, and squeezed out.
If the course of blood persists after a bleeding, and it is oozing: then immerse a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the oozing stops.
If the bleeding is abundant, then sprinkle powdered zechium (a type of alum), or gallnuts, or similar substances from the styptic plants upon it until the bleeding stops.
Or place half-peeled beans on the location and let them remain until they stick to the area, as the bleeding will stop.
And if it is necessary to repeat the bleeding (bleeding the patient again), it is advisable to change them whenever possible.
If bleeding is forbidden by suspension (a practice where a tourniquet was used to stop the blood flow), then clean the site with fresh blood. Or insert a lance into the sites until something comes out from the blood. Then place them (the instruments), for when they feel something coming from the blood, they will stick immediately.
When you want them to fall (the clots), sprinkle something from crushed aloes, salt or ashes over them and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of medicine and it is the restoration of broken bones and dislocations that occur in bones.
Know that the foolish doctors and common people boast about this chapter and those who have never examined an ancient book or read a single letter from it.
And because of this reason, the method is rare among our scholars on earth. And I have never encountered a good example of this method and I have not acquired that knowledge from it except for the length of reading ancient books and my dedication to understanding them until I extracted that knowledge from them.
Then I attach myself by experience and study to the length of my life.
And now I have described to you in this Chapter everything that contains my knowledge: and beyond what my experience has passed, after I have abbreviated it for you, and freed it from the occupation of elongation, and abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation, and shown it at the end of declination: and I have formed many shapes in it from the shapes of the instruments that are administered in it, as I did in two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary that we say in the prologue of this Chapter, the sums and chapters, to whose understanding the craftsman must be guided firstly on the truth of them: namely, so that you, and those prompt, may know or learn this noble art from it, and others from you.
I say therefore, that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or falling happens to someone, then it is necessary that you rush firstly to bleed him, and to dissolve himself, or both at the same time: if something does not prevent it, such as weakness of virtue; or it is he who has happened something of these things, a boy or an old man worn out; or it is a time of violent heat, or very violent cold.
Then he should be content with his food, cold vegetables, and the flesh of beans and lentils; and forbid wine, thick meats, and to be filled from foods and every food that fills the veins with blood. Until you are secure from a hot abscess and no longer fear the outflow of matter to the member, then let the sick return to their first regimen with which their custom was accustomed.
When the fractured bone begins to heal, then it is necessary that the sick be fed with nutritious food in great quantity, thick, heavy, which contains viscosity; such as food made from boiled wheat and water, rice, heads of cattle, feet, abdomens of sheep, eggs, fresh fish, thick wine and similar things. For this diet makes the coagulation of the fracture quicker and better.
And you should know that fractured bones, when they are in men who are in the first old age and decrepit, it is not possible for them to be held together and consolidated according to their nature always, due to the drying out of their limbs; and they are consolidated and held together which come from them at the end of softness, like bones of small boys.
Nevertheless, nature connects something similar to a glue around the fractured bone from all sides, in which there is thickness, by which it adheres and tightens it until they are conglutinated on both sides, and bound together until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until it does not prohibit anything from its operations; and for this reason it is necessary that you place nutriment for the sick food which has thickness, viscosity and heaviness, as we have said.
And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of limbs; since a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the backbone; and similarly all other limbs are diverse among themselves; and I come with the reminder of every species of fractures explained in its own chapter. The species of bone fracture are also diversified within themselves.
Since the fracture is bow-shaped, there are also stellate occurrences in it. (In this context "stellate" refers to a star-like pattern or configuration.) And sometimes the fracture occurs along the length of the bone; and these are its stellate or star-like fractures, and extensions proceeding, just as they are in a reed, when it is cut with a knife for writing purposes. (In this context "stellate" refers to a star-like pattern or configuration.) And not proceeding; and there is a fracture with wound and disruption at the head, and there is a small crack fracture.
And every species has a skill or its own specific tool for its restoration, according to how it will be remembered, distinguished in their respective places.
And from that which the bone fracture is known, there is its tortuosity and elevation; and its appearance to the sense, and the sound it makes when you compress it with your hand.
When therefore there is no tortuosity appearing in the place, nor a sound when you touch the bone with movement, nor does it produce a great pain; then there is no fracture there, indeed it may be a tortuosity or a small crack; therefore you should not move it with your hand and compression at all, instead put medicines on top of it, according to how it will be remembered, after a suitable time: then it is strained by a ligature made finely. (In this context, "ligature" refers to a medical bandage or suture used for binding wounds together.)
And know that a place becomes arched and is split into two, except there are stellate occurrences in it; however, all parts should be moved away from their comparison: then you must begin from your hour for its correction, equalizing it before a hot abscess occurs to it. (In this context "stellate" refers to a star-like pattern or configuration.)
If a boil occurs warm, then let it be left for some days until the boil subsides. Then cut (the boil) according to whatever method can be done with kindness and skill.
And know that the healing (of the wound) and its setting (in order), is easier than of a bone, in which there are fractures.
Then suture it, according to what comes to your mind regarding its healing.
If there are fractures in the bone, then it is necessary to stretch this broken limb by two parts, whether it be a hand or a foot; or with your hand, if the member is small; or with two ropes, or with a rope and your hand.
Let the position you place the limb on be equal to its natural shape on a flat surface, until the parts of the broken limb extend; then try with all your skill and in any way possible to bring back these additions (to their places); and be careful according to your strength so that no pain or injury occurs due to your operation, nor damage; and try according to your strength to apply one bone to its companion, according to the best forms.
And it is necessary that you try and touch it with your hand at that hour. If you see something irregular there, correct it, and set (the bone) straight according to your ability.
And avoid violent extension and strong compression, as many fools do. For often they make a boil occur due to their operation, or contraction in the limb; as we have already seen from their operations many times.
Then bind (the limb) after the setting, and a proper operation, and a tightening of the member, and quiet, and calm; and warn the patient about it. The translation of the given Latin sentence is: "And make him take care not to move it during his hours of sleep, and his sleep, and his restlessness, and during his digestion, and all its movements with utmost strength. "And let him take care that the position of the member which follows pain is not maintained. "What is meant by this, is that when it feels pain or injury in the position of a member, then it must be moved to another position from which it does not feel pain.
"And let him take care that his position is even and straight so that no deformity occurs in the member when it is being restored.
"And the quality of the immobilization of a fractured member, as I have said.
"Know that fractured members are classified according to their size, dimension, and shape.
"Those which are small such as the arm, finger, club foot, and similar, then it should be wrapped in a soft, fine fabric. "But those which are large such as the thigh and leg, there should be a wide, hard wrapping.
"Because a broad bandage unites a large member and compresses it equally from all sides with an equal immobilization so that no mark penetrates.
"Then begin to apply a suitable ointment after evacuation on the equal part, on a soft cotton over the location of the fracture. "Then begin to wrap the bandage over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, depending on the member's deserving, and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
"Then go with him to the upper part from the location of the fracture and loosen less than your previous immobilization on the fractured location. Then prolong yourself slightly with a slight rotation from the place of the fracture, and gradually soften the constriction until you seize a large amount from a healthy place.
Then take another poultice and apply it again over the broken place with repeated rotations. Go downwards, with a slight rotation, to the lower part from the fracture. And make your operation in the constriction of the rotation and its softening, according to what we said in the first rotation above.
Then put between the rotations (bandages) of soft wool or cloth, which matches the curvature of the fracture, if there is a curvature in it; and if not, do not place anything on it.
Then apply another poultice over it (the bandages). Then place equal stars (small poultices) evenly over these rotations, immediately if there is no swelling or a hot abscess in the area.
If there is swelling or an abscess in the area; then place over it what sits on that abscess and removes the swelling; and let it be for some days. Then bind over these small poultices (stars).
And let the small poultices (stars) be from the middle parts of wide reeds, shaved and wisely formed; or they can be from wood where sieves are made, which are made from pine, yew, palm branches, or calingi; and let the width of all the poultices be according to this form and this same shape.
However, it is necessary that the poultice placed over the fracture be slightly larger and wider than the others; and the length of the poultice should be according to what is suitable for the limb in size and smallness.
Then bind over the poultices with another poultice, according to the first constriction (bandage). Then bind above with threads properly, as we have said regarding the stricture: and it is, that your stricture be over the place of the fracture more: and as it is more elongated from the fracture, the stricture is lesser.
It is necessary that the threads be of a medium size and fineness, and be made of soft linen.
Since if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the operation of foolish ones placing their threads from twisted cords of coarse linen, it is a great mistake: since the stricture falls with them out of quality.
And fine threads again do not fit: since you will not achieve with the stricture what you want.
It is not necessary that there be less than a finger's breadth between the awl and the awl.
If the weak one is hurt by the tips of the awls after the stricture in healthy places: then place under them with wool felt or carded wool, until nothing is hurt from it.
When there is a fracture with a wound, and it happens that the break occurs in the skin, I will come with the reminder of this in the second chapter concerning special cases.
And know that not every fractured member needs to be bound with awls from the first day. Because when the member is large, it is not necessary to place upper awls on it, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your safety from the risk of a hot abscess.
And this is the method of plasters, which the ancients placed on a fracture and dislocation.
¶ Common method of plasters abbreviated, restoring the fracture, suitable for multiple constitutions, especially women and children: since it is from that which heat does not conquer nor cold.
And it is to receive from the flour mill powder, and it is the marrow of the wheat that hangs on the walls of the mill near the movement of the millstone: and make it as follows, except you sift it with egg white: and place the mixture of it not thick, nor thin. Then use it.
Another method of plaster (bandage), for setting a fracture, dislocation and twisting. Prepare almess, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mugath; and boil all of them with 10 parts of myrrh, 5 parts of each aloes, and 20 parts of alethil. Let everything be ground and sifted, then mix it with water of alethil or with sheep's milk white if the bandage is heated for a sick person. Then use this plaster (bandage). For it is of good composition, quickly sets broken bones and helps many people.
Another method of plaster (bandage), which also helps with a fracture and twisting. Prepare mugath, mess, white alteae, all with 10 parts of myrrh, 5 parts of each aloes, 6 parts of acacia, and 20 parts of ground Armenian pitch. Let everything be ground well and sifted, then boil it with water or sheep's milk white, and administer (the mixture).
Another method of plaster (bandage) for joints and bones separated from their places; it relieves pain and swelling, and heals a broken bone. Wool grease is collected, immersed in vinegar and boiled oil; it is placed on the location.
And indeed, there is no virtue of healing in this plaster (bandage), but it is good for the healing of hot abscesses; and it expels pain specifically.
Another method of plaster (bandage) that sets a broken bone. Take the leaves of wild fig and the leaves of silvestrous papaver; grind them all and make a plaster from both.
Another method of shortened plaster (bandage), administered for the healing of a broken bone; and when you want the removal of the remaining abscess. Prepare a mixture of the root of the marshmallow plant (altheae), chamomile, herb violet flowers, and barley flour, all in equal parts: grind them all and mix them with wine, if the affected member is not already heated.
If the affected member is already heated, then prepare it with water from moist coriander seeds, or simply use this preparation.
Another stronger method of plaster for resolution, stronger than the first, when there is a hard abscess during restoration of a member. Prepare a mixture of the root of marshmallow plant (altheae), flax seeds, beechwood resin, licorice, sesame seeds, asafetida, violet flowers and chamomile, all in equal parts: grind them all and mix with water of willow, sweet water or wine. Apply this preparation to the affected member according to its heat and the calmness of the heat.
Hippocrates did not say in his book to apply on a broken member during its restoration unless it is made of beeswax and oil; he does not mention anything else, and he said that it should be between coarseness and subtlety.
Galenus saw it fit that substances with a heating property be applied on a broken member during its restoration, such as myrrh, aloes, frankincense and similar ones from the substances mentioned earlier.
Another plaster method for injuries and pain relief. Prepare a mixture of mugwort, chickpeas, human hair (either cut or feathers of birds), marshmallow root and salt in equal parts: grind and sift it, and make plaster out of this mixture.
The amount that should remain tied (the ligature) is as follows: consider if there is no pain or itching, or the bone does not move from its place; if so, do not untie it for several days. If it happens to him at the place of itching intensely, or distressing pain, or swelling: then hurry up and dissolve it within an hour, and remove the plaster from him; and take a soft cloth or a soft sea sponge, moist; and immerse it in warm water, and wash the place with it until the itching ceases and the pain subsides.
If it happens to him at the place of itching intensely, or distressing pain, or swelling: then hurry up and dissolve it within an hour, and remove the plaster from him; and take a soft cloth or a soft sea sponge, moist; and immerse it in warm water, and wash the place with it until the itching ceases and the pain subsides. Then let the member rest for an hour. Then place on it a soft woolen cloth, immersed in vinegar and oil, or rose oil; and bind over it at night until you are safe from hot infection, and the swelling of the member subsides, and the pain disappears.
Then repeat on it a subtle bandage and small plaster; do not bind it with your first compression and fine ones, until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling and all the other occurrences have been removed entirely, and you need plaster and bandage, then repeat it as you did at first, equally.
If nothing of what we mentioned happens to the member, then do not dissolve it before three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is released after twenty days, according to what you see from the dissolution of the member as we said, until a fracture adheres and coagulation of flesh grows over it: add also at that time more than your first bandage in the bandage; and add also in the thickening of food, according to what was previously remembered.
If you see that the place of the fracture is already drying out and thinning more than necessary: then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Heat the embrocation with warm water in every place where you dissolve it, and let it be in all three days, and apply a ligature slightly.
Through this operation, nourishment flows to the member, and it heals quickly.
But what the foolish restorers do in place of fractured members when it is not first restored as required, and it is restored according to a curve, is an error from their operation, and great fear: and if it were correct, they would have said this in their ancient books, and operated with it.
And I never saw any trace of them [the error] in this at all, and it is better not to do that.
Chapter on the making of a fracture in the head.
The types of fractures are various, and their shapes are numerous; and their causes are distinct.
For a fracture is that which occurs by striking with a sword: and striking removes the bone to the extent it reaches the syphac (which is under the bone), just as an axe does in wood: and for this reason, this type of fracture is called an Axial fracture.
Or the sword cuts something of the bone and cuts its face, but does not cut through with the incision to the end of it: and this type of fracture is called a Calaan (meaning an Absolute Lifting).
And there are two types of wounds, either large or small.
And from a fracture is one which is crushed or rubbed: and the cause of this is a blow with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also one that penetrates and approaches the pannicle (which is under the bone): or it is on the face of the bone: and this type of wound is also among those two types, either small or large.
And from a break is that which is hidden within the bone in the subtlety of hair; and it is a small fissure, and because of this it is called this kind of fracture Capillary.
And from these (things) is a fracture that happens from an accident or impact of a stone and similar things which cause a lamina of the bone to enter within; and it makes a hollow place: just as it happens to the bellows of air, when they are struck, and part of them enters within.
And indeed, this (kind of fracture) is most often found in the moist bones of the head, such as those of children.
And all these kinds of fractures (are accompanied by) swelling and separation; and I shall return with a reminder of the whole in its place.
And we know all these kinds of fractures by the examination of them and investigation with probes, and removal of rotten flesh that is on top of them.
The Capillary kind (of fracture) is recognized by this, that it appears on the bone, and is scraped away, and a ligature is applied on top of it with pitch: for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, consider first the condition of the patient; then if you see that there are indications of illness from the accidents (symptoms) themselves, as in cholera vomiting, extension, loss of intellect, loss of voice, fainting, fever, eye discharge or redness, similar symptoms in other disorders, it will certainly not heal: and if you see the patient's condition is not terrifying and you hope for recovery; then begin its treatment.
If someone comes to you with a wound, and it is a fracture, it is during the winter days; then it is necessary that you study its excision (removal of bone) before the fourteenth day according to every situation.
If it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before it becomes rotten under the bone from the fat, and such accidents occur as we have described.
If the fracture of the bone has already reached the fat touching the brain, and is with particles and traction: then it is necessary that you cut the fractured and smoothed part, according to what I have told you.
It is necessary that you shave the head of the wounded: and bore into the bone according to whatever method is possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light on the weak.
If while boring into the bone there comes a flow of blood or a hot abscess: then oppose it with what is necessary. It is necessary that you fill the place with soaked rags in wine and rose oil: and let the wound rest until the abscess settles, and be secure from bleeding. Then begin in the treatment of the bone, and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
One method is that you cut the bone with a sharp chisel: and this is its shape.
Then administer another chisel wider than the first: and this is its shape.
Then administer yet another chisel wider still.
And the second method is that you have a number of chisels of different sizes; some of which are wider than others, and some shorter than others: and they should be at the end of their sharpness, and made from iron or steel: and use them with ease when striking the chisel, so as not to strike the head, and hurt it.
If the bone is hard and firm: then it is necessary that you bore around its circumference before you administer Incision, with Terebris which are called Terebras, not penetrating too deeply; and they are not named thus, except because they do not pass beyond the bone's meaty limit to that which is behind it; for this reason, because the Terebrum has a rounded extremity above what is beneath its head and a sharp point below, similar to an edge, and a small circle prevents immersion, and passing through the bone's thickness.
It is necessary for you to take a large number of these Terebris, one of which should correspond to the thickness of the bone; until the present is to you all the Terebrum of the skull; whose sharp edge's length and width should be according to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three kinds of Terebris or Trepans.
The quality of boring around the bone that is broken, is: you place the Terebrum on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know the bone has been penetrated. Then change the Terebrum to another place and place what is between every hole of the same thickness as a radius, or approximately so.
Then cut with Incision what is between every hole from the bone; and do it more delicately than you can above that from the edge of thinness, as we have said, until you root out the bone, either with your hand or with some other instruments which you have prepared for that purpose: such as tenaliae and delicate forceps.
And it is necessary to take care with every caution that the Terebrum or Incision does not touch anything from the siphac.
When you are boring around the bone and it is separated from the siphac, if it is continuous with it and you extract it, it is necessary to root, and cut off an equal end of what remains in the bone with another similar instrument, like the Incision. It is necessary that it (the instrument) be thin and delicate more than other incising instruments.
If something remains of small bones and cartilage: then take it easily with what you have at hand from your instruments. Then care for the wound after that with linen strips, and ointments as I said.
Another method of operation is easy, completely remote from fear; which Galen said, and praised greatly; and this is his speech. You first must begin to expose the bone fragment from the place where the fracture is more severe and more noticeable; until you have exposed that part, and placed under it the end of this concave incising instrument, which has this shape.
The concave part does not cut anything; the sharp part of it on its two sides going along in length, as you see; so that the concave part be attached to the splint, the face of which the sharp part incises into the bone.
Then strike on the incising instrument from one side with a small hammer, until you cut through the entire bone easily, as it turns; and be careful that no cloth accidentally falls into it, which you fear entirely.
And if the physician were not more foolish than humans, and less ignorant of his art, nor asleep, then if something remained attached to the bone from the cloth in certain places, he would cut it off with the end of the concave incising instrument, and remove it easily. It is freed from it without harm and without fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate to the cloth, and what is cut away from the bone is the face of it, and roughness and delicate cartilage remain in it; then it is necessary that you remove that roughness, and excavate those delicate cartilages with fine rasps, which you have prepared in various quantities, so that it is possible for you to apply more suitable ones in every place, and the ones themselves are straighter, according to what leads you in the operation, and the fractured bone and its shape. And it is necessary that you administer according to your proportion, firstly cut the bone, more widely than the width of those scrapers. Then use (the instrument) after that with a finer one.
And it is necessary that you administer according to your proportion, firstly cut the bone, more widely than the width of those scrapers. Then use (the instrument) after that with a finer one. And do not cease doing it in continuity until you reach the point of administering thinner and finer than all of them.
For each of the remaining small cracks and subtle breaks, it is necessary to administer care according to that which leads to its rectification.
And there is a thing that cannot be hidden upon all who have any interest in this art and it stands upon that which we have written and shown for large breaks.
If however a small piece of skin is found while you are cutting bone: then it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth either doubled or tripled and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth: and do that as easily as possible above it, so that it does not become heavy.
Then administer above it a wide ligature: and do not tighten it except to the size that holds the wound only: and leave it with this care for one day or two days until you are secure from hot inflammation. Then dissolve it, and administer afterwards medications with which excessive dryness is necessary: such as the roots of lilies, and oat flour, and turpentine resin, and aristolochia, and similar to these: and there is, so that you make a powder from these medicines, which is powdered over the wound like dry ones.
And universally administer in it every medication according to the property of which is to cleanse and not to irritate. Be careful according to your virtue, so that the wound may be clean during your treatment: neither should there be dirt from ointment, nor dirtiness.
Be careful according to your virtue, so that the wound may be clean during your treatment: neither should there be dirt from ointment, nor dirtiness. You must not let pus gather on it at all, because when pus gathers on the brain tissue, it corrupts it and makes it rot, and after that a great mischief happens to the sick person: and it has already happened in the head wound, when the bone is cleaned by him, especially when care of it is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore, if what I have said happens to the sick person, know that it is certainly dangerous.
If blackness does not happen except from the medicine placed upon it and this medicine is of its nature to cause blackening, then it is necessary that you take one part from honey and three parts from rose oil and wash it with these. Then place it on the wound: afterward take care of it with the remedies suitable for healing until it heals.
Chapter on the repair of a broken nose.
Know that the nose is not broken except by both of its upper parts together or one of them: therefore, because there are two bones in it, the lower part is cartilaginous and is not broken, nor does anything happen to it except abrasion, curvature, and deviation.
If one of its two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you insert a small finger into the nose and adjust the broken part with your index finger and thumb on the outside until the nose returns to its natural shape; and this should be done skillfully and easily. And be careful that no pain happens to the sick person during your treatment.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach it with the finger: then it is necessary that the end of the radius be leveled, where there is a small swelling.
If the fracture is in two parts, then make it similar (to what?); and approach with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, at a place of warm plasters (apostematis).
Then insert a piece of linen from a linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part; or insert two pieces of linen if the fracture is in two parts: and let there be a swelling on the linen of such a size that it fills the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers said that linen should be soaked in butter and changed every day. But that does not seem to me; rather, it should be soaked in egg white, made with flour mill powder. Then release the linen when the bone has hardened and the cartilage has become hard.
And sometimes a feather of a goose is inserted into the nose where the linen was, once a soft cloth has been laid over it: and this serves to hold the fracture in the nose more strongly and to prevent weak ones from being prevented from breathing.
And this is not necessary. If you want, do it; if you want, do the linen.
If it happens again that the nose gets an abscess while working on a warm plaster, apply a nasal embrocation with pitch, or with cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little bit of zinc oxide.
If no abscess occurs, then it is necessary to apply warm plasters with wheat flour and powdered incense mixed with egg white. Then place a soft cloth on top of it (the wound), and do not tie the nose with anything at all.
If however the bones of the nose are broken in a small fracture or crushed, then it is necessary that you cut through them and extract them with instruments suitable for the purpose. Then suture (the wound) and take care of it with something that promotes healing, such as appropriate plasters or ointments.
If the wound is between the nose, then it is necessary to take care of it with linen and administer a lead cannula until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of the lower jaw when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is broken and there is no wound associated with the fracture: examine it then to see if the fracture is only on the outside and not split into two, and curved towards the inside; in this case, recognition of the injury is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the weak jaw; similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert your right index finger; and push with it the bulge of the fracture to the inside with ease towards the exterior using your other hand from the inner part of the bone correctly, and with equal pressure.
If the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer a traction from both parts according to right angle; until it becomes possible to align them.
If however it has already occurred that the teeth are displaced or disrupted: then tie them with a gold, silver or silk thread. Then place a compress on the broken jaw. Then place a double cloth on the jaw and position a large star-shaped pad made of it centrally over the cloth or an equal piece of sole leather along the length of the jaw.
Then bind it above, as your ligature for it is prepared, and its application fits well until it does not disintegrate; and command the sick one to be at rest and in peace; and place soft foods for his purges.
If you deem that something changes in the figure by some means: then hurry, and dissolve it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it, and plaster it with flour of mill, with egg white, or with wheat flour, after you have removed the soot; and place a soft wool on top of the plaster.
While that plaster remains attached to it and the bone arrangement does not change, leave it be until it heals; or tie the fracture. For this fracture is often tied in three weeks.
If in the meantime a hot abscess occurs, then administer what I have said many times for its soothing until that abscess is removed.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, be aware of it. For if the fragment separates from the bone or a tendon, then be subtle in this matter so that you remove those fragments of the tendon together with what suits you for their removal using your instruments.
If the opening of the wound is narrowed, then enlarge it with a leech according to the amount needed for your purposes.
Then when you remove the tendon and nothing remains of it, or if the opening of the wound is wide: and if not, place on it plasters that suit for this purpose, and let it heal until it heals.
Chapter on the repair of a Fork, when it breaks.
The most common break of a Fork occurs from the front part of the shoulder blade, and its fracture is made in one of three ways.
For it is broken and separated into two, except that there occur in it pustules: and it is easier for its restoration.
For such as occur in the bone, pustules: and it is difficult for its restoration.
For such as is a break with a wound.
And the operation in it when there is a break without a wound, is that you make present two servants, one of whom holds the aid following the broken beam, and the other stretches the neck towards the side.
Then with your fingers make equal the break until its form is made, according to what is necessary; and there is not a projection or a hollow in it.
If you need more extension, then it is necessary that you put under the small of the sick person a ball made from cloth or wool; and its size should be according to your necessity; and stretch, raise, and press the ball with your hand until you make equal the break, according to what is necessary.
If you cannot pull the end of the beam outwards because it has come to a depth; then the sick person must lie down on his neck; and put under his shoulder a small board in size, and press the servant's shoulder towards below until the bone of the beam which is in the depth is raised upwards; and then straighten the break, and make equal it with your fingers.
If however you feel a pustule from the beam and it moves; then it is necessary that you pierce it over it, and draw out the pustule with ease.
If however it is retained in the bone; then you make an opening in its incision with one of the cutters which you have prepared for that purpose, after you put under the beam the instrument which protects the saw-horse; and the instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It is to be assimilated to a snail shell without concavity.
And let its width be according to that which you need for it in proportion to the size of the bone and its smallness. The length [of it] also, as far as possible for you, for the operation.
And it should have two ends, as you see; and one end shall be wide, and the other narrow.
If however the wound which you cut when you extracted the splinter of bone is wide, and it gapes open; and there is no adhesion from hot cautery; then collect two lips of the wound with suturing.
And if the wound is small, or you fear hot cautery; then fill the wound with cloths, and with wool according to the size of the wound incision.
If it happens that hot cautery occurs, then soak the cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and put it on top of it.
But the suture of a bone without wound and without cutting is, that you place on it an ointment made from milled flour with white egg yolk. And place soft wax over it. Then place a sphere under the fracture if you need it. Then take a hematic, that is, the wheel which the Arabs hold, which should be very long; and its width should be one palm or approximately that. Then place folded wool over soft wax and ointment. Then take a needle from thin wood, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then pass it through the cloth. Then pass the cloth with the needle into the place of the hematic which falls upon the fracture and into the wound. Then place the hematic upon the fracture as it is rolled, and pass it over his neck, and under the healthy part and under the sick part; and draw it over every part, and so that the suture holds the fracture tight; and this is what is not hidden from you, and all of it, so that the needle does not remove the fractured bone. It is necessary to observe the sick person every day. Whenever the bandage becomes soft, and you see the knot moving already, then adjust it, and tighten the bandage.
Then place the sick person's sleep on his back and put a small pillow under his chin near his sleep for the night, so that when he is awakened, help may be brought to him from his side. Therefore, dislocate the neck-fracture through elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck and do not loosen the bandage unless it happens at the place arising from itching or swelling, for up to twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see his face turning towards that [place]. And add some [material] in binding and release it until it is healed and hardened.
The dislocated neck is bound and supported for as many as 20 days, and sometimes it occurs in fewer than those [days].
Chapter on the repair of a fracture in the flat bone (spatula).
The Spatula seldom breaks, and at its broad place: and from it, only the edges break off.
When it breaks from there, and breaks within its midst, and is not recognized except by touch: then prepare for its treatment according to the figure of the break. Bring it back to its natural shape in every way possible that is within your ability.
Then place on it a mixture of milled powder with egg white and soft starch, and then cover with a downy cloth. Then place on top of it a wide star made from thin wood according to the size of the Spatula or slightly larger.
If there is a hollow under the star for any part of the Spatula, then fill the hollow with soft starch until the star sinks to the same level.
Then fix it on top with long alum thread, with suitable tightening and firmness of the star, until it cannot be moved from its place.
And examine the bandage every day. Whenever the bandage becomes soft, tighten it, and if the star moves from its place, let it lie weak on its healthy side.
And the Spatula is restored within twenty days or twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then loosen the bandage: and you will be safe. For it is made of bones whose fracture is not feared, nor their solution.
If, however, a bone splinter comes out and pierces under the skin: then cut it off above. And do as we said for the break of a collarbone using a hot poultice, if something happens from it.
Chapter on the restoration of the broken chest.
Chest sometimes breaks in the middle, and it happens rarely. Its extremities break or are fractured more frequently due to their accidents.
When it breaks at its middle, which declines towards the lower parts, and this is accompanied by intense pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and perhaps blood vomiting, and a hollow appears on the fractured bone, which is not concealed to the sense; the restoration is that the weak one lies down with his back upon it, and place between the splints a pillow.
Then press his humeri (shoulders), and bring the ribs from two sides or flanks with the hands; and chisel on its equal side, in any way possible that can be attained, until the figure of the bone returns, according to what is necessary.
Then place upon it an ointment and wool, and place above it a star from a thin board of elm or yew, or similar ones in lightness, after you fold it in a cloth. Then chisel on the binding (the splint) over the fractured bone to prevent it from being dislodged; and go with the binding according to its roundness to the back several times, and tighten it with a fitting ligature.
Then consider the binding at every hour, and whenever it becomes soft, tighten it; and if its necessity provokes its solution due to itching or corrosion that happens in the place, or pain, or abscess; then hurry, and dissolve it, remove the ointment, and correct whatever happened with the method of its cure.
Then bring back the ointment if you see it facing it (the fracture); and connect a ligature to it until it is healed.
Chapter on the restoration of ribs when they break.
You should know that the fracture of a costal bone does not happen except in thick places following the back, and from their extremities from the anterior part. And it does not happen to them by rubbing, unless because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this does not escape the sense during examination with fingers.
And its restoration is done in such a way that it is leveled with the fingers according to the possible manner, until it becomes equal in form, as necessary. Then apply ointments, and bind the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
And if the fracture of a costal bone is sloping towards the inside: then there occurs intense pain in the weak, and puncture, like the puncture that happens to one who has pleurisy; because the bone pierces the membrane, and also there occurs difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood much; and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients were skilled in this with many devices; and among them are those who say that you should put food for the weak that generates inflammation and wind, so that the stomach is inflamed and extended, and pushed the fracture towards the outside.
We, however, reject that a cause for making a warm abscess should be made if it does not occur. If, however, it has already occurred, then add this to it.
And some of them said: Place a bladder on the spot, then squeeze it with force, and it will be more similar to reasoning. However, it is feared that the bladder attracts excess to the spot, due to its weakness.
And some of them said: The place should be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil; and fleas should be placed between the ribs until it is filled; so that the binding will be equal when you roll it according to its roundness.
Then the sick person is treated for pleurisy with food and medicine.
If the patient is severely constricted and cannot bear it, and we pierce the skin with puncture causing pain, and we are afraid for the patient, then it is necessary that we cut over the area and expose the broken rib. Then place on it the instrument that conserves the sifac, whose memory has been mentioned earlier; and cut the bone easily, and cut the same (bone).
Then we will bring together two lips of the wound if it is large with stitching; and treat the same (wound) with plasters until it heals.
If, meanwhile, there occurs a hot abscess, then hurry and pour pulverized charcoal into rose oil, and place it on the site; and the sick person is treated with what suits an abscess.
Furthermore, a poultice should be applied to the side on which he lies until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of fracture of the spine and neck.
Fractures of the neck bones sometimes occur, and rarely is there attrition for them; and similarly with the vertebrae of the back. When such a case happens to someone, and you want to know if it will heal or not, then investigate. For if you see that the person's hands are already softened, stunned and dead; and he cannot move them or extend them or contract them; and when you press them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, it feels nothing nor pain in them, then you know that it will not heal, and in many cases it is mortal.
If he moves them and feels the pressure with his fingers and pricking, then you know that the neck bone is healthy, and that the sick person will heal with treatment.
If it should happen with the spondylus (vertebra) of the back similar to that one, and you wish to know whether it can be healed or not: then consider his feet; then if you see that they are softened, and the same thing happens in them as happens in hands: next, when it lies on its back, it expels wind and vomiting involuntarily: and when it lies on its belly, it expels vomiting involuntarily: and when it lies on its back and wishes to have intercourse but cannot: then you will know that it is fatal. Do not exert efforts in treating it (the vertebra or spondylus).
If nothing of that happens to him, the case is lighter.
And the treatment for that which happens to him (the vertebra or spondylus) is as follows: you should seek a hot lancing (or cauterization): thus, you place on the Spondylus (vertebra) a rubbed oil of roses only; or with saturated eggs of a sheep.
Place it (the hot lancing or cauterization) several times a day until the warm abscess subsides: then place on one location of a strengthening and drying plaster and bind it tightly over it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to rest quietly and calmly. He should not sleep on the part where he found pain until it is healed.
If it happens during the rubbing of the satheus bone or if something separated from it occurs: then you must remove it and let it heal over the skin. Next, apply two lips of the wound (if it is large), with stitching. Then care for him with some ointment until he is healed.
If the last bone of the alhausos (spine or vertebra) breaks and it is the end of the tail: then you must insert your left thumb into the anus, and with the other hand, you should align the broken bone according to what is possible, and secondly in accordance with the alignment.
Then place it upon him, and remove it; and care for the wound with the treatment that preceded, until it heals.
On the Restoration of Anus.
Chapter XI.
Rarely do the bones of the anus break. If they break, then the fracture of these bones is not complete, but rather a comminution at their extremities; and they are split lengthwise and turned towards the interior; and there occurs pain and swelling in the place, and puncturing; and the limb that breaks becomes numb.
And its restoration is to extend your hand over it until you feel the exact shape of the fracture.
If the fracture is only at its extremities, then align that fracture according to your preparation, until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is along its length or has already turned towards the inside; then make the weak person lie on his belly until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When you have aligned it (the fracture), place an ointment on it; then place a splint made of wood or hide over it, and tie a binding around it that will not cause the fracture to shift or the splint to be removed.
And align the concavity of these (the fractured bones) with the one that fills it, until the binding takes hold of it according to its alignment; and tell the weak person to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.
If a hot abscess occurs (on the anus); then cease extending it (the fracture) and its restoration until the hot abscess subsides; and place whatever it lies on, according to what preceded, and then return to its restoration; and bind it as needed.
If it happens to a bone that it becomes fractured, extract it.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Thighbone.
The aid is that which is between the elbow and the head of the Spatula.
If it breaks, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of them is: that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, in this shape which follows.
And bind on both ends two thongs.
Then it is suspended from a raised place, and the sick one sits upon a chair. Then cast his broken arm upon a stick, until it reaches the joint of that stick, where its splinter is attached to the wood.
Then place something heavy above it, so that the staff will extend towards lower parts. Then the physician shall press the fracture with both hands until it returns to its proper place.
And another method is that the weak one should lie on his neck, and hang his hand from his neck with a strap. Then order two attendants to hold the part above the fracture with their hands: and let one of them hold the lower part, and each shall stretch his own in that direction.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then tie a bandage below the fracture and above it with another: and let each of the two attendants stretch their respective parts in opposite directions.
If the fracture is near to the end of the shoulder, then it is necessary to place one bandage below the joint, and another one towards the elbow under the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is near to the elbow: then it is necessary to place a bandage on that place and another one above the elbow.
Then equal the fracture easily without effort, until it aligns as necessary, and is applied properly: then bind it if no hot abscess occurs.
But if a hot abscess occurs, then release the binding until the seventh day. Place linen cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil on it until the abscess settles down: then bind it; and the method of binding is to apply a plaster over the fracture.
Then place a new cloth layer over the plaster. Then bring the arm and place his hand on the support, and put his open hand on his shoulder.
Place a cloth and bind it over the assisting arm, so that the arm remains in place like a star; if it does not prevent anything from being removed, nor be altered by something broken bone.
If you fear that something may be altered by the broken bone, then use a larger and stronger star (astellus). It is so that you place a larger and stronger star over the fracture itself. Place between every star the width of a finger; and let the length of the stars be according to the fracture, with an addition of three fingers from all sides.
Then bind over the stars as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
It is so that your bandage be tighter over the place of the fracture. And as the fracture extends more, the binding should be less tight.
If you see the position of the stars and the bandage, as we said, at the hour when you restore the member, then do so; and if you fear a hot abscess, then release the binding and the stars until the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the bandage for three days, so that itchiness, swelling or food does not reach the member due to the tightness of the binding. Correct this entire thing as I said.
But if you are confident that nothing will happen from it; then do not loosen the bandage, unless after three days or more.
Let the sick person lie on his back and place his hand on his stomach; and put a full wool blanket under the assisting arm equally.
Consider at every hour of the night or day that the shape of the broken member is not loosened nor is the binding made softer. Correct this entire thing with your own strength.
Place the food of the sick according to the order we have prescribed, so that it be a subtle food initially, until the bone begins to bind; then it is necessary to increase his food.
For the custom of helping and healing wounds is to be bound for forty days; therefore, when it has become bound, it is necessary to loosen it and administer a bath, and treat it with ointments that correct it.
If the fracture is foul, scrape it; then do not loosen the bandage and nails from it for fifty days, nor until two months have passed.
Chapter on the restoration of a broken arm.
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the two forearm bones.
One of them is small; and that one follows the thumb. And the other is large, and that one is positioned below the small one from its lower part.
Therefore, perhaps only the larger forearm bone is broken, or perhaps both are broken.
When the smaller forearm bone is broken at the top, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the larger forearm bone is broken from below, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it becomes worse if both bones are broken at once.
If the bone that is broken is the smaller forearm bone at the top, then it is appropriate for the doctor to be present during its restoration, so that he may apply a small extension easily until it equalizes itself.
If however the larger forearm bone is the one that is broken: then a strong traction must be applied.
And it is necessary to arrange the hand during its restoration and extend its extension over the pulley. The thumb of the hand should be higher than all the fingers; and the inferior joint should be higher than all the fingers, or the remaining ones. A weak person sitting should have a square shape on himself, and the pulley should be before him, or directly in front of him, at a height, so that the weak man does not exert himself too much.
Then let the attendant extend the arm from its lower part, either with his hand or with a rope. And another assistant should extend it likewise from above.
Then the physician aligns the bone until he brings it back to its best possible shape.
If there are fragments of a broken bone, then try to put all the pieces back into their place by your own effort.
If it appears that a fragment of bone is separated and pierces the skin, and there is no hope for its restoration: then fill in the hole over it, and remove it as we have said in what has been mentioned before.
If there is a fracture with a wound, I have already written a special chapter about it, so take care of that from here onward.
If a hot abscess should happen at the beginning of your treatment, then fold a cloth with wax made from rose oil, and white beeswax, and let it be neither too thick nor too thin. Tie the cloth over it with a fine ligature until the abscess subsides. Then remove the wax, and place prepared plaster made from flour mill dust and egg white. Then place a splint (or wooden support), and the splint that is placed on the fracture should be slightly wider and stronger than the fracture itself.
And know that the number of splints for an arm is six in most arrangements; whether it is a fracture in one splint or in two splints at once.
Then place your ligature at the stronger and more intense part of the fracture and somewhat further towards the upper or lower parts of it; or place a softer ligature, according to what was previously remembered about it at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the bandages surrounding the fracture be made of soft, moist cloth; and they should not be hard or rough. And let the thread used for binding be medium-thickness linen as we have said.
Examine the limb and ligament after days. If something occurs which requires correction, such as itching of the limb: then it is necessary to wash the affected limb with warm water until the itching subsides and let the limb rest without constriction until it has settled; then tie again.
If the ligature has already been softened and the bone removed, and similar things: then correct it all with your skill and examine again.
For if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive constriction of the ligature, then it is necessary to soften it somewhat and let it rest for some days until it reaches the nourishment again; then tie it up again.
But if nothing from those mentioned above occurs to the sick man, then it is not necessary to untie it unless after twenty days or about that.
Then the hand of the sick man is suspended at his neck. And let his neck be kept equal and protected from excessive movements. Make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is healed within thirty or forty days; it may be healed within twenty-eight days. Everything depends on the dispositions of the temperaments and the dispositions of virtue.
On the restoration of hand fractures.
Know that the scissors-hand and finger joints rarely break. It does not happen to him except from repeated friction.
When the foot fracture or joint occurs from friction: then it is necessary that the weak quadrate sits: and before him there should be a seat according to equality. Then place his hand upon it extended.
The assistant shall spread out the broken bones, and the physician shall equalize them until they are joined together by a good union.
Then it is necessary to place plaster and wool, unless there occurs a hot abscess. Then place the splint on top according to the size of the place; and you shall now roll it up in a linen cloth.
If the fracture is around the toes approximately the navel of the foot, then make something similar to a ball from cloth; and command the patient to bend over it with his injured foot; then it shall be bound with a long cloth.
And let the splint be made of leather, in which there is softness, so that the skin of the sole may be applied to it; and bind it as necessary.
If the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary to place one splint on top and another below on the foot; and keep the hand open and straight. Then place a bandage, as the hand is rolled up; and extend it between the fingers with a ligament.
If there occurs a fracture in any of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it shall be equalized as necessary. Then bind it with the foot; and if there are more than one, place a straight splint under it, smaller; so that the fracture may be raised and not moved.
If the fracture is in the remaining fingers such as the middle finger, the index finger, the little finger or the ring finger, then equalize it and bind it with a healthy finger that follows it; or bind all of them according to continuity; and it is better. Or place a smaller splint over it, as we said for the thumb.
And be careful in your restoration, and after this position of hot abscesses; and apply to it as necessary, whenever something occurs from it, according to its description.
Restoration of a Hip Fracture.
The thighbone (OS Coxae) is often broken and palpable to the touch because it turns towards the inner and posterior parts.
And its restoration is done by tightening a ligament above the fracture, and another ligament below the fracture. The patient is laid supine on his back.
Then, each ligament used for the treatment should be extended to its respective side equally: and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is close to the root of the thighbone (Coxae), then let a ligament fall on one side, so that the extension goes upwards; and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the knee, then let a ligament be near the knee, so that the extension goes downwards.
The doctor then sets the bone with both his hands until he brings it back to its original shape; and joins the bone by a good union.
Then, one must apply an ointment and a bandage if no abscess occurs in the limb. If an abscess occurs in this, then let it be for several days until the abscess subsides and becomes warm; then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be like this. It is necessary to wrap a hard cloth around the fracture, that is, binding; and double it twice or three times; and there should be an excess left over from it. Then wrap the leg until it reaches the heel at the root of the toes.
And insert a long thread between the thighbone and the leg near the knee towards the lower part; and the ends of the thread should come from the upper part of both sides. Then wrap again over the leg and the thighbone where there is an excess of cloth from elsewhere.
Then place stars (or pins) on the thigh at the location of the fracture and place one star over the limb's bone.
Then fill the voids between the thigh and the hip with soft cloth to make it equal (in length).
Then begin the strong incision from the middle above the location of the fracture with three or four revolutions. And as you extend the ligament from the location of the fracture, let your incision be shorter and softer, and more gentle.
Then aim for the two ends of the cord that you inserted between the thigh and the hip. Tie three stars (or pins) to each end. Then go with the two ends of the cord to the lower parts until you reach the ankle bone of the foot. And bind the other ends of the stars as well to prevent the cord from moving away from its place.
Then release (the pressure) on the incision as long as it remains, so that it does not cause rot to the limb, or abscess, or swelling, and similar things. If anything happens from this. Approach then with the solution of it and correct everything that happened there, according to what we have said many times.
But if the broken bone splinter pierces the other bone: then it is necessary to equalize (the fracture) if it is possible for you. And if not, fill it up and remove it; take care of the one whose memory preceded until it heals.
Sometimes this thigh fracture is bound (immobilized) beyond what the pins added for it, as we said in aid and arm.
However, in repairing this kind of fracture, there is no limp in the lame person. But if it is repaired alone, without applying the other leg to it, then it is necessary that the lame person always limps.
And know that the hip (coxa) is bound for fifty days, or it may be slightly increased or slightly decreased: all of this depends on the diversity of temperaments and other dispositions.
On the restoration of a fracture of the knee joint (Rotulae).
Know that a fracture of the knee joint (Rotulae) rarely occurs, but it often happens that it is rubbed.
But if a fracture occurs, then it will only be either a crack or a hole in its parts. And this is with an injury and without an injury. It stands on it (the fractured bone) entirely with sensation.
And the restoration of this is such that it is made equal to what was broken from its parts with fingers, until it is joined, and united according to what is possible by equality and ease, and construction (reconstruction).
Then apply a plaster made from wheat flour or milled flour with egg white: and place on top of it a round stopper (if necessary): and bind above it with a band suitable for that.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have mentioned in other fractures: such as a warm abscess and similar to it: so that you counteract every occurrence with what is suitable for it until it heals.
On the restoration of a fracture of the leg (Cruris).
Know that the leg (Cruris) consists of two bones, one of which is large and called by the name Cruris; and the other is small and called Focile.
And it happens that there are also fractures of both the leg bones, as with the two bones of the arm; and because of this, the restoration of these is equal to the restoration of the arm, and the procedure is one.
If both bones break at once, the leg (Crus) becomes deformed in all its parts.
If a bone is fractured more finely, it turns to the front part.
If a bone is fractured coarsely, you will find it below; it belongs to those that are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of stars equally according to it.
However, if the fracture of the leg is a dirty fracture with many set-backs, it should have a smaller extension and softer alluvial treatment by you.
Moreover, in the leg there is something from the operation that is similar to the arm; and it is that when you equalize stars, and complete your entire operation, then take two bands made of pine wood, which are used in the making of roof tiles placed under tables; they are made from wooden spatulas; choose those with small thickness, and neither too small nor too large; and their length should be according to the length of the leg from the knee downwards.
Then fold over each cloth with two folds according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side and the other part on the opposite side; they should be from the knee down to the foot.
Then bind two bands at three places from both ends and in the middle. For when ligature is forbidden, the leg inclines to the right and left, and it stands steadily on a good stance.
And now, a splint made of wood according to the length of the leg should be administered, and the leg should be placed in it to keep it still.
It is especially important that you do this when there is a wound properly with the fracture.
Then consider the leg every day and study it diligently from swelling, edema, or other problems. If something happens among those, then oppose it with what is necessary until it heals, if God wills it.
On the Fracture of Bones in the Foot, and Fingers.
Calcaneum certainly does not undergo a complete fracture.
The bones of the foot sometimes undergo a fracture, and it happens seldom to the fingers; but they do not break except from repeated rubbing in various positions.
If a fracture of the bones of the foot occurs, and you see those bones rise up against each other, then place the sick person's foot on the ground prepared as when walking.
Then stand you there, and place your foot on what is raised by those bones; afterwards press or tread it down: and hold it even, until it returns to its places.
Then place an ointment and a plaster on it; and place under the heel of the foot a small board with two flat heads.
Then tie it with a suitable bandage when you have rolled it up with cloths and the other things that are needed.
When three or four days have passed, then unbind the bandage. For you will find the bones aligned if they are fractured or dislocated. Therefore, the operation is as you see.
If some fingers are broken, then restore them, and align them as I told you in the treatment of the fingers of the hand. Then place a peg under the finger according to its length and let it be slightly wider; then place the board that I told you about under the foot and bind it with a suitable bandage.
If what is broken consists of two or more bones, then place a peg of the appropriate size under each finger, rolled up in linen cloth; and bind the board at the bottom of the foot; let the board stand on one head of the board outside the heel to hold it firmly.
It is fitting for you to remember not to forget all that I have said to you regarding other fractures, concerning the accidents which were mentioned; and apply this to every accident as needed.
On the fracture of a woman's jaw, and the clavicle, and the man's penis.
When a woman's jaw is fractured, then make her sit square-like (in a reclined position). Then incline her towards the back of the same (head) somewhat, and hold her backwards.
Then fill the woman's jaw with a linen wrap until it is full; and let it be shaped on the jaw like a sphere (rounded).
Then strike the woman gently, and lift her back gradually. For this linen wrap will come out before the opening of the jaw becomes like a sphere, and the broken bone returns to its place.
Then place a feather upon her back. When he (the physician) wants to insert his hand, let him remove the linen wrap easily, then insert; and return it in the same manner as when he first inserted it; then return to the feather first.
He should do this for seven days or about, for the bone itself is restored.
And if you wish, take the bladder of an ox and fill it with a reed tube, and insert the entire bladder into her jaw. Then blow through the reed tube forcefully until the bladder inflates inside the jaw, for the fracture returns to its place.
Then it is filled with linen wrap and remains for some days as we have said, until it heals.
When the clavicle of a man or woman is fractured, then administer its restoration and use what we have said regarding the equalization for the bone of Ancha.
And the rectum is not hidden in those fractures which are close, which rarely happen, especially in one who has some inclination or practice.
And understand my book very much, for the fracture itself signifies to you in many dispositions a straight path for its restoration and for its constriction; therefore understand it.
When the penis of a man is broken, take the neck of a goose and insert the rod into it. Then place upon him a cover made of cloth, wrap it up, and let it be for three days or around those days, and it will heal if God wishes.
On the restoration of a broken bone, when it is with a wound.
It is fitting for the one who has a broken bone with a wound, especially if it is large like the hip or scapula or something similar, that you hurry and apply the phlebotomist; if they inform you of the conditions of phlebotomy as we have mentioned before.
If the wound flows blood, then it is necessary that you hurry to the excision of it, so that you sprinkle on top of it a powder made from crushed chalk; if there is no other present to you.
Then begin the restoration of the fracture on that same day and do not delay it unless an abscess occurs.
If however a hot abscess occurs, then delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess settles down. And do not approach him on the third and fourth day at all, for you would make bad things happen to him.
If the broken bone is projecting above the skin and detected: then it is necessary to compress it, and bring it back with your hands with ease and slight extension.
If however the extension is not prepared, and its equal with your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And is the instrument which is made of iron, whose length is the quantity of seven or eight fingers, and its width according to the size of the wound. And for this reason it is necessary for the physician to take from them three or four according to the size which he needs for the cure of any kind of fracture.
And let it be round: and let there be a small thickness within it so that it is not doubled during the compression upon it during the hour of the operation; and let it have sharp edges, with a border at its ends. And let the thickness of it be from the middle of it to the lower part.
And this is its shape.
In this operation it is necessary to place the sharp edge of it concave against the end of the projecting bone; and push it with one blow until the bone returns and becomes equal in some way.
Therefore try to make the ends of the fracture opposite each other.
If the end of the fracture is fine and does not accept the instrument well, then it is necessary to cut the edge of that bone until the instrument has control over it.
But if you cannot reduce them with what I have mentioned, then cut it with the saws which I have said; or cut it with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
Then plane off what remains in the bone due to roughness and small layers.
When the bone is reduced and finds that there is a weak spot after its reduction causing a violent pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Make it so. Thou conferrest a great remedy upon the sick one, when thou complete the restoration which thou dost make of the bone.
Then immerse the cloth in wine of stibium, black. And properly if it is in summer. And place not thereon greenish substances, nor anything containing oil; so that putrefaction and corruption may not occur in it.
Then administer astelas at the hour of completion of thy restoration of the bone. And leave the wound exposed; thus, cut with forceps the hole in the fracture according to the size of the wound.
And take care not to suture the wound with the fracture. For this have many foolish physicians often done it; and they have caused death upon their sick ones, or corruption, or gangrene, that is, pus. And let thy suture be soft, gentle, and diverse from the sutures of other fractures.
If the wound is bad, or if it is a large wound, and thou fearest some evil incidents which we have mentioned, and thou findest pain in a suspended place; then it is not necessary that thou place astelas upon it. And make for them immobilizations with hard cloths in the place of astelas, and suture it with them.
And when it is a day or two after, and thou seest that the wound already begins to produce pus; then take away the cloth which thou hast placed upon it with wine. Then administer linen and ointments with which we are accustomed to treat wounds; such as ointment of four ingredients (tetrapharmacon), and similar things.
And it suits thee, that thou loosen the bandage. Consider the wound every day, both morning and evening, until it consolidates, and heals.
It is necessary that the limb should be prepared so that the pus runs out from it easily towards the lower parts.
If many days pass without the wound healing and the pus is not discharged from it: then you know that there are small splinters of bone there. Therefore, one must examine the wound with a probe. How many of those splinters are separated, remove them and extract them. And those which are not separated and pierce the limb, causing pain, try to cut them and remove them in any way that is possible for you.
If a blister or boil should happen on the wound, that is to say if there are symptoms of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary that you apply to each one of them what is suitable for it from the remedies mentioned in its own chapter.
And in that which my speech should remain, and for whom you make your mind present when a bone is broken and protrudes on the limb, such as the hip bone or shoulder bones and similar large bones, it is not to presume the attraction of it, for often death occurs from this, indeed, leave it alone until it putrefies.
Perhaps it will fall off by itself within twenty or thirty days.
Therefore, treat the wound if you see fit to do so; and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter on the treatment of a nodule at the site of a fracture.
This nodule often happens in the site of healing of a fracture. It is particularly those near the joints that are corrupted and form an abscess on the limb. And perhaps it prevents the limb from performing its natural function.
Consider then, if the bandage is recent: administer medications that have astringent properties, such as aloe, olibanum, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar ones.
Take some or all of these [medicines]: mix them with astringent wine, or egg white, or vinegar; and place them on the bandage on top of a wad, and tightly bind it over the affected area.
And release the binding, do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and repeat the process until the bandage is removed.
Or tighten it well over the lead plate. For lead has the property of removing anything that is feared from the body.
If the bandage has already turned into a stone and is tightened and urgently requires removal: then bind over it from the upper part of it, and cut off any excessive growth; or grind it with certain scrapers until it is removed; and care for it until it heals.
Section on treatment when the limb restores itself, but remains weak after the injury, not according to its natural state.
When a bone fracture heals and the limb remains weak afterwards, this is not done unless for many reasons. Among them is an excess of loosening and binding of the ligament not as required: either due to redundancy of tightening of the ligaments until nutriment is forbidden to flow to the member: or due to excessive embrocation in a non-appropriate time: or due to scarcity of blood in the body of the sick and its weakness.
And the treatment for this is, to feed the sick, and make his body tender until blood multiplies within him. And administer a bath. And pour joy and happiness over him.
Then place pitch on the member, so that the pitch attracts much nourishment towards it. And constantly embrocate his member with warm water until the nourishment runs, and returns to its natural form.
Chapter on the treatment of broken bones when they are restored twisted.
When the member which has already been restored after healing is found twisted or protruding of the broken bone, or swollen: and it defaces the form of the limb, but the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation: then one should not receive the opinion of him who thinks that the limb should be broken again.
And there have been many foolish doctors and restorers who did this in our land.
This operation is indeed very condemnable, leading to death or great fear that it may be fatal.
But if the limping and swelling are recent: then it is necessary to embrocate with warm water in which have been boiled softening herbs such as althea leaves and its root, melilotus, and similar ones. And make for him a plaster with a softening plaster like well-prepared dyachilon.
Take a mucilage from the root of the althea, grind it with chicken fat or sesame oil; and apply it with that.
Take figs (that are) fat, grind them with pigeon dung and similar substances that are named for reducing consolidation.
And sometimes a knot is loosened with persistent friction, an old and gentle method which is done with moist hands. Let movement be administered to the limb for every hour.
If however the crookedness has already occurred and it is strong and it has been turned into a stone, and its necessity for treatment with iron has arisen: then it is necessary that it be cut above it, and the continuation of the bone be loosened, and what is superfluous from the knot or the bone with finer chisels be cut away; and let ease be administered to it with diligence and care.
Chapter on Dislocation.
Dislocation is the coming out of some joints from their place. Why it should be prohibited from movement, and become deformed in the form of the limb. And this causes pain to occur on the weak side, and very severe injuries.
When therefore a dislocation occurs, then it is necessary to hasten to its restoration; nor should one delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the place will relax, and perhaps with it the reduction of the dislocation.
Therefore it should not be moved nor extended during the hour of relaxation. Because many times it causes a spasm, and painful injuries to occur.
But when this happens, then it is necessary that you hurry to the bloodletting of the weak person. Then it should be left until the relaxation relaxes.
Then anoint the limb with hot water and oil. Then bring back easily (or gently).
And rub all the limbs with it, when memory comes to its place.
I myself have already arranged the chapters on dislocation, even according to what came before in fracture, from the upper part of the body downwards to its lower part.
Chapter on the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two Jaws scarcely dislocate except rarely.
And dislocation occurs according to two modes. For it is either moved away from its place by slight movement and becomes slightly softened. The dislocation should be reduced by complete reduction, until it becomes soft to the chest part, until the saliva of the weak runs and it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and its tongue is rolled up with speech.
When the dislocation is small, then by itself it returns through various dispositions with a few.
If the dislocation is complete and whole: then it must be administered a quick reduction, and it should not be delayed much; and it is necessary that the assistant holds the head of the weak; and the doctor inserts one finger of his hand into the root of the Mandible dislocation, if the dislocation is from one part. Or he inserts two fingers at the same time, if the dislocation is from two parts. And the remaining fingers of his hand should be outside, which are equal.
And command the weak, that he cleans the Mandibles of himself, and purifies them for eating to every part. And the doctor presses the Mandible, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both Mandibles are at the same time: then administer steam with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easy; nor delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said.
When they return and meet, and the mouth of the weak is closed, and they are not softened: then place poultices on them made of pieces of cloth with wax, and rose oil.
Then it is tied with soft bands.
And let the sleep of the weak be on his back; and let his head be standing between two poultices, so that it does not move to the right and left; nor let him try or be forced to chew something; instead let food be placed before him gently softened, until when the pains are removed, and the Mandible is loosened: then he eats what he wants, and that is given with ease.
Do not work on his mouth's operation for eating and drinking, and for talking, until the mandible has healed and is well.
If the reduction of the two mandibles becomes difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places: then often fevers occur, and continuous diarrhea; and perhaps the weak person's abdomen ruptures, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
Therefore, when you see that: then you will know, it is a loss, and often he who experiences this dies within ten days.
Chapter on the reduction of dislocations in the neck (collarbone) and the end of the upper arm.
The collarbone is not dislocated from the inside on the side due to its connection with the chest. It becomes dislocated occasionally towards the outside, and that is noticeable to sensation.
The restoration of it is that the sick one lies down on his back, and spreads out his arms. Then bring your hand close to the place with strong compaction, because it will return.
Then put on top of it an ointment and a linen cloth, and tie it.
However, the ends that follow the elbow should not be dislocated unless rarely. If it is dislocated on some day: then it must be returned and equalized according to what we have said, and that which is prepared for you.
Then put on top of it an ointment and a linen cloth, and tie it with a bandage. And command the sick man to remain in calmness and stillness until he is healed.
And when this same treatment returns the arm's end, even if it has separated from its place.
Chapter on the Reduction of Dislocation of the Arm.
Know that the shoulder does not dislocate except in three ways.
One is when it dislocates towards the lower part, towards the armpit. The second is when it dislocates towards the chest. And perhaps it dislocates towards the upper part of the shoulder, and that happens rarely.
Nor is it dislocated to the backside, because of the shoulder blade. Nor is it dislocated to the front side, because of the nerves.
And indeed it is most often dislocated and exits towards the lower part turned towards the armpit; especially in those whose flesh is less. Because it quickly comes out of them and quickly goes back in.
In those whose flesh is numerous, it is contrary to that one, namely because it exits with difficulty, and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men with a blow or a fall and the humerus is dislocated and hotly cauterized, and it is believed because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary that you try that, until you are certain of its nature, and then proceed with its cure.
A dislocation is known when it is turned towards the little finger: and distinguish between a dislocated humerus, and a healthy humerus. For you will find among them a manifest difference, and in the head of the Humerus you will find a concavity, and under the little finger by touch the head of the humerus seems like an egg: and the weak cannot bring the hand to the ear, nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if dislocated towards the chest or upwards: then you will find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
The reduction of this kind of dislocation is easy when it is recent, or if the child is weak.
And its reduction is that the assistant raises his hand towards the upper part. Then place your thumbs under the little finger of it, and lift the joint with force towards its place; and the assistant raises his hand, and extends it upwards. Then he puts it back down, for it quickly returns to its place.
If it does not return through what I have said, and from the beginning when the dislocation occurred many days have passed: then it is necessary that the weak person be bathed in warm water, and ointment administered which softens and soothes, such as if they boil the roots of althea, fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and apply it.
Then the sick person lies down on his back: and a sphere and wool should be placed under his navel, which is equal in size between softness and tightness.
Then the doctor places his heel on the sphere, and he lifts up the head of the arm with force, and pulls the hand of the sick person downwards.
And if you wish, bring him back in this manner: and it is, so that you make the present man who is taller than the sick person stand on his side, and he will insert his arm under the navel of the sick person: and lift up the navel of his upwards, until the sick person is suspended in the air. And another servant pulls the hand of the sick person downwards to his stomach. If the sick person is lightweight: then it is necessary that something else be suspended with him, so as to weigh him down; for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also brought back in another manner: and it is, so that a long piece of wood is formed on the ground, whose head is rounded like a cuff; as a mace handle; which should not be too heavy, nor too delicate. Then place something soft under the sick person when they are placed on the log; and the sick person should stand along the length of the log.
Then his hand is stretched downwards on one side, and his body on the other side with force; for the dislocation returns to its place quickly.
If the reduction is difficult by all that has been said, then use this method: and it is, so that you take a piece of wood whose length is the measurement of two forearms, and its width four fingers, and its thickness two fingers; and its head should be rounded, to alleviate the entrance into the deep navel, in accordance with this shape.
Then, soft cloths are to be tied over the round head, so as not to injure the weak wood [referring to a part of a surgical instrument].
Then, place it under the weak spot of the patient, so that the hand or arm can be extended over the wood until below: and tie the wooden support to the arm and the end of the hand.
Then, place the arm on the step of the ladder at its width, and extend the hand below, and let the rest of the body hang suspended from the other side. The joint is to enter immediately.
Once the entrance is completed in whatever way possible: then it is necessary to place beneath the weak spot a sphere of equal size made from wool. Then place the prepared plaster made of milled powder with oil of myrrh and egg white over the entire shoulder, as it is turned [over].
Then bind under the weak spot a suitable stitch: and turn the bandage over the plaster above: and connect the hand to its own neck, and let it not be moved for seven days.
And it is necessary to place a sparse food until the member recovers strength, because it is quicker for its healing.
Then, after seven or five days, let it be removed with movement. If it hardens and does not soften, then it is healed.
If the joint is dislocated many times due to moisture that happens to it or due to another cause: then it is necessary to administer cautery with three holes, according to what was stated in the chapter on cauterization.
If all of this is done, and the bandage is loosened after seven days, and the joint does not harden, and the plaster and stitch are repeatedly placed on it but do not firm up, and it falls, and cannot be raised to higher places: then you will know that the nerves that are toward the head of the shoulder have been cut or stretched or softened: and you will know that the joint will never be able to heal in its place.
Dislocations that occur towards the chest and breast, or are reduced to the rear, are done with pressure and extension using hands: until it returns, and further compression and care are administered in it, until it heals.
If there is heaviness in the member after healing and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths often, until that heaviness lessens, and it returns to its original state.
Chapter on the cure of shoulder dislocations.
Know that the union of the shoulder dislocates with difficulty, and it returns with difficulty as well; and indeed, it is dislocated in all directions, but particularly towards the front or rear.
And its dislocation will not be hidden from you: because it falls under sight and touch, according to whatever form it is dislocated. And when you join a dislocated shoulder with a healthy one, the condition will be clearly shown to you. For the joint should be hollowed out, and it cannot bend the arm nor touch its own humerus with it.
And you must hasten and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a hot abscess occurs to it.
For if a hot abscess occurs to it, the reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps it will not heal at all, especially when it is towards the rear. For it is worse than all kinds of dislocations, and of more violent pain; and death often accompanies it many times.
And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce it, is as follows: extend the hand with both hands; let the arm be extended, and the doctor's hands be above and under the shoulder, and he himself pushes the joint with the tips of his fingers or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
If it is a dislocation to the front: then [the hand] returns so that it doubles with its own hand, until it strikes with the root of its palm the elbow which is dislocated.
If the dislocation does not obey in reduction, then administer strong and violent extension; it is such that two servants extend the arm; and the same two servants hold it so that it is not moved during the extension.
Then the arm is turned to every part after it has been wrapped over its own hand with a long cloth or a wide bandage.
And when the doctor touches with his hand the joint, he binds it with oil; so that it is one of those things which help for lubricity of the joint with ease. Then he pushes the joint with a strong push until it returns.
After its reduction, it is necessary to place over it a plaster containing styptics and extract with egg white; and it is tied with a suitable ligature. The arm is suspended from the neck of the sick person, and leave for some days.
Then it is loosened. If the joint hardens in its place, then loose the bandage from it, and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not bound well, then renew the plaster, and the bandage, and leave it for some days until it hardens. Then loosen it.
If there is pain after the reduction of the joint and it moves badly: then administer humectation in bathing, and subtle friction, and compression until it settles, or place over the joint of the leg, that is, the woolly fat of a ram. Then bind it and leave it over it for a day and night. Then remove it, and immerse it in the bath. When it sweats, then press the joint with moderate rubbing. Then repeat over the same spot three times with a pounce and secondly, with the introduction of bath, until it becomes softened.
And if you wish, place upon it dung of cow, moistened and heated with butter, and press upon it.
Make that [process] several times. It becomes softened, and returns to its own condition.
Chapter on the treatment of dislocations by Albucasis.
Mahasem's hand is frequently dislocated, that is, the joint between arm and hand.
The reduction of this dislocation is easy. On the contrary, other joints [are more difficult]. However, speed should be present in the reduction of this dislocation within the hour when it is dislocated, before the location is loosened; otherwise a hot abscess may occur there.
And the reduction of this dislocation is that Mahasem's weak hand should be placed on a table, and the servant should extend it; and the doctor should place his palm over the prominent part of the joint, and press on it until it returns.
However, if the palm has already retreated to the back of the hand, then the weak hand should be placed on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be internally over the table, that is, the inside part of the hand should be over the table so that the doctor's hand falls upon the prominent part of the joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then press it with a plaster to suppress the abscess; and leave it alone, do not repeat the process.
For if it does not tolerate the reduction process and more days pass without improvement, yet the joint remains in its twisted state; and nothing harms the weak hand except that it becomes softened, and cannot be pressed; then you will know that the nerves have been severed or rubbed.
The skill in that (situation) is not to tie it with a cautery, except for saving its life. And perhaps it contributes nothing.
Since Almahassem did not return, then place on him the plaster that I mentioned earlier. Then it should be tied and let go for five days; afterwards it should be untied and let go, and the hand should be exercised.
If its movement is hindered and something heavy occurs to it: then soften it with warm water and rub it gently several times until it becomes soft.
Chapter on the cure of finger dislocations.
When a finger is dislocated in any direction, or when the finger is dislocated to the back of the palm, or the palm's ventrum: then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then hold the finger's head and hang it in the direction to which it is dislocated, and let it be for two days.
Then hang it and stretch it until it becomes straight on that same day.
And when it is night, tie it as mentioned; do not stop untying it during the day; exercise it with movement and tie it at night.
Do this for several days until it becomes tied (or immobilized).
And likewise do this if it (the finger) is dislocated towards the palm of the hand; tie it to that same part and perform your first treatment on it until it heals.
And likewise do this when it (the finger) is dislocated in other directions.
Chapter on the cure of spine dislocations (or vertebrae dislocations).
When someone has a spine (vertebra) dislocation of the back or neck, complete dislocation, or when many vertebrae are displaced from their places: then there is no cure for it, since death approaches the weak.
The sign of it is that the illness of a person leaves without will, nor can it be held; and many times certain members of his are softened from it, or two legs of his, or two arms of his, or one of them; or a vertebra is removed from its place.
Sometimes it is removed (of certain members), which often occurs in their removal from four parts.
Therefore, that which is removed towards the rear, is called Gibbosity.
The cure of it is to consider whether Gibbosity occurs from childhood; then there is no cure in it, nor healing at all.
But in that which occurs from an accident, or a blow, or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment have been said with a long speech. It rarely returns (when it is removed) with good result.
I myself have already abridged it from that (treatise), which explains very little of its substance due to my proximity to the intention; and in my explanation, I explained that and shaped its instrument differently from how they showed and explained it.
Therefore, in Gibbosity which occurs from the front side, there is no skill, nor healing from that.
And similarly in that which happens on both sides.
And it is not cured from them, except that which occurs on the back itself, as I am going to say; and it is necessary for the sick person to extend himself over his face on a plank equal to nearly a wall; and a damp cloth should be spread under him so as not to injure his chest.
Then a straight piece of wood is placed fixed in the mortar on the ground at the end of the plank, about his head; and another piece of wood about his feet at the end of the other plank; and let the assistant hold the wood, and it should not be fastened in the mortar. The other servant holds the other one.
Then, lean over the head of the sick person, and beneath his chin, tie a cord firmly: and extend the end of the cord to the wooden post that is near his head: and tie it there.
Then, tie another cord above his ankles, and above his knees, and at his fetters. Then gather all the cords together, and tie them to another wooden post that is near his feet.
Then let all the servants stretch out the cord to any part of the wooden post, and neither of the two posts should be moved from their places where they are fixed: but they should not be fastened, as we have said.
And the physician shall place his hands on the patient's shinbone firmly until he comes back; or he can place it on a board. Then he ties his feet to the board until he returns.
If he does not return with this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And hollow out a hole in the wall as we said near the sick person, into which the end of the board enters. Then place the middle part of the board on the shinbone. And let the physician put his feet on the other end. And tie it tightly until the shinbone is bent and he returns to his place.
Then, if you wish, work with the lathe that is rotated by hand: and it is so that you carve two wooden posts in the ground near the head of the sick person at the end of both feet, whose length is that of one arm: and near his head at the end of both feet, two wooden posts.
And the length between each post shall be a palm: and now a hole has been made everywhere where the lathe runs: and all the posts are fastened firmly to the ground, so that they do not move at all.
And a round stick is inserted: and it is a purse where the ligament revolves in two openings of two sticks.
And at its end there is a hole where the stick is secured, whose length is a palm with what revolves: and the same is in two other sticks as well.
Then tie the ligaments which you tied in the chest of the sick man to the purse which is at its head: and tie the ligaments which you tied in his legs to the purse which is at his feet.
Then let a servant stand by every purse, who will twist his hand with a linen cloth, with which the purse revolves: and the physician ties Spondilem, as we have said.
This is the shape of the purse, which follows.
Then when Spondile returns and the place is tied, then it is necessary to place an adhesive plaster with egg white. Then wax. Then place a star-shaped piece of wood on the adhesive plaster, whose width is three fingers, or approximately so. And its length should be sufficient to cover the hollow of the hernia and the healthy portion of the testicle.
Then it is tied with the ligament that we have said. And the sick man should be given a subtle diet until he recovers.
If something remains as a protrusion in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe, with the use of the tablets which I have mentioned for a long time. And now a sheet of lead is given there.
Sometimes a protrusion occurs at the end of the hernia sac on the back: and it is thought to be a displacement, and that bone now protrudes. It is not appropriate for this medicine to be presumed, for perhaps it will cause death.
On the Treatment of a Dislocated Ankle.
Know that the joints of the ankle and shoulder do not occur except due to dislocation; neither does it happen to them what happens to the other joints due to slight removal and hollowing out.
Indeed, the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four parts. It means that it is dislocated towards the front and the back.
And indeed it is mostly dislocated towards the inside; it is seldom dislocated towards the front or the back.
The treatment for dislocation towards the inside is: because when you join a healthy leg with an unhealthy one, it is longer; and the knee of the unhealthy one protrudes more than a healthy one, and the unhealthy one cannot double its foot near the groin; there is a place following the groin that is depressed by a depression tool because the head of the hip has already reached there.
The sign for dislocation towards the outside is that its symptoms are opposite to these symptoms.
The sign for dislocation towards the front is that it extends the healthy leg by a bend; however, it does not double it without pain in the knee; if it tries to walk, it cannot do so over it on the front side; and it retains urine, and the groin is pressed, and while walking it strikes against the heel.
The sign for dislocation towards the back is that it does not extend the knee nor can it double it before doubling the groin; and the leg is even shorter than the other one; and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at its place.
The reduction of this dislocation, however, is to consider at that time if the dislocation is old, which has already become chronic with the one having it. Then if you administer the reduction of it and it remains according to its position; then there is no treatment at all in it. Therefore, it should not be a presumption for him completely.
In the case where dislocation is recent, and it belongs to one of four types of dislocations: then proceed to this, so that you wish to join [the parts], and stretch it towards the inside and outside, and move it right and left: perhaps it returns, and does not need other care.
If it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong helper, and he extends the leg from its lower part: either with his hands, or with a bandage that binds above the leg over the knee: and another helper extends the hand above, so that he introduces his hands under the fingers. Then bind it with a soft bandage on the root of the hip, and hold the end of the other ligament.
And the extension is either from the front part of the groin to the neck part, or from the back to the back part.
And the extension of all [limbs] is one and the same, until the weak one is lifted with his body from the ground, and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is a common type among the four types.
If then the dislocation returns as we said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary for all cases what I will say about treatment.
In the reduction of [the limb] itself, when dislocation is towards the inside, it is necessary for the weak one to lie on his healthy side. Then place a bandage on the root of the hip, in that which is between the head of the hip and the place which is under the groin. Then extend the bandage upwards from the groin to the higher part of the body, to the neck part.
Then another strong helper takes his arms and makes a large place on the weak hip small, and extends it towards the outside with a violent extension. Now, it returns to its own place.
And this is an easier species among the remaining species of treatment, by which this member is reduced.
If it is excised over you, and does not obey you for entry with this species of treatment completely: then, it is necessary that two weak feet be tied together with a strong ligament, soft, above both heels, and above both knees: and let the length of each one be four digits' width: and let the injured leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two digits.
Then, the injured one is hung over the head of a stick, which is in the house: and let its length from the ground be two arms' width.
Then command a strong youth to brace the head of the hip: and let another hang it with the injured one: and let another youth push, bracing the hip with force, for the joining returns to its own place quickly.
In its own return, when there is a dislocation to the outside, it is necessary that the injured one lies on a platform, according to what we said in the one having a humpback. And let a ligament be tied over its leg, the injured one's own, and over its chest.
Then two sticks are placed, one at his feet and the other at his head. Then a stick is placed in the middle of the platform, firmly fixed: over which are rolled damp cloths, so as not to harm the injured one: and let the stick be between his hips, so as not to pull him down towards the lower parts due to the extension.
Then let every servant go to his place, and the doctor sets the reduction with his hand.
If it obeys in its reversal, it will be good.
And if not, place it on the same platform and press it equally, as we said in the humpback. The sick person should lie on his healthy side.
When the dislocation is towards the front, then it should be extended quickly the leg of the sick person; and this is according to the same narrative on a bench; and place the physician's palm of his right hand upon the hip of the sick person. Then bend him with one hand, and with that bending place him extended towards the lower part at the knee.
If the dislocation is towards the back: then it is not necessary to extend the sick person downwards and lift him off the ground; rather, it is necessary to place him on a hard surface, as it is also necessary if the dislocation of his shoulder is towards the outside, according to what we said about placing him on two hard surfaces: one under his face and the ligaments extended: according to what we said recently.
It is necessary that a compression be administered with a board also at the place where the joint goes out, when reduction is completed according to what is necessary.
And the sign of its reduction will not be hidden from you: and it is as if you extend two legs of the sick person; and when you see them equal, and the sick person contracts his leg, and expands himself without straining: then you know that the limb has returned, according to what is necessary: then join the pelvis, and place an ointment, and bind it with something soft, that is, a bandage: so that the shoulder does not move to any part; and let the sick person remain quiet for three or four days.
Then loosen the ligament and the ointment, and bind the leg with the other; then if you see them equal in their state, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed: so release the sick person for walking.
And if you see something softening: then return, and apply the ointment, and bind it according to your first binding; and leave it for three days as well.
Then dissolve it and make him walk slowly on both sides for some days, until he recovers well.
On Dislocations of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated to the outer, inner, and lower, that is, the back.
And it is not dislocated to the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you order the weak to apply his leg to his hip. If it does not stick to the hip: then know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the ways of dislocation is that you make the weak sit straight, so that he now extends his leg if he can over it, and his back touches your face, and put his foot between your feet.
Then make the knee stick with your palms, and straighten them between the fingers over the knee. Then apply with your palm the sides of the knee with force. And another servant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of restoration is that the leg sticks with the hip gently, not laboriously.
Then plaster it and make the leg stick with the hip. Then bind it with a bandage for three or four days. Then dissolve it.
And the weak should not walk for some days until he is healed.
If the reduction is refused to you, then administer strong extension with bindings whose precursor was mentioned in the treatment of ankle, until it returns.
Chapter on the Treatment of Ankle Dislocation.
The heel sometimes moves out slightly and sometimes it is dislocated completely. Dislocation of it can be either internal or external.
The sign of a dislocation is that you see the calcaneum swollen and protruding towards the part to which it is dislocated.
The treatment of its removal is easy reduction; and it is that it should be extended easily with hands, and equated until it returns.
In the treatment of it when it is dislocated by a jump, it is necessary that you make the patient sit straight; and let a strong servant hold him from the back of his middle part.
Then hold with your right hand the upper part of his foot and with your left hand from the lower part of his foot near the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then, with your left hand, twice.
Then stretch it with the left hand, and push the foot's chest with the right hand without strain.
Do that twice, as we have said.
Then push the foot's chest to the leg in the third instance, and you pull the ankle.
If it returns in one or two instances according to this method, and you see the foot equated, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it; because it itself returns.
If the reduction of it is prevented by him when we have said; then let the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a pillow firmly on the ground so that he falls between his hips; and you now roll over him with a cloth, so as not to hurt the patient.
Then let a servant take his hip; afterwards, let another servant extend the leg either with hands or with a rope that binds over its neck. Then all the servants should extend against its extension; and the pillow should be standing between the hips of the patient, holding him so that his body is not pulled down towards the lower part during the extension.
Then the physician reduces dislocation with his hands, and another servant holds the healthy leg downward. The dislocation returns quickly.
Whenever the dislocation returns and it is made clear to you that the reduction is good: then place plaster and wool, and tighten it firmly with bandages, and bind the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary that you be careful or fear of the nerves which are above the calcaneum posteriorly, so that the bandage is not too tight and injures them.
Then release him for two or three days. If the bandage softens, tighten it; then release him on the third or fourth day; and forbid the weak from walking for forty days. But if he attempts to walk before that period, there is no safety unless the dislocation is loosened again and damaged, and will not accept treatment afterwards.
If a hot abscess happens to him: then it is necessary that you administer to his sedation that which was narrated before in another place about treatment, and an embrocation until it is removed.
Chapter on dislocations of the fingers of the foot and treatment.
It is necessary that it is reduced which is dislocated from them with slight extension without effort; and this certainly is not difficult, but rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in some knuckles of the foot: then it is necessary that the weak sits his foot on a level place with the ground or on a table; and he stands like walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot over that which protrudes from those joints. Then press it with your foot with force until it returns, and you see it already reduced, and the protrusion does not appear in that place.
Then place under his abdomen a table that can hold his entire foot, which has two heads. Then tie it with a fitting stitch for three days. Then loosen it and let him rest from walking for many days until it is tied and secured against reduction.
Chapter on types of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When something like this occurs, and you attempt its cure and restoration, death often follows many times; and on account of this, one should not presume to undertake such a cure except the one who is wise in the art, compassionate, pious, patient, not hasty, nor presumptuous: and that he uses at the beginning only medicines that soothe abscesses with warm things: and that he leaves the sick to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for salvation from danger with mildness of illness, and something appears to be hopeful. Therefore attempt the reduction immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a hot abscess occurs.
If therefore the limb returns as we desire, then administer a regimen that soothes abscesses; and care for the wound with what is suitable for it from dry ointments.
If the dislocation is with a fracture and splinters are separated from the bone, then attempt their removal; and do what I said for simple illnesses in those places where they occurred.
And be cautious according to your ability, and keep yourself from entering the path of fear; as my previous advice warned you.
For it is better for you before your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more healthy for your body before them at your time.
