After completing for you, O Sons, this book which is the last in the science of medicine along with its complement, and having reached the end of it through expositions and declarations thereof, it appeared to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of operation, that is, surgery with the hand.
Since operation with the hand is laid low in our region and during our time entirely unavailable; until perhaps it has perished altogether along with its knowledge, and the trace of it has vanished; and only small descriptions of it remain in the books of old, which have been changed by hands; and error and hesitation occurred to them, causing their intentions to be enclosed and the force of it to be elongated: It appeared to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise according to the way from expositions, declarations, and abbreviation; and that I should come with forms of iron tools of Cautery and other instruments of work; with a declaration's addition and with proper consideration for what is necessary.
The reason why a good craftsman of this art is not found with his hand in our time is: because the art of medicine is long, and its author must be trained before that in the science of anatomy, as Galen narrated, until he knows the remedies for limbs, their shapes, their connection and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, and their number, their exit points, the pulses of veins and arteries, and their resting places; and the locations where they emerge.
And for this reason, Hippocrates said that name with name is much, and work is little, especially in the art of hands.
We have already said about it at the beginning of this book.
Because whoever is not learned about what we have said concerning anatomy, will not be able to avoid falling into error, in which people are killed: as I have seen many of those who are formed from this science and boast about it without knowledge, and without experience.
What is more, I have seen a foolish doctor cut an aposteme from the neck of a woman and he cut some arteries at her neck; therefore, the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead in his hands.
I have also seen another doctor who presumed to extract a stone from an old man, and the stone was large. Therefore he went to him, and extracted it with a piece of bladder. Thus the man died on the third day.
And indeed I had been called to extract it; and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the man that he would die.
I have also seen another doctor who was receiving a staff at a certain Duke of our land because of medicine; and a black eunuch was with him, who had a fracture near his heel; and the doctor with his ignorance strung the fracture on a wound with pulleys and strong bands, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he closed it according to his own devices. Afterwards he let him go for a few days and ordered him not to loosen the band; and he stood like that until an aposteme grew on his leg, and his foot; and he came to ruin.
I was then called to him; and I hurried to loosen the band; and calm came over him, and he was released from his pain.
The corruption had already been confirmed in the member; and I could not restrain it.
Stop, the corruption has stopped walking around in the member, until it perishes.
And I saw another physician who pierced a cancerous boil; and it healed after days, until the malignancy of its master was revealed along with him.
Because when the cancer is pure from black bile, then it is not necessary to reach for it with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can tolerate it, so that the entire thing may be cut off.
And because of that [saying], O Sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation is divided into two divisions; namely, an operation associated with health; and an operation with which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already aroused myself in every place of this book where the operation comes, in which there is fear and dread.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be cautious about it and divide it so that fools do not find a way to speak and disgrace themselves.
Take the measure with care and protection, and treat your weak ones with ease and firmness, and use a better way leading by the grace of God to salvation and praiseworthy success; and dismiss the dreadful illnesses difficult to cure; and free your souls from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation enters upon you in your faith and comfort.
For it remains more to your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your profit.
Galenus said it in some of his admonitions. Do not treat an evil illness, lest you be called an evil physician.
Now I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters. ¶
Chapter one.
On Cautery with fire, and Cautery with sharp medicine, this chapter is dedicated, and it is ordered from head to foot, and the shapes of instruments, and tools for Cautery, and everything necessary for the operation. (¶ denotes a new topic or paragraph)
De purgatione venae cum igne calido et medicina acuta
On purging a vein with hot fire and sharp medicine, chapter two is dedicated. It covers sectioning, perforation, phlebotomy, and ventosis; wounds; extraction of arrows and similar objects, and everything concerning the shapes of instruments. (¶ denotes a new topic or paragraph)
De uulneribus a bestiis feris et hominibus inf
On wounds inflicted by wild animals and men, chapter three is dedicated. It covers restoration, dislocation, cure for twisting, and similar issues; from head to foot, and the shapes of instruments. (This seems to be an incomplete sentence.)
But first, before discussing the operations with it, it is necessary to explain the benefits and harm of it, and under what circumstances it should be applied. (This seems to be an incomplete sentence.)
I say that the discussion of the quality of the benefit and harm of cautery is a long, subtle, scientific, and hidden discourse. (This seems to be an incomplete sentence.)
Moreover, a great number of wise men have spoken about it and have disagreed; and for me, enough is said from their discussions, fearing prolongation. (This seems to be an incomplete sentence.)
I say that cautery is suitable for every circumstance, whether with matter or without matter; except for two circumstances, which are a hot dry condition without matter, and a dry cold condition without matter. (This seems to be an incomplete sentence.)
In a hot and dry composition, matter has separated. Some say that the beneficial cautery is in it. And others have said the opposite of that, namely that cautery is not suitable in the disease which is due to heat and dryness: because fire is warmth; it is inconvenient to be healed from a hot and dry disease by what is warm and dry.
And he who says the opposite of that has said: that by cautery there is benefit in every hot and dry disease which happens in human bodies: because when you compare a man's body and his humors to fire, you find a man's body cold.
And I myself say by that speech: because from experience it has often been demonstrated to me.
Nevertheless, it is not appropriate for that to come about unless he who has been proven and trained in the chapter of cautery's practice at the end, and knows the differences in human compositions, and the dispositions of diseases in themselves, and their causes, and their symptoms, and the time periods of these.
As for the remaining compositions, there is no fear over you; and especially in cold and moist diseases. For now all physicians agree on these: and they have not separated in benefit with cautery in them.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing with cautery with fire, and its goodness over cautery with medicine burning, is that fire is simple, whose action does not extend beyond the member which is cauterized: and it does not harm another joint connected with it, unless minor damage.
But the action of burning medicine extends to what is distant from members: and perhaps it causes difficult healing disease in the member, and perhaps it kills.
Fire, on account of its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not do that unless it is in excess.
It has become known to us through experience, on account of the length of servitude and study required with art, and because of its truth-station: and on that account I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not, because it is not permitted to this book of mine, I would reveal to you the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies by which it expels illnesses, demonstrated by philosophical speech which would be understood by your minds.
And know, sons, that they themselves differ as to the time when a cautery should be made, and they set a better time for truth.
And I say that a cautery is fitting at any time: therefore because the harm resulting from time is submerged in the help which is attracted by the cautery. And especially if the cautery is for pains resulting from necessary, strong, urgent pains that do not bear delay: therefore because it is feared that from these there may occur a greater evil which would exceed the small harm caused by time.
And that may not occur to your minds, sons, that it is not thought by anyone except the common people and foolish doctors, namely that there is no return for an illness which is cured by cautery: and they put this consequence, and things are not as they think: therefore because cautery is not, unless in place of medicine, which changes complexion, and expels humidities which are the causes, wherefore pains occur.
However, the cautery is superfluous over medicine on account of the swiftness of its health, and the virtue of its operation, and the violence of its rule: and it is possible that an illness returns at some hour of time according to the complexion of the sick person, and the location of his illness, and the power of its action: and that it prepares in his body from accumulations in it: and that it comes to him from food and similar things from the causes, unless an illness occurs for which cautery is administered.
A subtle ailment in the member of few superfluidities and humidities, like cauterization of a tooth, due to pain, and similar to it, is possible, for it may not return into him that pain. That occurs in a few cases.
But indeed the common speech, that cautery is the last remedy, is true: not regarding what they intend in it, since they believe that there is no cure given with medicine nor with anything after the fall of cautery.
But the fact is contrary to theirs, and their intent, that cautery is the last remedy, is not, unless when we administer modes of treatment in any ailment, and they do not give such cure with medicine: then we administer cautery at the end, and it cures: thence comes the notion that cautery is the last remedy, not according to their understanding as the common people and most foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron; and they did not say this except for the equality of gold, and the subtlety of its substance; and they said that it does not make a place for cauterization. But that is not absolutely true; because I have already proven it, and I found that it does not do this in certain bodies without others.
And indeed cautery with itself is good, and better than with iron, as they said. But indeed when you fire cautery in a fire from gold, it is not manifested to you when heated according to the amount that you wish, due to the redness of gold; and when it approaches the heat, and if you add more heat to it, it liquefies in the fire, and turns into layers.
Therefore the craftsman falls from that occupation; and for this reason we use cautery with iron among us more quickly and closely to the operation, for rightness in the work.
I have already arranged this Chapter in Cautery, according to the chapters: and I have arranged it from head to feet: so that it may be relieved for whoever seeks what he wants from it.
Chapter II.
Here is the cauterization for mastery of humidity and coldness on the brain: these are the two causes of soda (seizures), and the flow of many fluids from the head to the eyes and ears, and the multitude of sleep, and toothache, and throat pain: and universally all illness that happens due to coldness, such as paralysis, and soda (seizures), epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar conditions.
The method of cauterization is that you should instruct the sick person: to evacuate first with purifying medicine washing the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the sick person, and his age, and his custom.
Then instruct him to rub his head with a new linen cloth. Then make him sit between your hands in a square shape, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the palm of your hand on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that spot with an unburned (cauterized) mark.
Then heat the cautery oil: of which this is the form.
Then place it (the cautery) on the marked spot without burning, while gradually pressing with your hand, and you turn it around. Lift your hand quickly, and look at the spot.
If you see that a piece of bone or pieces of hair have come out from the skull, then lift your hand. And if not, press your hand with the iron itself or with another if it becomes cold: until the bones that I told you appear.
Then take something from salt, and dissolve it in water, dip the cloth in it, and place it on the spot: and leave it for three days.
Then place on top of it a wet cloth in butter, and let it remain until the burn is destroyed by fire. Then treat it with four-ingredient ointment, until it heals.
It is said that the larger the wound remains open, the more pus it discharges; therefore, it is better and more beneficial.
Some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone; and the cautery must be held until something of the bone's thickness is burned.
Then grind away what has been burnt from the bone, then treat it.
Others say that when the cautery reaches the bone, an impression should be made on it for as long as the bone falls off, so that the shape of a corkscrew is formed; or an instrument similar to what women use to insert when they alphabetize letters, and they believe that vapors from the head are released from this place, and the wound should be kept open for a long time.
Then treat it until it solidifies.
But I do not see these two types of cautery at all, except in certain humans according to the path of fear.
And let it be, it is better for its safety with me.
The head weakens from the solution of its own continuity; as we have been witnesses in other members; and especially when the head is naturally weak; the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use it; so operate with it for safety.
Chapter III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the head, and it persists in the weak, and uses warm baths, and leeching, and purges, and oils, and plasters. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one iron as we have said, and it does not help him with any of these, then consider. If the head of the weak is strong by nature and not frail, and finds a violent cold, then cauterize it with another iron, but only slightly. Then cauterize it over the entire horn of his head with iron, so that the skin is not penetrated and a quantity from the bone, as we have said, is exposed. And cauterize it with one iron at the occiput of his head, in a place called vasa: and it is a place where air is placed: pour your oil into this, and do not expose bone. The weak finds it because of that violent pain, and different from the pain of all other cauterizations of the head.
And I say that this cautery is in its place, and it should be a cautery for the horns of the head and the occiput more subtle than the cautery used for the middle of the head.
Chapter IV.
When there is pain and swelling in part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is cleansed with purifying medicines, and further treatment is given as I said in the divisions of diseases, but it does not help completely, then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with hot medicine burning, or with iron.
The cautery with a burning medicine is to take one garlic clove, peel it, and cut off the ends from both sides. Then divide the painful area at the time with a wide lancet until there is a place under the skin where the tooth is captured.
Insert it into the same place under the skin until it is hidden; then bind over it with a suitable bandage and leave it for fifteen hours; then dissolve it and extract the garlic; leave the wound open for two or three days; afterwards, put a warm poultice soaked in butter on it until a pus forms; then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do this with certain burning medications as I wrote in the twelfth treatise on poisons.
The cauterization of this is as follows: Hot Iron Cautery, whose shape is this.
Claw-shaped Cautery (also known as Clavilatus): because the head of it is shaped like a nail, having a small notch, and there is a small projection in the middle.
Then place it on the location and hold your hand; and you pull the iron slowly but quickly; and the quantity that is to be cauterized should be as thick as the skin itself, half of which. And lift your hand so that an artery, which is below, is not burned and blood flow occurs.
Then immerse the wool in water with salt and place it on the location for three days; then immerse the wool with butter, afterwards heal it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemiplegia with the tip of a second Cautery (also known as bistoury). Be careful not to cut an artery in this hemiplegia, not an old one specifically.
§ Method of Cauterizing in Old Hemiplegia.
When you treat hemiplegia, as we said in the previous treatment and what we said in the division of diseases, and healing does not help; and you see from the disease that the first cautery with medicine, or the cautery with fire, did not suffice, then it is necessary to heat a claw-shaped Cautery until it becomes white after marking the location of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or about that; and place your hand once, and press it until you cut the artery, and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful not to burn the cheek that moves during chewing, so that the side or nerve that moves it does not get burned, thus causing a spasm.
And it should be regarding the care and caution for the flow of blood from an artery that has been cut. For indeed, in its cutting there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing, and is not careful, nor experienced. And it dismisses the operation first with such a person.
And I shall come with the reminder of the management of the flow of blood following the rupture of an artery according to its own method and in its place within this book.
If you see from the illness that this cautery does not suffice for him, and you see the body of a weak person tolerating cauterization in the middle of the head as we have said, care for the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery as we have said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with a cautery having two knives. For indeed, cauterization is better and more advantageous in this way.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing pain in the ear.
When pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with solvents, and other treatment as we have said in division, but the pain does not disappear, then cauterize with fire. And this is what is called Punctum, whose form is as follows.
Then the punctum is made with it after its ignition all around the ear as it revolves; or around each of them if pain is on both sides. And move away from the root of the ear with the cautery a little after marking the places with enkaustricum; and let the quantity of the cautery be ten punctums in every ear, and like that.
Then care for the places until they heal.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in torture.
Chapter 7.
The torture that is cured with cauterization, is not other than those which occur by phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cauterizing species that occur from excision, and also from spasm of a nerve.
When you treat this species of torture with leeches, purging, and gargles, and your treatment does not bring improvement, then it is necessary that you cauterize the sick person with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and second slightly below its time, and third at the junction of two lips.
Place your cautery from the weak side of the sick part. Since softening does not occur except in the healthy part.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize yourself with the cautery directly on the upper part of the ear at the very tip below the horn of the head a little: and another in the time, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until the thickness of half the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery and it is a species from the knife, whose shape has been previously stated: however, it should not be too fine as you can see: and it is necessary that the knife be in it of excessively large thickness a little.
Then treat the place with what preceded until healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in old apoplexy.
WHEN old apoplexy occurs and your treatment with what we said does not bring improvement, and the sick person does not have a fever, THEN CAUTERIZE HIM WITH FOUR CAUTERIES ON EVERY CORNUS OF HIS OWN HEAD, AND WITH A CAUTERY IN THE MIDDLE OF HIS HEAD, AS WE SAID, AND WITH A CAUTERY AT THE BASE OF HIS HEAD, ACCORDING TO WHAT PRECEDDED: AND THE FORM OF CAUTERIZATION SHOULD BE ACCORDING TO WHAT WAS STATED.
Also cauterized on the face of the stomach with a Cautery; and it is more extreme.
Then it is cured, with what went before.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that for the sick there be given first large onions (hyerae), and cleansing pills for the brain (pillulae mundificantes cerebrum).
Then shave the head of the sick person completely, and place on his scalp an ointment made from synapi, as described in the treatise on ointments; and place it several times.
For that is the method of cauterization; and make it according to the same order as I said there.
If therefore he recovers through this, it is good. If not: then make three cauteries on the back of his head, which shall be descending from the top of his head to the lower part of his eye; and place between every cautery a thickness equal to a finger.
Then treat the cauteries, with what went before.
If you wish an additional treatment, and the sick person is able to bear it; then make a cautery in the middle. If you wish an additional treatment; then cauterize him on both horns.
Then treat him until he recovers; and let the cautery be oiled according to the shape that was given before.
On the method of cauterizing in Paralysis, and softening (mollification).
Chapter X.
It is necessary to proceed with cleansing the head with onions, and with what was said before.
Then shave the head of the sick person; then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of his head, and on every horn of his head, and on the back of his neck, and three on his spine.
If however you require the body to be softened in sickness by several of those, and the patient is weak and enduring, and the sickness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries upon the dorsal vertebrae, and the last one with a cautery, until he is burned most from his skin, and you pull your hand away. Then treat him until he is cured: thus cauterize with Olive oil.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless his epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary to clean his brain first with hyssop and the rest of the treatment as we have said in the division; when he is very weak or enduring in taking medications.
If he is a child who cannot endure medications, then give him gargarism and mouthwashes that clean the brain; beforehand for many days with purifying food.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of the skull, according to what has been said before; and another cautery on the occiput, and over all the horns of the skull with a cautery. If he is strong and enduring, then cauterize him with the cauteries as I have said in treating paralysis, and softening of the body upon the vertebrae of the neck and back; and let it be cauterized with olive oil according to the method that has been said before.
If he is weak as a child, then place a subtle cautery in this manner.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries as I have said in treating paralysis.
And if the cause is excess of melancholy leading to melancholy, and the body is weakened and damp, then give him a drink that cleanses his brain, as specified in the previous division; then shave the head of the sick person, and make afterwards a well-formed bandage like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the sick person sitting squarely should be held from all sides.
Then apply a liniment. It is more suitable from ancient butter from sheep. And heat it over a gentle fire, with a measured warmth that the finger can bear when inserted into it. Then evacuate it on the head of the sick person in a circle and let it remain until it cools.
Do this to the sick person once a week, with the rest of his good regimen, until he is cured.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small holes in it, but keep your hand with the cautery; let it be fragrant.
For this kind of cautery dampens the brain with its quality.
Then place a warm cloth soaked in butter or chicken fat on it.
[Paragraph break] Method of cauterizing near the eye when descending into water.
Chapter XIII.
When you are informed about the beginning of water in the eye through signs mentioned in the division, then begin and give a drink to the sick person, along with what cleanses his head.
And keep him away from all moisture and make him sit in the bath for a few days while fasting.
Then order him to shave his head and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it on two sides with two cauteries, if the descent of water is blocked in both eyes at the same time; or from one side, if the descent of water is blocked in one eye; and cut off with the cautery all veins and arteries that are under the skin; and let the cauterias be long in the width of the temples; and be careful not to cause bleeding.
If you see anything from that, then cut it off immediately with any medicine that is possible; and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their dissection, and precaution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck, under two bones, with two lastly produced cauteries.
Chapter on the ancient method of cauterization in the tear-ducts.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and persistent, being above veins and arteries that are manifest on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is due to an excess of cold phlegmatic humors; then cauterize with the same cautery as I described in the beginning about descending water, with a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above the temples, and two cauteries in the neck under two bones. And if you need additional treatment, then cauterize it carefully on all sides of the eye, above the eyelid extension with a small cautery.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in nasal foul smell.
When you treat it, as we said in the division, and the medicine does not work: then hasten, and give for three nights infirmocochias in drink: then shave his head, and cauterize it with a middle cautery, with the cautery oliuari. Then cauterize it with two cauteries and a clavius cautery, on top of the eyebrows under the hair slightly.
And beware of the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the clavius cautery.
§ On the method of cauterizing in softening the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by sickness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with this cautery lunare.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the eyebrows slightly with two cauteries in all places; and they should extend from both temples; and let the length of the entire cautery be according to the length of the eyebrow; and do not place your hand with the cautery at the very end, rather according to the amount that is burned by the third eyelash.
§ On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs are turned upwards and prick the eye.
The cautery is in this two ways: either a cautery with fire; or a cautery with burning medicine.
In the cautery with fire, instruct the sick one beforehand to release his hairs, if he is among those who wash them, until they are extended and aligned. If however they prick him at the root: then constrain his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move, until new ones grow.
When they are born and become equal (in size), then place the head of the weak one in your lap; afterwards mark a sign on the eyelids of his eyes with hot wax, a sign which is in the shape of a myrtle leaf; let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
Then place a wet cloth on the egg white or on the eye, or apply slippery elm poultice to the eye.
Then heat an instrument with fire, which has this shape (a trephine or surgical drill).
Then cauterize gradually, in several places where you have marked, until the surface of the skin burns, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, completely appearing.
And the mark of the success of your work is that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting and hairs rising up at the corner of the eye.
Then lift your hand (away), and release him for three days.
Then place a warm cloth with butter over it until the scab falls off. Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
If a hair grows back after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft again, then repeat the cautery on that spot, as you did initially.
If however hairs are below (in the lower lid), then cauterize it until they rise up to their natural position and do not irritate the eye by growing into it.
It is necessary to instruct the weak one to pluck out his hairs until they grow longer and become equal. Make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf from linen cloth.
Then take some soap that is known and plaster that has not been soaked from one source or the other (equal weights of both), then grind them together with good pressure, but quickly, so it does not get cold. Then take that (object) and place it on the cloth you have made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put it upon one or both eyelids. Then place under the eye a swab soaked in egg white: and let the head of the sick be in your lap.
Place your index finger upon the medicine and press it slightly. You move (the swab) whenever the sick person feels a bite from the medicine, because its bite is like fire.
While this persists and it continues to feel a bite from the medicine, then release the medicine and move it with your finger. When the bite ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
Then consider whether the eyelid rises as it does when heated by fire or cut: if so, it is good; and if not, then repeat the application of medicine over the place where the medicine does not press and does not discolor, until your operation is complete and the eyelid contracts.
Then place (the swab) over it with butter until the charred skin is removed. Then treat it with diaphine ointment or another ointment until it heals.
It is necessary for you during the operation that you keep the last guard, lest anything fall from the medicine into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes softened after days and something comes out of the hair into the eye from that place, then repeat the medicine over that place which has become softened from the eyelid, just as you did at first. Then treat it until it heals.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And know that human eyes differ in size and smallness. Therefore, according to that, let your consideration be: and the path of righteousness shall not be concealed to him who is devoted to this art.
On the method of cauterizing in the lacrimal fistula.
When you treat the fistula, if, as we said in our discussion of diseases, your treatment does not help: then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Command the sick man to place his head on your lap, and let one of his attendants hold his head between his own hands in such a way that it does not move or shake with his head.
Then put cotton soaked in olive oil or psyllium mucilage on his eye: then place the cautery iron over it, which has this shape.
It should be concave, like the form of a bird's feather quill from one end, with which the cautery iron is made: and if you wish it to penetrate to the other end, and if you wish it to extend upward in this manner.
However, a concave one is better for your purpose.
Then, if the fistula is open, unblock it and drain the pus from it, and then excise it: and if it is not open, then open it and drain its pus.
Then place the hot cautery iron on it.
And hold your hand near the cautery iron for a little while by the eye, at the side of the nose, so that your hand does not stray or shake the sick man: and you will place the cautery iron on the fat of the eye and destroy it.
If you reach to the beginning of your cautery as far as the bone, that is good. And if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it for three days.
Then place the wound with butter, and care for it with an antiseptic ointment until it heals.
If it goes beyond forty days and does not heal, then place a sharp corrosive medicine on top of it until the bone appears: and shave it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some of the first ones said. Approach the place of the fistula and find it: then put a fine cannula into the opening, that is, a thin cannula whose shape is as follows. Pour in it a quantity of drachmas of liquid lead, and hold your hand with the cannula's retention good, and do not let it move at all, so that the liquid lead does not run or reach its eye.
It is necessary that you place a warm poultice on the eye of the sick person in egg white or water.
For lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful healing process.
If the fistula heals with what we said about cauterizing, and treatment, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to open the nose hole and redirect the fistula towards the nostril, according to its own place.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in facial clefts.
Many times fissures occur in the lip, which are called "Pili", and especially in children's lips.
When you care for these fissures, as we said in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then use a small cautery iron shaped like this.
The depression of it (the instrument) should be according to the subtlety of a knife's edge.
Then place it (the hot cautery) hastily into the splits (wounds), until the cautery reaches the depth of the splits (wounds).
Then care for it (the wound) with ointment, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing a mouth ulcer.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gingiva (gums), or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and bursts: afterwards it becomes old, and the pus runs and becomes a fistula: then take care of it and do not apply treatment to it, then if it does not heal, as required, it is necessary that you heat cauterization according to its quantity, which can be absorbed in the fistula. Then insert the heated metal (cauterization) into the hole of the fistula and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches its depth and its end; do this once or twice.
Then take care of it afterwards, with what I said about treatment, until it is healed.
If therefore the pus separates and heals, it will be good (favorable). And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone according to its size.
Chapter on Cauterization in softened gums and teeth.
When the gums become soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medicine does not help; then put the head of a sick person on your lap.
Then heat the cauterization whose form will come later; so that you place a cannula over a tooth and insert the heated cauterization quickly into it: and hold your hand for a while until the sick person feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand: then apply the cauterization several times as you wish.
Then let the sick person fill his own wound with salt water and hold it for an hour: and rinse it.
Teeth that move are made firm, and softened gums are tightened and dried out the rotten moisture.
On the method of cauterizing tooth pain.
Chapter XXIII (Head of teeth) on external and internal diseases of the teeth, and their cure. When toothache is due to cold or there is coldness in it, or worms, and no medicine brings relief: then Cautery is used on it according to two methods: either Cautery with butter; or cauterization with fire.
The cauterization with butter is as follows: Take lard (butter) and boil it in a cast-iron or copper pot. Then receive the cup and turn it over on the end of the incision. Then immerse it in melted butter and place it on the painful tooth quickly and hold it until it cools; then repeat it several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you want, immerse wool or a cup in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth; then place hot iron on top of it until the heat reaches the depth of the hollow part of the tooth.
The cauterization of this, with fire, is to aim at the brass tube or iron tube. And let there be something bulky in his body, so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the weak bone.
Then apply the cauterizer (Cautery) with fire and shape it; place it on the tooth and hold your hand until it cools down.
Do this several times as the pain will subside either on the same day or on another day.
And when applying the impression of the cautery, the weakened bone must be filled with good butter and held for an hour; then it should be spat out.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
Cauterize with whichever end you wish, depending on what is possible; and this is the shape of the tube.
Section on the method of cauterizing abscesses.
When Warts are from phlegm and from cold moistness, and they do not obey digestion through medicines, and they desire rapid digestion: then to the Curved Cautery, whose shape is this.
Having two open ends so that the smoke may exit at the Cautery from one end: and place it heated upon the ulcer once, and again, if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the ulcer.
If the ulcer is small: then place the Cautery according to the size of the ulcer.
Then let it rest for three days, and place upon it a dish of warm butter soaked until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment until the form of the pipe (cannula) heals.
On the method of cauterizing in a hoarse voice and constriction of breath.
When moisture accumulates on the windpipe (trachea), especially when it is accompanied by coldness of complexion, then it is necessary to first remove the weakened one with dissolving medicines.
Then cauterize it (the windpipe) in the neck at the root of the throat in a hollow place depressed: and be careful not to reach with the Cautery at the throat or skin unless something of that area is present.
Then cauterize it (the windpipe) with another cautery at the juncture of the neck in the last rib of that place: and let the Cautery be square-shaped according to the method previously described.
Then care for it with what was previously mentioned until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in diseases of the lungs and cough.
When cough and sickness of the lungs are from cold moistures, and the person is not feverish, nor consumption, and the sickness is old: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the collarbone in depressed, gentle, empty places. With another caution on the middle of the chest between two breasts: and let the caution be of the tube shape, as was before.
And if your caution is to be by pricking with the caution called "Punctum", whose shape was before in the pricking of ear pain: and let the pricks be from thirty up to as many more.
Then take care of it with what was before until it is healed.
And now let the caution have three branches: according to this shape. Therefore let the caution be applied when you are using it instead of three cauteries.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head is dislocated due to assistance and it does not heal within an hour of its return from the dislocation, until such a habit of returning has been established for it, then it should be dislocated slightly as a result of a small movement that occurs just as we have already testified about this. Then you must reduce the dislocation first. Then the sick person lies down on his back or on the healthy side. Then peel off the skin that is on the inner side of the Tilt (Titillico) towards the top with your left hand fingers: and if there is a fusion in the internal parts.
Then heat the cautery with two openings. Its shape is as follows: (Drawing not included, but it is described as a "T
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates through to the other side and forms the shape of the cauterization with four cauteries.
And sometimes there is cauterization with a cautery having three prongs, for which the figure of cauterization becomes that of six cauteries: and the prongs are according to the subtlety sought.
Here is the form of the cautery having three prongs.
And sometimes an additional one is added to it, for which there are eight cauteries.
Then place upon the cautery bent rods with salt. Then make the patient to adhere to calmness, so that a limb is not moved during any time, until it recovers.
And if there is a dislocation toward the upper part, which rarely occurs, then cauterize it on the shoulder with an angled cautery or with many pointed cauteries.
For union strengthens, and moisture is removed: and the sick person recovers.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When coldness and many moistures occur in the stomach until it is separated from its composition, and catarrhs multiply on it, and continuous methods of treatment do not help: then the patient should lie down on his back, spread out his legs, and hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries: one angled cautery of the size of a finger under the navel of the chest, and two cauteries below on each side of the one cautery, until the figure of the cauteries becomes triangular. And extend them apart so that they do not join together, when pus will form.
And the depth of the cautery should be the size of two thirds of a finger thickness of skin.
And the figure of the cauteries should be according to this shape without addition: and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape: and let the cautery used for this cauterization be one according to the shape of a circle according to this shape.
The stomach is to be cauterized by piercing it with a probe for those who fear the cautery; and this should be done by making marks on the stomach in proportion to the size desired with an encaustic iron, then cauterize that spot with the point of the cautery; then care for it with the preceding cure until it heals.
The method for cauterizing a hernia (epar) coldly.
When pain occurs in the hernia (epar) due to coldness and moistness, or from a large wind that cannot be expelled naturally through its own expulsion and the patient is ill and not cured by what has been said; then the patient should lie down on his neck, and make three marks with an encaustic iron on the hernia in this manner and this size, below the hypogastrium, where the human arm reaches; and let the space between each cauterization be according to the thickness of a finger; and let the cauterization be according to the length of the body straightly; and do not press your hand with the cautery too tightly.
And let the size of what is being cauterized be according to the thickness of the skin, without adding its half; and let the patient stand on his own feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of the cautery.
It is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery when you have subtlety and wisdom in your art.
And take care not to proceed too deeply in the cauterization, and when the thickness of the skin is being cauterized, the whole body is being cauterized; therefore it reaches the intestines, because the skin there is subtle; therefore know this.
Method for cauterizing abscesses of the Liver.
When it is required to know if an abscess is in the liver flesh or its covering, and if it is in the liver flesh, there is a dull pain and heaviness without sharpness; but if it is in the liver covering, there is intense pain with sharpness. And now you see that the treatment of this abscess has exhausted the physicians.
The sick person should therefore lie down with his head on his chest. Then, make the position of the lancet and apply encaustum (hot wax). Then, heat the cautery resembling a ray. And this is its shape. And cauterize it with one cautery until the entire skin is burnt and reaches the flesh, so that all pus comes out; then care for it with healing until it heals.
And one should not use this cauterization method, unless his interest in the art of medicine is prolonged; and for whose hands these diseases are often associated with experience: then he dares to perform such an operation.
But rather, I prefer to release it myself.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in pleurisy.
Ancients said that cautery with the roots of arnica to the lungs in this way: cold method. And it is to receive from the dry roots of arnica, one longer root which can be found thereof, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil, and ignite it. Then cauterize with one hot iron in that which is between the continuation of the clavicle with the neck, and with two small irons below at the place that is under the beard.
And with two irons also in that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly downward towards the back, and with another iron in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach. And with three irons from behind: one in that which is between the two scapulas; and with two irons on the sides of the chest, below an iron which is between the two scapulas.
And it is not necessary to press your hand with the iron, on the contrary, let it be in open air smelling of skin.
And some ancients said that there are men who use an iron similar to a probe and heat it up, and they put it inside where the ribs are until they reach the abscess with it, and the pus exits; as we said in the case of the liver abscess.
But in this puncturing with the iron there is fear, because either the weak person immediately dies, or a fistula occurs at the place from which there is no healing.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the spleen: XXXII.
When you treat the sickness of the spleen, as we said in the treatment of diseases and your treatment does not help, then there is cauterization of it according to three methods, which are all correct.
One of them is to make three or four cauteries in the shape of the cauterizations of the liver, where the figure of the liver's cauterization precedes, along its length.
And let every cautery have a thickness equal to that of a finger, or more or less.
The mode of the cautery we mentioned in the liver cautery should be the same.
And do not press your hand with the cautery; let him who is being cauterized lie weakened on his back.
Another method for cauterization is to have the cautery with two holes and apply it as we said in the chapter on dislocation of the humerus: and lift up the skin that is directly on the spleen, where the elbow of the weakened left arm reaches: and your lifting should be such that you lift the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert two holes with very hot fire until they penetrate the skin on the other side; then withdraw the cautery; thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish to cauterize using a cautery with three holes.
Then take care of the cautery after releasing it, let it expel pus for many days; for this is more beneficial than the rest that preceded in treatment.
Chapter on the mode of cauterization in dropsy.
Cautery does not fall into Hydropisis, unless properly ascliti.
When you treat a Hydropic (patient), with the methods of treatment as we have mentioned in the division, and the treatment does not bring improvement, then it is necessary that you cauterize him with four cauteries around the umbilicus, and with one caution on the stomach, and another on the epar, and another on the spleen, and two cauteries behind (him), between the vertebrae, and one in front of the chest, and another in front of the stomach: and let the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then let the open cautery (be left) so that it may discharge pus for a long time.
And do not evacuate the sick person after cautery along with him, for it is necessary that two intentions are applied to him: and healing will hasten towards him with God's help.
The form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be in the shape of a nail: according to its previous form: and that with which the back is cauterized, should be in the shape of an oil flask according to its previous form.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing Feet and Legs.
When they are amputated in a Hydropic (patient), and filled with citron water: it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot in the navicular bone, which is between the auricular and annular bones: and lift your hand with the cautioner, but do not twist it: then lift your hand again: and do not return to him at all.
For citron water will flow out, and let the cautery be in this shape.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be with the tip of a lancet-shaped cautioner: and let the cautery be along the length of the leg, one below the knee, and another further down, about halfway along the leg: and over the whole hip make two cauteries: and leave the open cautery for a long time without treatment so that some water flows out from it: then treat him as we have said.
Method of cauterizing in the solution of the abdomen.
Head XXXV.
If the solution of the abdomen is caused by cold and humidity, until it weakens the powers retained and digestive, which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with methods of treatment, but not healed: and you see a patient tolerating an excessive amount of cauterization due to strong powers, then cauterize it with a large cautery over the stomach, as was done in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the umbilicus, with a subtle cautery on the clavicle, and a large cautery or two cauteries over the alcatin upon the flanks, or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive humidity and a patient tolerating it, then cauterize it with a large cautery over the breastbone, and a large cautery over the entire ilium: perhaps you will add two small cauteries near the stomach.
For indeed the treatment is progressing, whose help is not in vain.
Method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Head XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are of thick, cold, or corrupted fluids, and are treated as we said in the division, and the treatment does not help: then cauterize three times on the lower part of the backbone slightly triangularly below the almeidati, and cauterize under the navel about two fingers.
If you think that his stomach is chilled and food does not digest properly, and you see his face turning pale, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery, as was mentioned earlier: and cauterize over the Epar (liver) of his and another one over his Spleen, and also over his clavicle: and leave the open cautery for some time: then take care of him until he is well.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you excise althelul, then heat the cautery that resembles a rod. Then introduce the heated cautery into the excised althelul: and your last hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows: do this once or twice.
If there are many althelul, then cauterize each one with the cautery as we have said. Then take care of them with that which benefits them from ointments until they heal.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on the bladder, it is more effective for healing.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing anus fistula.
Chapter XXXVIII.
If the patient does not obey the incision and operation as we have described at its place, and is afraid of it, he may be cured with a cautery.
When an abscess occurs and breaks, pus flows out from it, and the moisture is corrupted. Therefore, it is necessary to test (it) with a thin probe. Then, recognize the depth of it by using a probe.
Then, prepare a hot cautery that resembles a rod. Then insert yourself into the fistula while burning (and note) the depth at which the nail is inserted.
And repeat the cautery on (it) until all corrupted bodies are burned away, either once, twice or three times, according to your need.
And take care not to burn a nerve or a large vein if the fistula is there; or if the fistula passes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then take care away from all these places.
Do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place; and remember, it does not penetrate.
Then, take care of the place until it heals.
If, however, the location is sealed off and the material is removed from it, and it remains for a long time; then you will know that it has healed completely.
If the material is not removed from it, then you will know that it penetrates or there is a rotten bone deep within it; or it is one of these things which we shall remember later in its place.
Chapter on cauterizing the Kidney.
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or large wind, and it weakens the body because of that, then it is necessary to cauterize it on the flank over both kidneys with a cautery throughout the entire kidney with a cautery claw, whose precedent is remembered.
And perhaps we cauterize it again in the same flank. Why three lines will come. Therefore they will be more effective in the relief.
Section on the method of cauterizing the Bladder.
When weakness or softening occurs in the Bladder due to cold and moisture, until it is unable to retain urine, then it should be cauterized on the lower part of the back over the Bladder where the hair of the comb begins, and with a cautery from the right side of the back, and another from the left: and let the length of this cauterization on the side be according to the size of the knuckle of the thumb: and it should be cauterized with a lower-back cautery or with two cauteries, if necessary: and it should be done as the preceding cauterium claw.
Section on the method of cauterizing the Womb.
When coldness and moistness occur in the womb, preventing conception, and the menstrua are spoiled, and their calling forth is delayed, and pain occurs at their arrival, then it is necessary that three cauteries be applied around the umbilicus, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and a cautery below on the back, or with two cauteries: and let the cautery be a claw.
On the method of cauterizing the anus in its dislocation.
When the moistness of the mucosa flows out to the anus, and it becomes the cause of its exit from its place; and the sign of this is that one leg is extended over another when they are brought together; and a hollow place is found in it (the anus) due to dislocation.
Therefore, it is necessary to apply a weak cautery on the anus itself with a similar circular cautery; after you have marked the anus with encaustum (hot wax) in a circle, as they are rolled (the anus); and that the anus falls into the middle of the circle.
If this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large oil-burning cautery; and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
Then take care of it until it heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the anus and the cause of this is coldness and moistness; and it is treated with what was said above (for other conditions); but the treatment does not help, and it worsens; then it is necessary to dissolve the weakened one with fetid pills or with artificial pills, or similar. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization is done in two ways: either with a cautery containing medicinal substances or with fire.
Cauterium with fire, is in many ways.
One of these (ways) is to cauterize on top of the ankle pit with three triangular cauteries in this manner. And make it a good or bad depth (for them). And let the space between every cautery be of the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be greased (with oil).
Sometimes, however, the cautery is made in the middle on top of the ankle pit itself. Why are there four cauteries?
If you want to cauterize with a circle, whose form preceded the cautery in the ankle dislocation, one should be: so that the circle contains the entire ankle.
And burn (or char) the thickness of the skin all over.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica when the pain is attached to the ankle itself and does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, at the place where the patient indicates that there is pain, and with your own cautery four fingers deep into the woody part (of the affected area); and let the cautery be a knife-like cautery.
And let the depth of the cautery correspond to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends towards the toes, then cauterize it there where he points with a needle-like cautery, three, four or more, as needed.
If he indicates that the pain is turned towards the calf of the leg (thigh), then cauterize it there with a knife-like cautery.
In every cauterization of yours, be careful not to burn the nerve or a major artery with the cautery, and avoid causing harm or contracture through it.
I myself have seen one and another among those who cauterized over the heel, and burned in cauterization, and the leg swelled until the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated completely, and the whole foot was rotten: then there occurred rupture of the belly, and death followed after that.
If pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And certain wise men have said about the cauterization of the anus, whose cautery this method is. Make a similar instrument of iron, whose diameter is half the width of the palm: and it should be at its opening according to the size of the tip of the thumb or less: and within this instrument there should be a third instrument.
And the distance that is between each instrument should be according to the size of the knuckle on the index finger: and the instruments should be open on both sides: and their height should be like a knuckle or two knuckles: and make handles for them of iron properly fitted in the instruments.
Then it is heated in the fire until it glows and casts sparks: then place it on a bowl of the weakened anus lying on the healthy side. Therefore, cauterize it with three rounded cauteries at once.
Then let it rest for three days. Then apply poultices with butter: and leave the open wound for many days. Then heal it with ointment until it heals.
Says Albucasis, we have not used this type of cautery enough, because of the fear of its appearance: and therefore, few are found who dare to endure it.
Verumtamen is good for the one who endures [the operation], and it finds its place with him.
Cauterium however, with stimulating medicines, is to be made so that you make two knots having a perforated armillary, from which descends the cord of its gate from brass or iron, long as the thickness of the wall: whose height in their nodes should be two, or themselves like.
And let there be space between the two which is the thickness of a finger, and it should be open below and above: and let it be able to contain each other according to this shape.
Then place it on a box of ankles, with the weak one lying on the healthy side. And press your hand much upon the box of ankles. Then pour water between the two circles which is heated slightly with fire and hold it for an hour's time: and let the weak one endure its bite and his burn, for he himself finds a bite like fire until the bite ceases.
Then wipe your hand with the tool and remove warm water from the whole ankle with sweet water: then let it go for three days.
And place butter on it until the blackness of the burn is removed: and let it go for some days, and pus will flow out from it. Indeed, it is the last remedy.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg: make a splint for him in what contains water, according to what you did in the ankle equally.
This is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Take alkali and half a part of unslaked lime from both of them: grind each of them, and put them in a new pot, the lower part of which is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters it itself radius: and put another earthenware pot below the bottom of the pot: and pour alkali and lime from sweet water on both of them, so that each is submerged by a finger: after this you press them with your good compression: and let go the pot until the acid water comes out from the bottom of the earthenware pot.
Then collect all that water and pour it over another pot, and let it boil until it returns.
For indeed, it will then be very strong for sharpness, which is given in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of other members. Because it performs the operation of fire itself.
And among the medications are those with which they are cauterized, such as tesisie, and honey of cardamom, and chalk with soap, so that both are mixed together. (Here starts a new paragraph)
And Galen himself, in telling, reported a cure for a man of old, who was cured from pain in the anus and the sciatic vein: and he praised it very much. And he said that it does not need other cure, and because it was cured by one application, until it returned to tell that perhaps he himself had entered the bath, and left already healthy from it.
And it is to be taken from the wild green sedge: and if not found, dry one should be taken, fresh: and it should be crushed a lot with some fat, and placed on the anus where there is pain, or leg, or hip: and tied, and left for three hours, or until it feels weakened by the sensation of burning. Then insert it into the bath.
When his body becomes warm, insert it into the bed. For pain retreats and heals.
And know that someone should not use a cautery with these medications unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides, who said that the feces of goats, when it is used for cauterizing the sciatic vein, gives it: and it becomes a cautery according to this method. Take wool, and soak it in old oil, and place it on a deep place that is between the toe of the foot and the heel, and near the heel.
Then take dry feces of goats and burn it until it becomes charcoal.
Place it on wool and let it extinguish. Then repeat this process. Do not stop doing that until the sensation reaches the bone and the pain ceases.
And this method of cauterization is called a "Vaccine Cautery".
[Title] On the cauterization of back pain.
Occasionally there is pain in the back due to various causes, either from falling, striking, excessive evacuation, and similar things, or from the infusion of cold and moist matter: and cauterization does not occur except in this sole case, which is made by the infusion of cold and moist matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the sick person with fetid pills and similar things on the back where there is pain, three lines should be drawn according to the width of the almeida itself, after marking with encaustic in each line five cauteries or more according to the amount that comes from the strength of the sick person: and the cauterization should be made with a cautery point.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries, along with the medial claw cautery, according to this shape.
Chapter on the method of cauterization in the development of humpback.
This disease often occurs in small children.
The sign of the onset of this condition in children is that it happens above them when they are constricted during a sigh and motion: and you find at the end of the vertebrae of the back and its knots, which have already begun to emerge above the other vertebrae.
When you see this and wish to do it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery of the following shape.
And the cautery should cover all parts of the vertebrae equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebrae with a pointed cautery, make two lines or three; and let the points be close to each other.
Then take care of the place until it heals as we have said.
And be careful not to administer the cautery in the humpback that occurs in a spasm of the nerve.
On the method of cauterizing in gout, and pains in joints.
When pains in joints are caused by cold humors that flow into any part of the body, and when they occur in the feet, it is the custom among physicians to call it gout properly.
Since gout caused by cold humors does not respond to the usual treatments and the pains persist, then use cautery to remove them.
And it is done by cauterizing it after evacuation around the joint of the foot, with many firebrands, and let the cautery be Oliuare.
And if it is necessary to prick the sole of the foot, then do so with a hot iron (cautery). If the pains ascend to the knees or other joints and this often happens, then cauterize it over all the knee three or four times with a single firebrand, called Clavili.
If more than one cautery is required, then cauterize it. Do not immerse your hand in the cautery, but rather let it be about the thickness of the skin.
If the pains ascend to the knees and the back (of the leg), then administer what has been said in the appropriate chapter regarding cautery.
If the pains are only in the hands, then prick around the knuckles, as two lines are rolled (or twisted).
If the pains remain in the fingers, then prick them all over, on every knuckle and on the back of the hand (palm).
If the pains ascend after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both from all sides.
And do not evacuate a weak person from good diet and medicine reception. If good care is taken and phlegm is drained, it will be healed with God's help by this cautery.
On the method of cauterizing in ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and the intestine or spermatic cord descends to the testicle, which is just beginning: then it is necessary that you order the patient to abstain from food on their own day. And they should use laxatives, so that the feces leave their bowels.
Then he should sit on your hands over his back; and order him to hold his breath until the spermatic cord appears or the intestine emerges.
Then you should reduce him with your fingers and mark the place of the rupture with hot iron, with a sign whose end is similar to half a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then apply the heated iron cautery, in this shape: until white matter appears and it discharges pus. Then reduce the intestine or spermatic cord to its hollow. Then place an assistant's hand on the location so that the intestine does not escape; and you have already opened between the legs of the patient, placed a pulley under him, and another servant on his thighs and another on his chest holding his hands.
Then place the cautery over the mark, with your hand holding the cautery straight. And hold him until you follow the bone with it; or hold it again in turn if you have not followed it to the bone in the first instance.
And be careful to observe the exit of the intestine during your cauterization hour, lest you burn it and it passes over the patient causing death or great harm.
And know that when you do not follow the bone with the cautery, your operation is of no use.
And it is necessary that the cautery for infants be fine, according to their measurement.
Then, care with the remaining ointments, until it heals.
And let the sick one lie on his back for forty days, until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you place his sustenance in length of the time of treatment for him, so that it will calm his stomach; lest the intestines come out during an attempt at healing and evacuation.
Then, when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a well-made bandage and let him hold it for forty more days.
And let him be less in labor, in filling of food and drink, and violent voices.
For when this regimen is used, thus it heals with a complete healing.
And I will say the cure for ruptures with an incision in its own chapter.
When ruptures happen in the rest of the belly, and they are beginning, and there is a wish not to add them, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and let it be what is heated from then on as one-third of its size. Then care for him as I have said; do not add to it.
And some of the first ones have said: that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape.
After it is signed with pitch and a line is placed that is across its width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And put your hand in the middle with the curved cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Chapter on the method of cauterization for pains due to loss or blow.
Chapter LIV.
When pain occurs in some members due to accident or blow, and the pain persists for a long time without healing with medications, then it is necessary to cauterize it with the cautery of Point.
And let the cautery be for all members according to its size and smallness, weakness and strength, and its location and pain from it.
If it is cured by the first cauterization, it is good. If not: then repeat the cauterization on it.
Because it is a custom of these pains that they are transferred from one member to the neighboring one. Therefore, follow them with the cautery until the sick part is healed.
Chapter on the way of cauterization for Leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes helped by a great benefit from cautery. And especially the kind of leprosy that occurs due to corruption of phlegm and black bile; when you intend to cauterize it, consider this.
If leprosy is beginning and you have treated it as we said in the division, but it does not decrease or stop; and if you fear that corruption will spread over its entire complexion, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head at a known spot, and the second lower facing the forehead towards the end of the hair, and two above the horns, and one behind the occiput on the neck.
And place your hand with the cautery a little bit more until it makes an impression smaller than the mouth cavity and the scalp separates from it; so that expiration of thick vapors from it is relieved, and cauterize also over the spleen as it preceded.
If the leprosy has already spread over the sick person and it is manifestly apparent, then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries which we have mentioned earlier, and a cautery upon the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries upon the cheeks, and two cauteries upon the spine of the neck, and six upon the spines of the back, and one large one over the alhahosos near the base of the tail and one upon it, in the almeidati: and two over the ankles: namely, one over the entire anklebone, and two over the knees: one over every knee, and two over the shoulders, and two over the elbows, and two over the tendons of the chest, and cauterize it upon all the joints, from the joints of his fingers on his hands to those of his feet: and cauterize upon all the heels of his feet, and upon the soles of his hands.
Cauterize the nerves which are above the heel bone (calcaneus), so that you do not burn them.
And sometimes a cautery is applied to the back of the head, another to the stomach, and another to the liver.
And know that the more cauteries you apply, the more helpful and beneficial it is.
And know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery, as healthy people do; therefore, because his body has already become numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of various sizes and shapes according to the limbs and joints; this will depend on the type of instrument used.
Then care for the cautery with flour made from herbs mixed with honey, and the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Stupor (numbness).
When a limb becomes numb and is treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the numb limb with cauteries, according to the size or shape of the member.
Your cautery should go slightly into the thickness of the skin. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Sometimes, when cauterizing in the region of the hand and foot, especially in the spine at the nerve exit points that move that limb; remove the stupor (numbness).
But do not presume to act on it unless one is wise in the study of body parts and nerve exits.
Chapter L (Roman numerals for 50).
When Albaraz is ancient and does not receive anything from the skills of medicine; then cauterize on top of it, slightly deepening with a cautery according to the thickness of the skin, until the white disappears and the color changes.
Then care for it with barley flour and lentils mixed with rose oil, arnoglossus leaves, and the blood of a dove and a frog; each equal part; mix all these together, soak them on a cloth, and apply them to the location until it heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Cancer (Tumor).
When Cancer is starting and you wish to stop it; then cauterize it with a ring-shaped cautery around it, as it rotates.
But the wise have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
I do not think that is correct; I fear it may burn, and I have seen it happen several times.
And it would be better to cauterize around it with a ring, as we have said; or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in Adubelati (boil).
If someone has a boil and it is slow to mature or due to excess causing it, or because of old age and weak blood or due to time and a desire to hasten the maturation of the boil, then cauterize its circumference with small cauteries, many times. Then release it. For it will hasten with the maturation itself.
If you wish to perform a perforation of it with a cautery, then cauterize it with fire, whose shape is this:
Place it in the middle of the Adubelati, until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be weakened from what follows, so that the course of the purgatives may be alleviated.
Then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing a corroding disease.
Chapter LIV.
A corrosive is not anything other than a corruption walking in a member and consuming it, just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see a corrosive in a place that can bear cautery with fire, then use much cautery, small and large nails, according to what suits the place where the corrosion is located.
Then cauterize it from every side until you root out the entire corruption, and there remains nothing of it deep within.
Then let it be for three days, and put sulfur pulverized with oil on the cauterized places, until all the scabs and all corruption are rooted out.
Then care for it with ointments that produce flesh.
If you see that after three days, flesh is born with a healthy growth in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery on what remains from the corrupted places.
A corrosive is sometimes treated with a sharp medicine. The place of the cautery rises itself.
Nevertheless, cautery with fire is more expedient; and I have already said that the cauterization of it with a sharp medicine should be used in division; therefore, take it when you need it there.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing nails and warts.
Chapter LV.
This disease often occurs in the lower parts of the feet, and it is a thick, filtered one that injures the foot.
And the cautery is indeed in two modes: cauterization with fire, and cauterization with hot water.
The quantity of the cautery with fire is such that it is similar to the concave tip of a vulture's feather: made from iron, its entirety should contain a nail; and its edges should be subtle.
Then place the heated (cautery) on the nail. Then, turn the hand with the cautery around the nail, until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail; and leave it for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then, apply balm made of forest malve oil crushed with salt on it; and leave the balm over it at night. It will be uprooted from its roots.
Then take care of the place with a salve for healing flesh until it heals.
If they have not been converted and frequently occur on the surface of the body, particularly in hands and feet; then administer cauterization with hot water: it is to be noted that you should take a cannula made of copper, iron or vulture feather; and place it on the nail, or althea root. Then throw a small amount of hot water into the cannula: hold your hand and turn it with slight pressure, so that the edge of the cannula presses on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the nail; let the weak one wait for about an hour under the pressure of hot water.
Then release it, as the nail will be uprooted with its roots.
Do this to each one, until you have come upon all that are within the body.
Then take care of them after they have been uprooted, with the salve that generates flesh.
Method for Cauterizing in a Shaking Motion.
When there occurs trembling due to cold in the nerve or from quartan fever or something else: then you should cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the dorsal spine, and a cautery between every spine, and on its chest, and above its stomach.
For trembling ceases with the cauterizing of oil, and hastens the health from cold illness.
Method for Cauterizing Alabatrum (a type of porcelain).
In quibusdam partibus corporis accidit, ut ne
Sometimes in some parts of the body, alabatrum (porcelain) discharges foul matter, that is, pustules, which are produced by corrupted substances.
Therefore, when they appear, it is first necessary to cauterize them with a fine cautery over every head of the pustule with the myrtle wood, whose tip is ignited with fire. Or with the root of long-stemmed Aristolochia (an herb). Or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized with ademenul (a type of metal), at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and they do not grow more; and the excess is broken, making them so, and it heals from them.
But it must be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
Method for Cauterizing when bleeding from an artery in a wound.
Blood often flows from an artery that is cut near a wound, which happens externally or at the incision of boils, or cautery on a member, and similar to these; and it is difficult to separate it.
When it happens to someone, then hurry with your hand to the opening of the artery and place your index finger upon it: and tighten it much, until the blood is held under your finger so that nothing exits from there.
Then place in small oil lamps a few cauterizations, and blow on them until they are heated very much.
Then take one, either small or large, according to the wound and place where the artery is broken, and place the cautery upon the vein, after you remove your finger: and hold the cautery until the blood is cut off.
If the blood is ejected with the removal of the finger from the opening of the artery and the cautery is extinguished, then take another cautery quickly, from those which are prepared in the fire.
Therefore do not cease to do that with one after another until the blood is cut off.
And be careful, lest you burn the nerve which is there, and something evil happen to the patient through other malice.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to cut off [the blood]: especially because the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, the ends contract and the blood is cut off. Or it is tied with a strong thread. Or they are placed upon it [the wound] medications that have the property of cutting off blood, and it is tied with a tight ligature using a bandage.
Whoever administers the amputation with a ligature and tightening with bandages, or with placing on them burning things and similar, does not completely heal him, unless rarely.
If it happens to anyone that [the situation] occurs, and the physician is not present nor medicine available: then let him begin with the positioning of the index finger over the opening of the vein as we have said, and with a very tight constriction until the blood is blocked from above the wound, and on the artery. And let the finger not be removed, from above it with cold water of intense coldness always, until the blood freezes and thickens, and is cut off.
And meanwhile let him consider what he needs from a cautery or medicine.
Chapter on Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds and Similar Matters.
We have already said in Chapter One, every sickness in which it is suitable to burn with cautery and burning medicine, its occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries.
And there I placed the chapters from head to foot.
And I shall proceed in this chapter along the same path, to alleviate the person seeking what he seeks.
And before I begin that, my sons should remember what is in this chapter from the fear which is in Chapter One on Cauterization.
And because of that it is necessary to be more careful, since in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation with blood frequently occurs, with which life stands at the opening of a vein or incision on an abscess or exit wound, or treatment of wounds, or extraction of arrows, or incision on stones and their similar: from all of which are associated tremor, fear, and in many of them death.
And I warn you, lest it fall upon you that wherein is hesitation, for sometimes they fall upon you in this art as do men with their weaknesses. For there is one who gets angry with his illness, and death is easy for him; because of the vehemence he finds from his weakness and the length of his wickedness. And when it is with fear, this signifies death.
And there is one who offers you the remedy and promises healing to you, hoping for health; but his disease is deadly.
Therefore it is not fitting that you should agree with him who comes to you of such kind. Let your caution be stronger than your greed and avarice. And do not presume anything concerning that, unless after certain knowledge, which is proven to you by a praiseworthy sequence.
And use in the healing of all your sick, prognostication and indication concerning that to which it is fitting for safety.
For there is help to you in that concerning the acquiring of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God, O son, inspire you with His intelligence, and not remove from you the direction and inspiration; for that is in His hand.
And I myself have arranged this Chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what preceded in the chapter on Cautery, from neck to feet; so that you may be relieved of that which you seek from him, and what you need.
Chapter on the healing of water that accumulates in children's heads.
Chapter I.
Know that this weakness frequently occurs in boys during childbirth: or when the midwife tightens the boy's head without gentleness.
It also sometimes happens for reasons that are unknown.
And indeed, I have not seen this illness in anyone other than boys; and for everyone that I saw of them, death followed immediately; therefore, it seemed to me that I should abandon the operation on this matter.
And indeed, I saw a boy whose head was filled with water and who swelled up in every day until he could no longer sit upon himself because of the size of his head; and the wetness increased until he died.
This moisture, indeed, may accumulate between skin and bone; or it may accumulate beneath the cheekbone.
And the operation on this matter, if there is moisture between skin and bone, and an abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a longitudinal split in the middle of the head, and let the width of the split be as two knuckles, until the moisture drains out.
And this is the form of a trephination (spatulum).
If therefore the moisture has increased more and the abscess is larger, then place these two splits according to this form.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone and there is a sign that you see of the head's openings widened from all sides; and water comes out when you press it with your hand towards the inside and it does not hide from you; then make three splits in the middle of the head according to this method.
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. Then suture the splits with cloth and lint. Then anoint it above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the sutures, take care of the wound with poultices, and ointments.
Do not let go of tying the head with equality. Feed the sick person with dry food containing little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
Another method of cutting is to consider where the size of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
Whenever it is more in the head, or in the forehead, or in the right, or in the left.
Therefore ascend with incision where it appears to you an abscess and filling of water: and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, do not cut an artery, and may the flow of blood occur, and the sick one dies from that flow with evacuation of moisture.
Chapter on the incision of arteries that are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When someone gets cataracts on the eyes or on the chest, and it has become chronic and medical treatment does not help: then, more effective is the final treatment in him, incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you wish to cut them (the arteries), it is necessary that the sick person shave his head. Then scrape the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then let the sick person tighten his neck with any of his cloths. Then consider where the vein pulsates. And the places on both sides are places that are depressed behind the ears and are rarely hidden except in some men.
Then mark both with hot wax: and cut each one with a spatula on both sides of the head, the incision reaching the bone; and let it be done all around the head.
And if you wish, insert a spatula under the artery and cut it towards the top with the incision.
Let the length of the incision be as long as two fingers joined together.
For when the vein is cut, blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which jumps to the internal parts with frequent leaps.
If, however, the artery does not appear to the sense (touch), then it is necessary that measurements be taken from the ear for the space of three fingers. Then mark with hot wax and cut up to the bone.
And what must be released from the blood is 6 ounces (or fluid drachms), and perhaps you will release more or less from it. All this must be done according to the quantity that appears to you from the strength of the sick person and the filling of his artery.
Then consider for a wound. If there remains some flesh near the bone in the wound, then cut it so that no hot abscess occurs; then tie up the wound with linen rags.
Then care for him with an ointment until he is healed.
On the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
Third Head.
When an old hemicrania or sharp catarrh occurs in a man due to acrimonious humidities and warmth in the temples, or an old soda, violent, and similar things: and it is treated with modes of curative medicine, but that does not help; then we have experienced extractions of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have said.
And the method of operation in their extraction is that a weak person removes hairs which are in the temples, and intends towards the visible artery in the temple. Indeed, it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is rarely hidden except in a few men, or by violence of cold.
If it is hidden to you, then a weak person should tighten his head with any cloth of his, and then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or apply warmth to the place with hot water, until it appears to you in a manifest appearance. Then take the probe that I made earlier. Then scrape the skin with it easily until you reach the artery. Then thrust into it a hook and draw it out upward until you draw it out of the skin, and make it emerge from all sides from the layers beneath it.
If, however, the artery is fine: then envelop it with the tip of the hook. Then cut off from it a portion according to the length which its ends will extend and contract, so that there is no bleeding. For if it is not cut and not separated, the blood does not rise deeply.
Then empty out six ounces of blood, up to three.
If the artery is large: then it should be tied in two places with a double thread, strong, of silk; or with threads of alum, so that decay does not occur to it before the wound heals and there is bleeding.
Then cut the redundancy which is between two ligaments. Do that at that hour or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone, with a sharp-pointed cautery; until its ends are cut through and it remains in place for the same work.
It is a better operation, unless if he is weak and has fever, or is of cold constitution. Because the cautery is made from those things that help to stop moisture. Therefore it is a better remedy.
And after the extraction of arteries, the place should be filled with boiled old linen; and small, well-made fleas should be placed upon it.
And after the dissolution, it shall be treated with dry medications that cause flesh to grow and with linen, until it heals.
If there happens to be bleeding from an artery while you are working, then go quickly to cut it with a cautery or fill the place with wax; and press your hand until the bleeding stops. If none of those is present to you, then place your finger on the place until the blood freezes. Anoint the place with water of intense cold, until the pain subsides and it is squeezed as required.
And from that which is easier and simpler to extract an artery, it is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two sharp points; and let the sharpness of the two points be similar to a needle. However they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they are as sharp as two knives, coldness is required for both; and they do not cut the flesh swiftly. Since therefore there is some thickness in them, heat of fire is required within them; and the flesh is cut swiftly with this operation, which is better than any operation, and easier, and simpler.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space between the two knives be of the size of a finger's thickness, after you mark two places with wax: and place both very hot ones, until they reach the bone, and cut through veins in two places: so that what is between its extremities may come out. They are not fully consolidated with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
Chapter on the treatment of acute and frequent tear ducts from the eyes.
When tears are frequent and there is a channel for them from the veins on the exterior of the skull: and no remedy for them with medicines confers anything in this condition, and you see the face of the sick person becoming red, and feels walking in the forehead, as ants walk: and his eyes are weakened, moist, so that the hair of their eyelashes has already been corroded by corrosion: and his eyelids have become hot from the acuteness of tears: then ancients resorted to this treatment for them, and called it a cure, with a sword.
And it is that you command the sick person to shave the hair on his forehead. Then cut three fissures in the forehead that are equal in length to the forehead: and let the length of the fissure be like two fingers, and let one fissure be in the middle of the forehead equal to the length of the nose, and the second near the movement of the arms, and the third on the other side: and be careful not to cut the arteries that are in the sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the entire incision space be the size of three connected fingers: and have a piece of prepared sponge or dried cloth with which you can squeeze blood.
Then insert a bistoury with two sharp ends, whose shape follows next. From the first incision, which is from the temporal part, to the second incision: and scrape off the skin that is between the two incisions, with a curette (sifac), which is on the bone of the forehead. Then make it also from the middle incision to the second incision. Then remove this bistoury and insert another tool called a sharp knife (cultellare), blunt on one side, not sharp on the other side, into the first incision. And this is its shape.
And place the sharp side towards the attached flesh with skin, and the blunt side towards the bone; push it in until it reaches the middle split, and cut off all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes; except for the incision which extends as far as the visible part of the skin.
Then make it to the other split.
And when an equal amount of blood flows out, squeeze the areas from the clots of congealed blood.
Then place linen from an old cloth into each split and put over them small pieces soaked in wine, oil or vinegar. And observe that no hot abscess occurs.
And on the third day loosen the suture and administer a large amount of decoction with warm water. Then take care of it with a basilico ointment and the rest that are used to heal wounds until it heals.
Chapter V.
Chapter on treating sharp tears and catarrhs of the eyes, from the inside of the head.
When someone gets sharp, intense, continuous catarrhs; you see their eyes are sunken, small, and their appearance is already weakened; and the eyelids are ulcerated, hairs fall out, and there is intense pain deep in the head, aggravating and causing sneezing; then take from among these symptoms what does not come from mucus or catarrhs unless they come from many veins.
A better treatment for them is this. And it should be ordered to shave the sick one's forehead. Then make one incision in the middle of the forehead or slightly to one side, and begin the cut from the left temple to the right temple, and let the cut go as far as the bone; and move your hand away from the temples that move during chewing, until when the bone is exposed; then dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the gap between the two lips of the wound using warm old cloth or linen irons. Then press down with pledgets and soak the pledgets with wine and oil to avoid a hot abscess.
And when you release it and see that the abscess is starting to subside, then you should cut the bone until flesh begins to grow there.
Then treat the wound with a drying regimen to promote growth of flesh; as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, prepare an ointment from them and apply it for the growth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
[Section title: Treatment of Ear Wounds]
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or something resembling a stone such as iron and wood; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is liquid, such as water, vinegar, and similar things; or it is an animal.
When a stone falls into the ear or anything resembling a stone that does not grow within the ear, expose only the ear: if you see a stone, then pour something from violated oil or sisamo into the ear. Then administer the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with a snuff, and close the nostrils at the onset of sneezing, after you place around the ear fragments from cloths or wool, and stretch the ear towards the upper part.
This treatment is repeated many times.
If it does not come out, then administer the extraction with Geista, that is, subtly cooked Pizigarolis [a type of medicine]: its shape is as follows.
Therefore, if it comes out with Geista, this is good.
If not, then administer the extraction with a fine blind hook, only a few times.
If it does not come out through that [the blind hook], then make a tube from brass, and insert the end of the tube into the ear opening many times, and close what is around the tube with wax softened with oil, so that there is no way for air to pass except through the tube: then draw it out with your strong pull.
This treatment is repeated many times. If it does not come out in this way: then take some helkalimbat or vinegar, that is, gluten prepared for catching birds, a small amount of it: and place it at the end of the radius after you have placed it accurately over it: then insert it into the ear opening with ease, after you have removed the ear from moisture.
If it does not exit as we have described, then hurry to cut, before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
The method of incision is to use a lancet on the weakened first in the head region: and draw out from the blood according to its virtue's measure. Then make the patient sit with his hands on his lap, and turn his ear upward, and make a small incision at the base of the ear in its fatty part at its depressed place: and let the incision be crescent-shaped, until you reach the stone: then remove it along with it, which is possible for you using your instruments.
Then make the incision from your side quickly and carefully, until it heals.
If what falls into the ear is one of the grains that grow and swell, then administer its removal.
But if it does not obey you to exit, then take a fine, thin forceps according to this shape.
And administer with it the removal of that species from the grains which fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think that the grain is already moistened by the ear's moisture, until you put many fragments on it: then remove it with tweezers, or with a fine hook, or with suction, as we have said, since its removal will be eased.
In water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze with his nose pinched in first: and already fill his ear with some cooked old solution: and there lies on it the ear where the water is. If it exits through that, it is good.
And if it does not: then take many small, soft, warm stones according to the length of a finger, and heat them slightly with fire, and make the patient insert one from them into his ear's opening: and sprinkle some salt on his foot from that part, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear. Therefore, it should not cease to be done with a stone and stone, until all the water comes out.
And now water comes out in such a way that you take one from parchment or reed, and insert one end into the ear; and burn the other end with fire until it is burned much of it. Then take another reed and do the same thing many times until all the water comes out; and draw it out with a cannula as was said before in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering it [the ear], if it is of small body, like a louse, and similar to what was said in the division [of animals], take care of it as I have said.
But if it is of large body, which appears to sense, then administer the extraction of it with forceps and with hooks; and its substance is easier for all who hold in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you care for it with what was said in the division, and in the treatment of distillations, and your care does not help; then it is necessary that you look at the ear in sunlight. If therefore something appears from worms there [in the ear], then draw it out with forceps or with fine hooks.
But if nothing appears there, then take a cannula whose shape is narrow below and wide above; and insert the thin end into the ear according to the amount that the weak one [patient] can tolerate; then draw it out with strong suction. Do this many times until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you to come out, then circle the ear with seeds of poppy wrapped in a cannula as I said in the stone.
What if they do not come out with what was said: then administer the distillations which the ancients have already known for the destruction of worms; and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your flow (be) from which you pour oil and medications into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here. As you see make it from silver or bronze, below narrow and below it has a small hole, wide above.
Therefore let the thing that is inside the concavity of the cannel be made from bronze. And if you wish, take radish, and roll on its end with a decent rolling; then pour oil or juice, or whatever medicine you prefer into the cannula, and let it be in the ear; then insert the radish rod with the heated top, and press it with your hand evenly, until the oil is pushed out in the concavity of hearing, and the sick person feels it inside; and what is poured into the ear should already be slightly heated with fire; and take care that nothing which distills into it is very cold; for medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
Chapter on the treatment of an auricular impaction (obstruction or blockage in the ear).
When certain infants are born from their mother's wombs not pierced (perforated).
And it also happens to some people that an obstruction occurs in the ear from a wound or flesh grown there.
And this obstruction sometimes occurs in the deep ear canal, which is not visible to the eye; and sometimes it happens near the outer ear canal, and it can be seen by the eye.
Therefore, the obstruction that occurs in the deep ear and is not within the reach of sight, is difficult to cure in many ways.
And in the case that is visible to the eye, it is necessary to place the sick person's ear on the sun and observe it; then if you see the obstruction appear, open it with a delicate spatula, whose shape is as follows, with its end having a small notch, part of which is sharp; and the rest of the spatula should be two-edged so as not to harm the ear.
If therefore an abscess arises from the flesh in the ear: then hold it with a fine hook, and cut it out with great ease, until the whole flesh is removed.
If therefore an abscess is deep within the ear: then take a fine and sharp probe, heat it slightly with fire: then insert it into the ear.
If you then find that the abscess is accompanied by illness and hearing loss: attempt an opening of it with ease: but be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Then place linen cloth of appropriate size according to the width of the opening you have made, wrapped in Egyptian ointment: do this for several days until you are certain that the wound has healed.
Or take linen cloth and immerse it in distilled water, sprinkle powdered chalk over it, and use it (to clean the wound).
If you see that the ear is discharging pus: then it is necessary to extract the linen cloth, and let another linen cloth be placed over it, which has been soaked in a cerotic ointment made with rose oil, until the hot pus settles: afterwards care for it until it heals.
If there is bleeding instead: immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear: use the rest of the treatment that stops the described bleeding in the section about distillations.
Chapter on the care of Althaea's (marsh-mallow) for the eyelids.
Chapter 8:
These are the Althelil [affections] that occur in the eyelids of the eyes, which are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore, one should hold them with tweezers or with a hook and cut them at their roots with a spatula. Then place it on the location of the bite, crushed.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a thin lenticular cautionery.
And it is better to cauterize them after the incision. For often they recur when something remains at their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Section on the care of the eyelids of the eyes (Grandin).
Chapter IX.
Often something happens in the eyelids that resembles a Grandio (Grandio) in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called Grandio; and it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper eyelid and the lower one.
Therefore, the operation is to see if there is a Grandio proceeding from it that appears on the eyelid and moves to all parts, and its substance is easy to remove.
Then make an incision over it along its width. Then scrape it off from all sides with ease until it comes out. Then hang it with a hook and cut it off.
If its removal is not prepared for you unless after you make an incision into the eyelid a little, then it harms the weak one (patient).\]
If the incision is large: then gather it together with stitches; and take care of it until it heals.
And if it is small, there will be no harm from that. Ointment restores it and fills it up.
And if a foreign body is turned towards the inner parts of the ear facing the internal surface, then turn the eyelid inversely, and hang the foreign body with a hook; besides this, you will need an incision, and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is stretched out by an incision, it does not harm it in any way.
Then clean the eye after the incision of the foreign body with salt water; and take care of the place with it until the weak spot heals.
Chapter on the Care of Axirnath (Eyelids)
Chapter X.
The Axirnath is a growth that is generated in the upper eyelid tunic; it mostly occurs in children, and it weighs down their eyes, causing cataracts in the mornings, and they are unable to look at the light of the sun, because tears flow towards them, and on account of this, you can see them lying on their faces constantly, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are always under the eyebrows, which have already swollen; and indeed, the appearance of Axirnath is visible to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the Axirnath between them.
The method of operation for it is that the weak person should put his head in your lap.
Then take a clean cloth and prepare linen within it, and make a circle out of the linen according to the size that contains the Axirnath from all sides. Then place it on top of it, and press it with your fingers from all sides, so that the Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the center of that moisture with a small spatula, and let the fissure not be larger than the one made in phlebotomy in depth.
You must find the entire skin until you reach Axirnath, for in many arrangements Axirnath proceeds from the fracture according to the shape of a white plum's pit.
Draw it out with a cloth that you have dipped between your fingers to the outside: and you roll your hand left and right until it is dispersed: and take care not to add to the fracture, so as not to reach the spatumelas with a lancet at the eye, and injure it.
If, however, Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fracture, you shall gently add into the fracture until Axirnath appears. Then draw it out as we have said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the site, and bind it with small stones.
And there are men who grind salt, and place it in the hollow of the fracture, so that it dissolves what remains of that moisture.
Then take care of it until it heals.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs at the place, then take care of it with soothing plasters until it heals.
Chapter on the methods of Ataxmir for the eye: when the eyelid becomes soft and weeps excessively as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow in the eyelids beyond the natural course of the hair, and they turn white: then they harm the eye, and cause various ailments such as constant tearing, softening of the eyelid, and clouding of the cornea until it causes the destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmir for the eye is cured according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire. With sharp medicine, as stated in the chapter on cautery. The blind man Ataxmir is cured by incision and suture. With reeds, as I shall say.
You should place the head of the sick man in your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it (the eyelid) is turned, it is good. And if not: insert the needle into it (the eyelid), where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread, and let that be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and draw the thread upward with the eyelid, and turn it up with a spatula.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with a probe inserted from the larger tear duct to the smaller tear duct.
Then extract the thread, and place a small round piece of cotton or cloth under the eyelid: then mark (tattoo) the eyelid with a branding iron in the shape of a myrtle leaf (as a mark).
However, it must be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: since this is diversified among men.
For there are those who require that it (the eyelid) be cut in proportion to its size, according to the part which is softened by the eyelid.
Then with the probe find above the two lines which you marked, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller tear duct, and let there be one incision near the natural hairs, as thick as a nail.
Then insert the hook into one of the two corners of the skin (incision). Then scrape it (the eyelid) entirely. Then sew together with fine wool and needle the two edges (of the incision), and remove the blood, and let that which overflows from the threads on the eyebrows adhere to it, if you wish to do so; and if not, do not worry about it.
Then release the suture and the threads for three or four days; afterwards take care of it.
And if you wish, release the wound without suture, and care for it as it dries and contracts. For the eyelid should be raised during sealing of the wound and its collection, but it will be better in the future.
This method of healing was taught by the ancient ones named Ataxmir.
However, there is concern for the sick one in it, and it comes from a good operation, but there is no fear in it.
And another method exists in Ataxmir: and it is to mark signs on the eyelid in a form similar to that of the leaf of the myrtle tree, as we have told before.
Then raise the eyelid with three separated or grouped combs, according to the following shape, then cut off what is excessive with small scissors, according to this shape, with equal incisions.
If it is not possible for you to hold the comb, and it does not match it: then take a needle with a thread, and insert it into the middle of the shape; and insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and another thread near the smaller tear duct; and tie threads between your fingers with equal tension.
Then raise your hand equally with the same lever: and lift the skin where the spot is marked, as we have told before.
Then join two lips of the wound with a suture: and care for it until it heals.
If an abscess occurs at your incision or your tear, but it: pack the abscess with wax and similar substances from soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelashes also turn inwards.
Therefore, you should use what I have said for this incision, but suture is more artificial for both of them. "On the treatment of Ataxmir with dogs.
"It is as if you turn the eyelid and make an incision in the inner fissure, as I have told. "Then make two canines or two fine sticks whose length is the same as that of the eyelid and whose width is smaller than the width of a thumb, and you have already made an incision at the ends of both sides where you hold threads.
"Then apply both together with delicacy to the excess part of the eyelid of the eye and press the two canines from both sides tightly, and release it for some days. "For the tightened skin will die, become blackened, and rot until it falls off by itself.
"If it does not happen quickly, then cut it with scissors. "Then take care of it until it heals.
"When it has become solid, lift the eyelid and do not pluck hairs.
"And this is the form of two canines which you should make according to this shape and size in length and width.
"Chapter 12.
"On the pulling out of hairs sticking in the eye with a needle.
"The operation is to take a fine needle, insert a thread from silk into it gently, "Then connect the ends and tie them with a very fine knot; let the length of the threads be one palm."\]
"Then make another thin thread called Alinxotati, place it under the first and tie the ends if you wish."\]
"Then the patient should place his head on your lap and position it near the sun so that the operation may be seen clearly; because this operation is delicate or minute.
"Then insert the needle with Alinxotati into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you pull out the natural hair from above."\]
Then draw the needle above the ankle-bone: and insert the needle into the ankle-bone; if it is one, or two, or three, not more than that.
Then draw your hand with it until the needle emerges with the ankle-bone at the eyelid together with the natural hair.
If the ankle-bone is drawn and the needle does not emerge with it: draw the ankle-bone downward, with the thread you have made in it, until the ankle-bone comes out through the superior opening, and you see it with the eye: then draw the ankle-bone and the thread; take both out, and close the eye; and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then join a long hair from the natural hairs and elevate it with it; or leave it as it is until it lengthens, and then elevate it.
Title XIII.
When this xiphacteral ulcer happens to the eye, it is called a leporina (rabbit-like sore).
And this xiphacteral ulcer is either natural or accidental.
An accidental xiphacteral ulcer arises from the consolidation of a wound, or incision, or cautery, and similar things.
And the method of treatment is to make an incision in it (the ulcer), and to separate its lips, and to place a linen cloth between them and bind it until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use things that dry and constrict (the ulcer) for its treatment; if you do so, the xiphacteral ulcer worsens rather than improves; instead, use softening things such as fenugreek; and embrocation with water in which althea has been cooked, linseed; and an unguent of dyaquilon that has been softened with some oil; and wrap it with a linen cloth, and treat it with it.
Thy treasure of care is to strive with all thy skill, that it may not become consolidated, according to the form which it originally had.
This operation indeed, is but a correction of Alzharate, so that the form of the place returns not at all to what it was originally.
§ On the care of Alzharate that is made on the lower eyelid, and it is a swelling or contraction upward towards right and left.
Chapter XIIII.
This which is below, is what is truly called Alzharate. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one is made from a wound, or a fissure, or a cautery, and similar things.
And the method of operation in it is to take a needle with a double thread, and moisten it in flesh, and make it penetrate from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upward with the needle, and cut it with a broad scalpel. If therefore the form of the eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take radium and place it in the fissure, and turn the eyelid with it; and make two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let their ends be from the angles of the incision, until they meet and form an angle; until when joined together, this figure is formed, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the amount of its sharp edge below, from what follows the eyelid. Then join the separated parts; or join it with a thread of wool.
Then care for them with what I said, with softening medications, and linens, until they heal.
If an alxatrati occurs from a fissure, whether by suturing or cauterizing, then it is necessary to examine the fissure flat under the eyelashes, as was done before. Then separate the two lips with a linen cloth, as I have said.
In summary, the treatment of alxatrari, whether it is above or below, is to perform the operation as described for preparing the alxatrari.
For it is of many different forms: and the skilful craftsman prepares the intellect with whatever method is possible for him, until he restores the figure to its natural form or almost so, and himself who is sick, according to what suits him from the operation and the tools in various dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Chapter on the adherence of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, it is necessary that you insert the end of the radius beneath the eyelid and peel it upwards: or stretch it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a delicate spatula, which should not be sharp like a spatula's edge, but rather blunt somewhat: so as not to disturb the sick man during the operation, and remove the spatula, and harm the eye with its sharpness: and let your incision be as if you are scraping off the adhesion gently, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, the adhesion heals completely.
Then pour saltwater into the eye and clean it with water: or distill it onto him from sulphur boiled with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a linen cloth: and place warm wool soaked in egg white over the eye: and use sulphur on the third day and with ointments until it heals.
Chapter on the incision of the nail and protrusion of skin at the corner of the eye.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the nail is in two ways. Or it is nerve-like and is similar to horn, subtle. Or it is not nerve-like, similar to the consistency of frozen white matter that when touched with iron or attempted to be picked up with a hook, it breaks off and the hook does not adhere to it.
And both types do not start unless from the larger tear duct, up to where it gradually reaches the eye, until it covers the vision, and prevents light, and movement of the eye.
And the method of operation for its incision is: let the sick person place his head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand. Gather a small nail with a pair of tongs and extend it upward. Then take the awl, and insert a horse or cow hair into it; let it be threaded, slightly enlarge the tip of the awl, fix it in the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the awl, tie it with thread around the nail, and extend it upward. Scrape the side of the nail following the pupil as if you were pulling it out to the very end.
Then cut the remaining part in the root of the lacrimal with a thin spatula, or with small forceps: and let the natural flesh of the lacrimal pass, so that there is not a continuous flow of tears from the incision.
And sometimes an onyx is extended with a chisel alone; or with a file, as we said. Then it is to be scraped with a soft spatula, whose shape is this.
And beware, lest the spatula touches the horny sheath and there occurs a breakage, and the pupil is pierced.
Then after the incision, throw into the eye something crushed salt, or made from alum and vinegar, and let it remain until another day. And then care for it as needed, until it is healed.
If the onyx is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle into it nor does the chisel fit into it, then this type of onyx is often treated with medicine and heals as I described in the division.
If you wish to cut it (the onyx), then open the eye of the sick person and take a thin, soft, delicate spatula with a blunt edge, in this shape: And file the top of the onyx with a file (rasp) with finesse. If you see that it is becoming rough and broken, and you press with the rasp into it, then drip from your hour into the eye a solution made from alum and vinegar, or red alum, or crushed salt: and close the eye until another day.
Then repeat this operation until the whole is removed. Unless there is a warm abscess in your eye: then let it be and treat the abscess until it is healed.
Then repeat this operation on it with the rasp until it is healed.
Prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it harms the eye severely, should be suspended with a hook and cut from it, not too deep, so that the flow of tears is not interrupted.
Then drain into the lacrimal sac or reddish, or made from zinc, until it heals.
Chapter on the incision of Alguardenic and the flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
Sometimes in the eyes of humans, red flesh composed or placed, which covers the pupil, approaches it, or presses against the eyelids and perhaps turns the eyelids toward the outside; it resembles a rosebud on a column.
And the operation for this is that the weak place his head in your lap. Then open his eyes and collect the entire flesh with appropriate hooks; hold it with a single forceps or pinchers.
Then cut the flesh first, until the entire piece is finished with the knife. Be careful not to hurt the eye during the operation; let your cut be as we described in the incision of the nail or with small forceps, such as are used for cauterizing an abscess, according to the shape that will come after this chapter.
When your incision is complete and the entire Alguardenic is removed, fill the eye with ground salt or pour in red powder and similar substances from corrosive medicines; place on the outside of the eye a piece of cotton with egg white to protect it from hot infection.
If some Alguardenic remains and hot blood dominates, and you fear a hot abscess, then let the eye be; treat the abscess with what calms it.
Then repeat over him with the operation until he is healed.
And similarly do with the added flesh that happens in the eye of this kind.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that all the weak eye from a natural or accidental cause be cured without iron operation: and you shall not introduce your hand into any of these operations, until you see that this member can bear this operation.
§ On the collection of Sebale from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Sebale are the red veins that surround the eye and prevent the use of its operation; and they weaken the eye for days.
Therefore it is necessary for you first to consider if the eye in which there is Sebale, is strong, and there is no other sickness except Sebale; then collect Sebale of it.
And it is to command the weak one that he place his head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with a single hook or two according to your discretion; and the hook be subtle of double thread, according to this shape, or there are two hooks graded in one body, according to this shape.
Then collect those veins with subtle forceps and remove the blood by the hour after the hour, until you see that those veins are removed from the eye and dissolved; and beware not to wound the eye with the points of the spatula.
And let your operation be at midday before the sun, and be strong in your operation very much: that you cut not except those veins.
And when you are finished, then pour into the eye either green or red; that with its own sharpness it may burn what remains of Sebale.
If however it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then plaster the eye with that which soothes the pain of the eye; and let it rest for some days until the pain subsides; and fumigate it with warm poultice; then repeat over him according to the same manner until he is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
On reducing the aphthae to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
The physician named Arisatha treated a Fistula, which he cured with a cautery or with a medicine burning sharply, according to the story that preceded it.
If it is not cured, then there is no skill in it; except to open a boil at its birthplace and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus, until the bone appears.
When the bone appears and you see decay or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument whose shape is this.
It is called the roughness of the head.
Make it from iron and let its head be round like a rasp, which is marked with the mark of a file or a fine aliskilfer mark; and place it on the corrupted bone.
Then turn it over with your fingers and press your hand slightly, until you know that the corruption is already scraped; and do this repeatedly.
Then restore the place with extremely dry medicines.
If the place consolidates and flesh grows there, and the flow of pus stops; and it remains for forty days without recurrence, without abscessing and no accident occurs; then you know that it is already cured.
If not, then there is no skill in it except to reduce the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this shape.
It is to scrape the bone with iron or with a sharp medicine; and when the bone is exposed, then take a trepan according to this shape, the extreme part should be iron, triangular: and the wood part should be a pyramid extended until the extreme end, as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself; let it be close to the tear duct; and extend your hand slightly from the eye. Then turn your hand with the lancet until it penetrates the bone and feels weak: through this you will find wind to come out from it, when you hold your hand over his nose.
Then restore the place with medicines that are drying, as I have taught you.
When the flesh is born and hardens, then the material that was flowing out returns to the nose: therefore it is lighter above the weak one.
Chapter on reducing protuberance of the Eye.
Chapter XX (20).
When the eye protrudes entirely and there is no visual harm or diminution, then it must be weakened; afterwards, apply leeches to it; later place wind-drawing plasters on the neck without scarifying but with suction.
Then put on the eye a liniment made of acacia, aloes, frankincense, and colophony. Then bind the eye above with a plaster containing many small stones.
And the method of stones is: that you receive soft cloths, many, and each cloth should be folded over four; make many from them; then place one on top of another, according to the quantity that the eye needs; afterwards bind them above with a strong bandage.
And repeat the wind-drawing plasters without scarifying but with suction.
Then remove the wind-drawing plasters, and let the eye be bound day and night.
If the binding becomes soft again, then it must be tightened a lot; afterwards remove the binding after a day and night, as we have said.
If you see the eye already returning to its original sheath, that is good; if not, then repeat the plaster, stones, binding, and wind-drawing plasters until it heals.
On the incision of the bladder's covering.
In hac operazione, si vis introitum facere in
When a rupture occurs in the bladder's covering, it protrudes like a bladder stone and disfigures human shape because of that, and one wishes to cut it: then operation is performed on it as I have told before, namely, insert the point into the root of the bladder from the lower part to the upper part.
Then insert another point where there is a double thread from the lacrimal part and let it pass through: then release the first point according to its position.
Then cut the location of the double thread and tie a part of the bladder around it with the point: and tighten it much.
Then remove the point, and put warm linen on the eye of the eyeball: and let it remain until the thread comes out with the bladder.
Then take care of the eye, as it comforts itself, until the wound heals.
And sometimes the bladder is tightened from all sides with a circle made of cloth until the eye protrudes greatly.
Then a sharp instrument is inserted under the eyeball gently until it reaches deep into the eye and wetness spreads on the white part, and the eyeball drops down and enters immediately: then tighten it until it heals.
Treatment of Alcomnat.
Et si aliquis homo habuerit alcomnatum
If a man has Alcomnat. This illness that is called Alcomnat is nothing but pus that collects in the eye, which is like descending water, and it itself is not.
The method of operation in this case is to make the sick person sit on a prepared seat or chair.
Then take hold of his head with both hands from the sides and move it until you see pus coming down to your lower eyes. Then it (the catheter) is fashioned and not allowed to descend, and the passage is cleared: and the sick one sees as he saw before: and if it does not descend lower, know that there is water.
If the evacuation of pus is not prepared with what I said, then make the sick person sit between your hands. Then take a fine probe and punch through the horny layer slightly above the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal pannus, until the pus emerges.
When it (the pus) comes out, then pour hot water containing honey into the eye; or hot water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey; afterwards treat with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
Chapter on the treatment of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have already discussed the types of water and those suitable for perforation in conversation, when they appear and are explained, then take it according to its health.
Therefore it is necessary to make the sick person sit with his face between your hands facing the sun; and bind the healthy eye, and tightly compress it; then close the eyelid of the affected eye with your right hand if the watery eye is the left one: or with your left hand if the affected eye is the right.
Then take your right thumb, if the affected eye is the left one; or your left thumb, if the affected eye is the right.
Then place the end of your thumb near the edge of the cornea, on the side of the smaller lacrimal gland visible in the white part of the eye; then push with force; and you revolve your hand with it, until it penetrates into the white part of the eye; and you feel that the thumb has reached an empty space.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the journey (of the needle) be large enough to reach deeply, the measurement of space from the pupil up until the end of the blackness: and it is the circle of the eye. You will see it (the light spot) within the very pupil of the eye, on account of the clarity of the corneal tissue.
Then place (the finger) deep until the place where there is water. Then press it down once after another.
If therefore water descends immediately, then the sick man sees that which opens his sight immediately, and it (the light spot) is within his eye.
Then rest a little. If water descends, then place it down again, except that the light spot goes out.
When it is pressed and does not rise: then pull the light spot out with ease: and you rotate your hand slowly.
Then dissolve something from clear salt in water, and clean the eye inside with it. Then place outside the whole wad of wool or flax soaked in rose oil and white egg: and bind with it the healthy eye.
We, and those who are of our time, place over him (the injured party) powdered camphor with egg white.
If the light spot does not obey you to enter into the eye because of its hardness, since it is a person whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you receive spathule called Alberid, whose form is as follows:
Grind it (the Alberid) with it (the spathule) only the eyelid: and do not go deep into the hole with your hand: and it is only to make a path for the light spot to reach the deep place.
Then insert the light spot as we have said.
And for the completion of your work, prepare a suitable bedchamber for the sick, in which he may sleep on his back in a dark house; and let him be prohibited from all movements, and from coughing; and place food for him that softens his nature; and let him not move his head to either side at all.
And the suture should be according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then dissolve that in the dark house and test his sight; make him see things. Then bring back the suture until the seventh day.
And it is not suitable that he should do that during the hour of cure, or immediately after the incision; on the contrary, it should be left to others; for this reason because water rises quickly through a violent opening.
If, however, an abscess occurs that is hot: then it is necessary to dissolve the eye before the seventh day; and correct it with what quiets the abscess, until it is quieted; then without his sight, and place upon his face the purgative that regulates his vision for several days, while he remains in the dark house.
Then he should go out of the house gradually, and convert himself to his belongings.
And know that in surgery, a student is not exempted from seeing the operation often; then he dares to perform it.
And now a certain one from those who are of Alayrach has arrived, who said that in Alayrach, a large hole was made through which water was drawn.
Therefore I have not seen anyone in your country who has done this; nor have I read it in any of the old books: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of shapes from the great Magdee, to stand over him who does not know them.
Make them from proper iron: and let their ends have the same subtlety of triangular shape, and let their points be sharp.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of newborn flesh in the nose.
When diverse fleshes are born in the nose, among which there is something that resembles a scorpion with many feet: and from it is cancerous flesh, stone-like, dark in color; and from it is soft flesh, not dark in color.
Therefore, with respect to the soft flesh that is among these fleshes, neither fraudulent nor cancerous, it is necessary for you to make the sick person sit with his face opposite the sun, and open his nostrils, and throw a hook into those fleshes: then pull them out towards the outside, and cut what you have seized with a subtle spatula sharp on one side, until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
If something remains from that which it is not possible to remove: then shave it with a subtle instrument with ease, until there remains nothing from it. If blood dominates you, or a hot abscess occurs: then oppose it as necessary: or it is from malignant abscesses, then run to cauterize it until the blood is removed, and all fleshes are taken away.
Then throw vinegar, or water, or wine into the nose after the incision. If the nose opens and moisture proceeds to the palate, then you know that he is already well.
If moisture does not penetrate as necessary, then you know that there is newborn flesh in the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Then it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen with some thickness and many knots; and place between every knot the amount of a digit, or less; and let the weak person send one extremity of the thread into the nose with a probe, or with whatever he can do once he has made it similar to an azure; and draw out the odorous part until it reaches the nasal cavity, and exit onto his throat.
And indeed many boys in schools often make something similar to this Attomius; and it is easy for him who wishes.
Then place two ends of the thread, one end which exits over the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then cut a piece of flesh with the knife containing the knots on the thread. Do that until you know that the flesh is already with the knots of the thread.
Then draw out the thread; and place in the nose after bleeding linen which you have soaked in Egyptian ointment; do that for three days, or more, until the ointment has completely eaten away what remains of the flesh.
Then place at the end of the thing in the nose a tube of lead, for some days, until it heals.
If however it needs treatment that dries out, use that.
For the purge of the head, when olive oil and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it from silver or copper; it should be similar to a small lamp, open like a snail shell; and its channel similarly.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the instrument for head purging should be full, pierced; with a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when heating oil or whatever you want from juices and flowable substances in it.
Chapter XXV.
Multotiens nascitur in extremitate nasi Thelul, et magnificatur, et augmentatur cum diebus, donec foedus fit aspectus eius translates to: "Thelul often arises at the end of the nose and becomes more noticeable and grows with days until its appearance is unsightly.
"Therefore, it is necessary to cut it at the beginning of its appearance and to remove all of it. "Then place over it either a hot iron or a medicine that burns in its place.
"If the incision does not make it less noticeable, then consider if it is hard and black, with few senses; then do not touch it with iron, because it is cancerous.
"For often I have seen that when a person cuts a common growth, great harm comes to the one who has it.
"And if the growth is soft when touched, not black, and you see that it can be cut out entirely, then evacuate the weakened one, and cut it without fear or hesitation; take care of the place with medicine to draw and bind it until it heals.
"Chapter XXVI.
"On the subject of suturing the nose, the lip, and the ear.
"Know that when discontinuity of one of these cartilages occurs, the operation is not effective in it unless in certain individuals.
"Therefore, when something happens to someone, you should consider if it is a recent wound with its blood; and then gather two layers of the wound with suture; then take care of it until it heals.
"And if the discontinuity of the lips has already separated them, and each part is healthy; then it is necessary to remove all parts appearing from the skin until it bleeds. "Then gather the two lips with suture and bind them; sprinkle on top of the blood of a dragon and pulverized olibanum; place on top of the powders a piece of emplastrum diafinicon, and any other more consolidated emplaster; leave it bound for two or three days. Then dissolve it and change the medicine; and leave it until the threads separate by themselves. Then treat it with ointment, until it is healed.
The method of suturing is to gather the solution of continuity with needles, as we have told about suturing the abdomen; or to gather the solution with thread, as I have shown you.
Chapter 27.
Chapter on the extraction of neck lumps.
Many people indeed suffer from hard, nodular-like ulcers similar to the seeds of grass within their outer or inner lips; and some are smaller, and others larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to turn the lip and make an incision over every node of it, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision with powdered silver until the blood separates.
Then it is rubbed with vinegar and treated at the place where there is stiffness, until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 28.
Chapter on the incision of the born flesh on the gums.
Often a flesh grows over the gum which the ancients called 'abuless'.
It is necessary that you hang her with a hook or hold her with forceps and cut her at the root, and let the pus run out, or blood.
Then place upon it a powder of sieved wheat, or other healing powders, drying ones.
If the flesh returns after treatment, for it often returns, then cut her again in a second place and cauterize her; for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter XXIX.
[Chapter title:] On Tooth Extraction with Iron.
When they are gathered on the surfaces of Teeth from within and without, between the gums and rough cortex, and sometimes they become blackened, turn yellowish and greenish, until that corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul because of it.
Therefore it is necessary that you make the sick person sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and grind the molars and teeth where the cortex appears to you, and similar to sand: until there remains nothing of them, and similarly do with blackening, greenness, yellowish, and others until they are cleaned.
If therefore what is in them is removed from the beginning by reason, it is good: and if not, then do repeatedly over them the shaving on another day, second, and third, until at last the effort comes to that which you wish.
And know that the tooth requires razors of various forms, many figures: according to which it is prepared for your operation: because the razor with which the tooth is shaved from below is different from the razor with which it is shaved between the teeth, according to other shapes.
And these forms of razors should be prepared by you, which you see.
Chapter 30.
Chapter on the extraction of tooth pain.
It is necessary that you treat the Tooth from its pain with all skill, and delay in its extraction. For it is not that anything can be its substitute when it is extracted: because it is a substance that rises up: until there is no excuse for the extraction of it, then if the sick person is compelled to extract it himself, it must be firmly held and certified by you that the tooth in pain.
Often pain deceives the sick person and thinks that there is a worm in the tooth and extracts it himself: then the pain does not subside until the sick tooth is extracted.
We have already seen that from the operation of phlebotomists.
If therefore the toothache is certified by you yourself, then it is necessary that you should make an incision around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is something virtuous, until the gums are loosened from all sides: then move it yourself with your fingers, or with subtle forceps first of all gently, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps in that place, and hold the head of the weak there between your knees: what you have already firmly held, so that it does not move: then pull out the tooth in a straight line, so as not to break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If however the tooth is pierced or corroded: then it is necessary that you fill that hole with a cloth and tie it with the end of a fine radius so as not to break it during your constriction on it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you be careful when making an incision around the gums from all sides a lot.
And keep your strength, so as not to break it and a part of it remains, and returns to the weak one from that malice which is greater than its first pain.
And be careful not to do what ignorant phlebotomists do in their haste and the boldness of themselves regarding its removal, apart from what we have mentioned.
For many times they bring on great weaknesses in men, which are more difficult to break and all the roots of it remain or some of them: or to pull it out with certain jawbones: as we have often testified this.
Then it is to be lanced after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If there should be bleeding from the places (for it often happens), then rub something from pomegranate peel, and fill that place with it; and if not, cauterize it with fire if pomegranate peel is not available to you.
The handles of the fine forceps that move the tooth should be long at the ends, short in the handle, thick, so that they do not split when pressed against the tooth; they should resemble the thickness of the handles of pincers, until when you pull with them, they do not bend or split: the end parts, and they should be made of iron or well-made steel, with pointed ends: and at their ends there should be teeth, some of which enter into certain ones and tighten with a proper constraint, strong.
And sometimes the ends are like the shape of a bird's beak, which is called a stork's beak, and they are strong in compression.
Chapter XXXI.
Chapter on extracting teeth and broken jaw bones.
When part of a tooth remains after its extraction and breaks off, then you should place hot iron with butter on the site for one or two days until it softens; then insert algast (alum) or forceps whose ends resemble the beak of a bird called a stork. This is the shape of the forceps.
The ends should be made like a file or an alisclife (small pointed tool).
If the tooth does not come out with these forceps, then you must cauterize the root and remove all the flesh, and insert a small tool called a palanca minora whose shape is this:
The extremity is short and somewhat thick: it should not be moist so as not to break.
If the root comes out through it, it is good: and if not, it should be helped with other instruments whose shapes are like these.
The first shape is a triangle at the end of which there is some thickness.
The shape of the triangle is subtle or fine-tipped.
And with other instruments and tools which have been described earlier in the ratio of teeth.
It can also be helped with this tool resembling a large nail, of the following form: a triangular end twisted, having some thickness so as not to break; it should not be moist.
And know that there are many tools for the teeth: and similarly the other tools are not counted; and the skillful artist, subtle in his art, discovers for himself the tool according to what the operation and illness themselves signify.
Because from the diseases there are those for which no instrument was mentioned by the ancients, due to the diversity of their forms.
If the bone breaks from the jaw or from other bones of the face, or it rottens: then examine it at its place with that which suits it from the instruments and tongs that I have mentioned for extraction of roots, and help with gestures whose form is as follows.
There should be something of thickness in it gradually, so that the bone is tightened or held with it, and it does not flee and go away, until the bone comes out; and restore the place with appropriate medicines for this.
If there is a small rottenness in the bone, then scrape it from its rot, and care for it until it heals.
In the head of the scalpel used for amputation, a
Locking of projecting teeth over others.
When teeth project not according to their natural course, the form becomes ugly; and particularly when this happens in women and girls, that is, venereal.
Therefore, one must pay attention. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit or can be locked, neither sawn nor filed; then pull it out; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this tool, whose shape is as follows:
It resembles a small beak and is made of iron with a very sharp tip.
And let your cut be such that you cut it over many days due to the hardness of the tooth and so as not to disturb another tooth.
If it is projecting exposed for sawing; then saw it with a file made of iron, whose shape is as follows:
The whole (thing) is made of ivory, and its handle is small points of large needles, similar to a file with which scribes make pen points: with it, the hard part is gradually filed down over many days with ease, so as not to disturb the hard part and let it fall off: then smooth it, and in the end sand it with some scrapers.
If it is hard (and) breaks off a part, and injures the tongue: then it is necessary that the file is used on it until the roughness of that breakage is removed, and it is made smooth; and flatten it, so as not to injure the tongue, nor corrupt speech.
Chapter XXXIII.
Chapter on the filing of teeth with gold wires.
When there is shock and disturbance of the front teeth due to a blow or accident, and the weak person cannot hold what they eat so as not to fall out; and you have treated them with medicines made of wax, but the treatment did not work: then it is appropriate for them to be held with a gold wire, since silver becomes green and rots after days, but gold never changes.
And let the gold wire be of medium thickness and varying coarseness according to its size so that it can fit between the teeth.
And the shape of the filing is that you take the gold wire and insert it double between two healthy teeth; then wrap it with its two ends around the moved teeth, whether one or several, until you reach the end of the wire at a healthy tooth on the other side. Then do it again until you reach the part from which you began; and hold your hand with delicacy and wisdom until it is not moved completely; and let your grip, by which you hold the wire, be at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not go out.
Then cut off the excess parts of the wire with pliers; and gather both of them together and turn them around each other; and hide these under a healthy tooth and a moved tooth so as not to injure the tongue; then release the grip, but leave it tight until it remains so.
If it is loosened or cut open, tie them with another thread and let it remain so for the entire time.
And this is the shape of Teeth, and the pattern of the interlocking of two healthy teeth, and two moving teeth, as you see.
And it sometimes happens that a tooth or two return to their places after loss, and they are held as we have said, and remain so: and this does not occur unless the skilled craftsman is careful and experienced.
And sometimes a tooth from the bones of a cow is adapted: and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in its position, where it strengthens and ties, as we have said: and it remains, and serves with it for a long time.
Chapter XLII.
When this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already healed.
The operation on it is to open the sick man's mouth at its base, and raise his tongue: then cut the nerve ligament across, until the tongue is released from its restraint.
If there is something hard and knotty in it, and it is from the consolidation of a wound: then thrust in the hook into it, and drill it across, until you cut the ligament, and the knot is released.
And beware that there is no gap in the deep flesh, and do not cut the artery there, and let blood flow.
Then it is dressed with water and rose petals, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place a piece of linen under the tongue that the sick man holds all night: so that it does not become consolidated again.
If however there occurs a bleeding, then place on the place crushed zecha. If blood defeats you, then cauterize the place with a lentiginous cautionery which is suitable for that; then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes an aposteme occurs under the tongue that resembles a small Ranula, preventing it from its natural function and perhaps growing so much as to fill a bone.
And the operation on it is to open the sick person's mouth facing the sun, and examine the aposteme.
If you see it of dark or black color, hard and insensitive to the sick person: then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it inclines towards whiteness with moisture, then pierce it with a hook, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and free it from all sides. And if blood defeats you in your operating hour, then place on it crushed zecha until the blood stops flowing; then return to your operation until you extract it along with its contents.
Then wash it with vinegar and salt, and care for it with the rest of the treatment suitable for that until it heals.
Extraction of two Apostemes from amygdalas.
Chapter XXXVI.
Whenever there occur swellings at the throat, that is, glands similar to glands occurring outside [the neck], which are called the two tonsils: if, when you treat them as we said in division, they do not heal, then consider.
If it is a hard abscess, of dark color and few senses, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and its root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing bleeding, rather let it be until it matures. Then either you will perforate it yourself or it will burst by itself.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is delicate: then it should be cut.
And the operation in it is that you consider before the operation itself, if the abscess has become quiet with complete heat or if it is reduced by some reduction: then let the patient sit facing the sun, and place his head on your lap; and open his mouth, and a servant should be between his hands, and press his tongue down with an instrument, whose shape is as follows.
Let it be made of silver or brass, which is thin like a knife.
When therefore you press his tongue with it and the abscess is shown to you, and it falls on it under your vision: then take a hook, and pierce it into the tonsil, and pull it out to the exterior as much as possible, beyond which you pull something from the tunics.
Then cut it with an instrument, whose shape is as follows. It resembles forceps; however, its ends should be curved so that the opening of each one is in a straight line and the sharp part of one is opposite the other: therefore, it should be made from iron or wood soaked in oil.
If however this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, whose shape is as follows. Be sharp on one side, not on the other side.
And after cutting one almond, cut the other in accordance with this same shape of the incision.
Then, after the incision, let the sick person gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If however there is a bleeding, let him gargle with water in which the rinds of pomegranates have been boiled; or leaves of myrtle and similar ones from elms, until the bleeding stops; then take care of him until he is cured.
And sometimes ulcers other than almonds two grow in the throat. Cut them accordingly as I said, equally in the incision of two almonds.
I myself have been cured of a woman with an ulcer that was born in her throat, which pulled towards the swelling, little sensation, which almost closed her throat; and the woman breathed through a narrow mouth, and already forbade her to eat, and drink water; and she had already come close to death, if it had remained one day, or two days.
The ulcer had only risen so much that it expelled two branches, until they came out through two nostrils.
I approached quickly, and fixed one of its hooks. Then I pulled it out, and a large piece came out with it.
Then I cut off that part, where it was grasped from the nostril.
Then I did to it what came out from the other nostril.
Then I opened his mouth, and pressed his tongue; then I fixed a hook on the ulcer; then I cut off part of it, and nothing else came out except a little blood; so the throat of the woman was healed, and she began to drink water immediately, then she began to eat.
I did not stop cutting out the tumor many times over a long period of time; and the tumor succeeded in its place that I was cutting out, until it grew too large with it.
I then cauterized the tumor between the throat.
Then it stood still concerning its increase; afterwards I walked away from it, and I did not know what God had done with it after me.
Section on the excision of a tumor of the vulva.
Chapter XXXVII.
When a catarrh descends to the vulva and becomes a large tumor, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, it is then called a swelling.
When it is cured together with what I said in the division, and it does not heal; and you see that the tumor is warm and has become subtle, then it should be cut out.
And if what is gathered around it is round and not long, and it is red, or of a dark brown, or black color, and there is no sensation; then it should be excised with a knife. For there is fear over the weak one.
Therefore when you see it as I said according to its size and whiteness, make the weak one sit facing the sun; then press his tongue with the instrument whose use was described before; then prick an awl into the vulva and draw it downwards; then cut out the tumor with one of the two instruments that were mentioned in the section on the excision of the two almonds.
And it should not be cut out from it, unless what is added goes beyond a natural limit without increase.
For if you cut out more from it, you harm the voice and speech.
Then after excision, use what was described in the section on the excision of the two almonds; and heal it until it is healed.
If the sick person fears incision: then it is necessary to treat him with skill in cauterization without fear and dread.
The method of cauterization is not otherwise than with sharp water: it is to place the head of the sick person in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument that we mentioned. Then take from the water which I told you in the chapter on cauterization, and fashion a not-extinguished lump of plaster, neither thick nor thin, and fill the hollow of this instrument with it, whose form is as follows:
Let its end where the medicine is placed be concave, like the concavity of a cochlea's radius.
Place the instrument with the medicine on the wound itself: and let the sick person lie on his side so that saliva runs from his mouth through the internal medicine, so that nothing descends from it to his throat and harms him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from above, apply it to the wound in portions of half an hour, until you see it already darkened and the bite of the medicine ceased.
And if you wish to receive the cautery and enclose it on the end of the radius, and pour the cautery with the medicine, and insert the radius with the cautery into a funnel from above, until the cautery adheres to the wound.
Do this often, until you achieve what you want in the cauterization of the vein. Then release it: for it burns and falls after three or four days.
If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after cauterization, clean the area around the vein with cautery soaked in butter, and clean it with that which is around the vein from the medicine: and wash it with cold water.
And it shall be treated externally with embrocis (fomentations), and internally with gargarisms (emetics or purges), until it is healed.
This manner of treatment is healthier than incision, and further from fear.
And sometimes the ulcer is also treated with that which is more subtle than cautery and incision: it is treated with suffumigation (fumigation), according to this manner. Take calamintus (Calaminth), hyssopus (hyssop), origanum (Origanum), ruta (Rue), sseah (probably a typo or miscopy, could be Sesame), camomilla (Chamomile), abrotanum (Abrotanum) and similar herbs from them: gather all of these together, or some of them in a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, and boil them: the pot should be well-coated with clay: it should have a hole in its center, over which an instrument concave according to this manner is placed.
It should be made of silver or brass: its end, where the grain is placed, shall be inserted into the sick man's nose until the vapor reaches the ulcer through the pipe, until the ulcer is greatly covered up.
Then repeatedly over it many times, until it burns out.
And beware, not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess's advent (appearance). For, usually, it is added to an abscess: and it shall not be done except when the abscess's heat has declined (subsided).
If this instrument is not present to you, then take a reed and make its end the rind (bark) of an ox's horn: so that the sick man's bone is not burned: since the ox's horn rind prevents the vapor from burning the bone: and this is good treatment with safety.
Chapter on the extraction of thorns, and bones from the throat.
Head, XXXVIII.
Often a bone or a fish spine, or something else, adheres in the throat.
Therefore, it is necessary to extract whatever appears visible above which the vision falls, after pressing the tongue with an instrument in the sun, and when it is shown to you that it is in the throat.
And whatever is not apparent to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the attached object will come out through vomiting.
The sick person may swallow a piece of poppy seed, radish root, or a morsel of dry bread; or he may receive a soft piece of dried sea sponge: and tie it with thread, then let him swallow it. When it reaches the place where there are bones or teeth, and it is extracted, then it comes out.
If it does not come out as we have said: then use an instrument made of lead in this shape.
Let it be thicker than a radius, but smaller, and at its end let there be a hook that can easily enter the throat with convenience; and let him hold his head raised upwards.
And be careful not to touch the patient's epiglottis, so that he does not cough, and push with it the bone or spine, or the doctor may insert it with his hand.
However, what the sick person inserts himself is better: because of his knowledge of the place where the object is attached; and he pushes downwards, or pulls his hand with the instrument upward, all of it according to the size that is prepared for him, until it comes out.
Chapter on the Extraction of Leeches.
Head, XXXIX.
When a leech is treated with what was said in the division of cure with medicines, and it does not work, then consider in the throat of the sick person before the sun or after pressing his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
If therefore your sight falls upon a leech, extract it with a small hook or carefully with fine forceps.
If it is not possible with them (the hook or forceps): then take a concave cannula and insert it into the sick person's throat until near the throat; then insert into the concavity of the cannula a hot iron with fire. Do that often: and let the sick person abstain from water for the whole day.
Then let him take a mouthwash full of cold water, and open his mouth in it: and rinse his mouth with it, and swallow nothing from it; and move the water with his hand one hour after another. For a leech immediately falls when it feels water.
If it does not come out with what we have said, then fumigate the sick person with bedbugs or with the instrument that I spoke of for the fumigation of the bladder.
Do that often, because it (the leech) will fall by itself.
And the method of operation in fumigation is that you take a pot, in which are living prunes with fire; and let the pot be covered with a cover, in the middle of which there is an opening; and arrange the end of the instrument in that opening.
Then throw the fumigation, and let the sick person put his mouth at the end of the cannula, and close his mouth, so that the fumigation does not come out, until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech. For a leech immediately falls.
If it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation often.
Let the sick person bear thirst, and eat salty things and other things, and drink no water.
Therefore it is necessary that it (the leech) comes out with this treatment.
And this is the form of the instrument with which a leech is drawn from the throat, when it falls upon it while seen.
It resembles forceps, as you see, except that it has a curvature introduced into the throat. And its end is similar to the beak of a bird called the stork, which has the roughness of a file; when it seizes something, it does not let go entirely.
Chapter on the opening of abscesses, and their section, and care in general.
Chapter XL.
The species of abscesses are many, according to the recollection of them, that is, one and one in this book; and they are diverse in their perforation, and section from two kinds.
One of them is from the species of an abscess itself, and because it seizes from humors.
And the second method is due to places where it happens within the body.
Since an abscess occurring in the head is one thing, and an abscess occurring in the anus is another; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is one thing, and an abscess occurring in joints is another; and each of these has its own judgment according to the operation.
And of abscesses there are some which should not be perforated unless there is the ripening of pus in them, and its completion; and of these there are some which should be perforated while they are raw, and do not ripen according to their completion.
Such as abscesses which are near joints.
Because when an abscess occurs near a joint and is prolonged until it putrefies, what is around it is perhaps corrupted, the ligaments or that joint's nerves; therefore it is the cause of its closer contraction of that member.
The cyst is at the main part of the body: since if you delay its perforation until it matures, it will harm either him or through the main member.
It is near the anus; perforate it, therefore, while it is immature: for it is not necessary to perforate a raw cyst, which has not completed digestion, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not rot deeply and extend towards the interior of the anus, and become a fistula, or remain at its end which will not heal.
It is necessary that you know the hour of perforating the cyst, which has matured according to its completion; and it is at the stage of sedation of pain, recession of fever, diminution of redness, pulsation, and sharpness of the head of the cyst; and the other signs.
And it is necessary that you perform the same perforation at a lower position of the cyst, and of greater prominence: and the perforation should go in length of the body, if cysts are in the parts of hands and feet, and in places of arms, shoulders, necks, veins, nerves, arteries, and finally in all places where there is no reflection.
In those which are reflected, go with the perforation according to that member.
But when the cyst is in fleshy places: then it is better to delay its perforation until its digestion has consolidated, as we said according to its completion.
Since if you perforate it beforehand, the course of the virus from it is prolonged, and there are many filthinesses and dirtiness, and perhaps its edges harden, and its depth.
And some cysts are perforated according to the width of the body in necessity; or according to that which the member requires.
It is necessary that you administer a small perforation for small boils and a large one for large boils; or multiple incisions similar to the size of the boil.
In some boils, it is necessary to concave the skin; and to cut when it has become like a piece of cloth, and has reached a point that is already dead: as happens often with many, so that they burst, and with buboes.
And among them are those to be cut through an incision having three angles. And from these is one in which it is to be cut like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Like an inguinal boil.
And among them are those in which a round incision is administered, and a crescent-shaped incision; and similar to these from incisions.
But that one without a head, such as are soft superficial boils, it is necessary to perforate it with a superficial perforation or only flatly.
And it is necessary when the boil is large and has collected much pus, to perforate it so that it does not burst and you extract all the pus in that hour; rather, extract a part of it from it. Then press the boil until another day. Then extract something again from the pus.
Do this often according to gradation until it comes out; especially if the patient is weak in vigor, or a woman pregnant, or a small child, or an old man decrepitus; for the animal spirit is resolved many times with the discharge of pus; and perhaps the sick one dies, and you do not perceive.
Beware therefore that this chapter requires great caution.
And after your perforation of the boils, which you perform, it is necessary to clean the wound; and observe. If therefore the wound is small, or it is a plain incision, then administer linen lice or ancient cobweb. And if the wound is large and there are many perforations, then it is necessary to insert linen into each perforation until they meet.
And if you cut off a piece of skin in the wound or hollowed it out, then it is necessary to fill it with ancient cobweb, or as when cloth is sewn, or shorn with flaxen linen without moisture, and tighten it for three days.
Then throw it away, and care for it with whatever is necessary from the ointment until it heals.
If however there is bleeding during your operation hour, then administer cold water and vinegar, after which a cloth is soaked in them; and place it on the site of the bleeding many times.
If however the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer treatment, care and powders as I have described in many places of this book of ours, and from division.
If however it is winter time and the wound is in many nerves: then it is necessary to pour powder with wine and hot oil over them; and place them on the sites.
And if it is summer and the sites are fleshy: then it is necessary to place powder soaked in water, or oil, or with wine and oil, and everything should be cold. Until the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary to dissolve the wound, and wash it, and administer for its care whatever is suitable until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary universally regarding the treatment of abscesses.
According to the method of classification, as I have already said regarding every ulcer, here is the procedure for treating it individually.
Chapter XL. (Forty-first chapter)
Chapter on the incision of ulcers that occur on the head skin.
Small ulcers occur on the head skin and they are of the type of tumors enclosed by the membranes which resemble small pouches; as if they were engorged with fluid like a hen's pouch.
And their types are numerous.
Among them are the fat ones; and among them are those that contain moisture similar to clay; and among them are those that contain moisture similar to ointments and powders; and similar to these, and among them are those which are hard like stone.
And in incising all of them, and extracting them, there is no fear, as long as it does not create opposition to an artery during the incision.
And the operation in incising them is to explore it with an instrument whose shape comes afterwards, which is called Probe, until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it along the length with a superficial incision in this shape (circular).
And begin with a cut along line b to line g. Therefore when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off the scab that contains this moisture, and do not let anything remain deeply within it.
For many times it returns if something remains from it.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt; and fill up the wound with it, and let it remain until another day. For it corrodes what remains from the scab.
Then again on the wound with second Egyptian ointment, and third, and if necessary, until you trust that nothing remains from the scab, then take care of the wound with ointment, until it heals.
If an abscess contains a thick knot: then cut it according to this form, having the shape of a cross; and throw hooks between the angles of the cut, and scrape it from all sides; and try your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If, however, it opposes you an artery, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And the same procedure should be followed with an abscess that is stone-like, by cutting and treatment as described above.
The cut over a stone-like abscess is easier since there is less blood and moisture involved. There are sometimes such abscesses on the heads of some men that have no deep moisture within them.
This is because I have cut over an abscess on an old woman's head, and found the abscess to be like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken; and if anyone struck it with something to throw it away, it would injure itself.
In other kinds of boil-like conditions on the head, except for those boils occurring on children's heads and around the roots of ears, a section of all of them should be a superficial one.
Make a perforation of all of them always from the bottom part of them to alleviate the course of pus towards lower parts.
Then treat those with whatever is suitable for them in terms of treatment.
Chapter on the sectioning of goiters (swellings of the neck).
Chapter XLIX.
These boils occur frequently in the neck and under armpits, and sometimes in the groin; they may also occur in other parts of the body.
And on top of those that occur in the neck, there is one main swelling (goiter), and many smaller ones; they are generated around each other; every goiter among them is within its own layer, like knots and boils on the head as we previously mentioned.
The types of these goiters are numerous. They can be hard (stony), some contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones which do not obey treatment.
In the one among them which appears good, with a proper disposition, whose softness is close to the skin color and it moves throughout all parts and is not attached to the neck muscles, groin or arteries, nor deep; it must be cut out by superficial section from the upper part of the body to the lower part from the line b to the line g, scrape it off from every side, extend two flaps of skin with a scalpel or multiple scalpels if needed as we mentioned in boils on the head, and remove it gradually.
And be careful not to cut into a vein or a nerve.
And let the lancet not be very sharp: so that it does not cut your hand with the incision, or disturb the sick, and you cut what is not necessary.
If you cut a vein or artery, it prohibits you from performing the operation, then place in the wound alum powder or some powders that coagulate blood, and tie the wound, and leave it, until the sharpness of the abscess subsides, and the wound softens: or it begins to rot.
For blood is coagulated by a linen cloth, therefore return to your operation when you finish.
Then examine your index finger if there remains something from the Straphs (suture materials) or other small ones, therefore cut them and clean them.
If it is at the root of the suture material a large vein, then it is necessary that you do not cut the suture material from its root: instead you should tie it with a strong double thread and leave it until it falls off without damage.
Then fill the wound with an old cloth that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of yourself.
If the suture material is cut completely, then it is necessary that you gather the edges of the wound together and sew it immediately, after you see that there is no redundancy left.
If you see that there remains redundancy due to the size of the suture material, then it is necessary that you aim at cutting its root and pulling it out, and apply the suture as we have said.
And those from the suture materials that contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial perforation, so that the place of maturity appears to you: and place the perforation below that which follows the lower part of the body, as we have said.
Then administer after perforation linseed with ointment, and similar ones, to burn what remains from corruption, until when you see the wound already clean: then care for it with regenerative flesh ointment, until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
On a section of the epiglottis due to ulcer within the throat.
The ancients said this section of the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; and this is their writing.
However, in those with synanchias (a medical condition), the section of the epiglottis should be avoided; for there is no benefit in this, because all veins and lungs are weak.
In those who have a hot ulcer in the mouth, throat, or both tonsils, when there is no illness in the channel, it should be done with section of the epiglottis to prevent loss that happens from suffocation.
Therefore, when we want to do that, we should cut the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small section in width, at the place between two circles by amount, so it is a section in sifac (cartilage), not in cartilage; and this place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh, and blood vessels from it are distant.
If the doctor is fearful, then it is necessary that he spreads the skin of the throat with a hook. Then make an incision in the skin until when it reaches the channel; avoid blood vessels, if he sees something from them.
Then cut the sifac (cartilage) as we said; and it is indicated by the mucus that comes out of it, with what breaks off, and voice loss.
Let the open wound heal at some time.
When the feared putrefaction is removed, bring together two lips of the wound's skin and its flesh alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
Says Albucasis. This sums up the conversation we reported, it is not a treatment unless they see that one of these abscesses has already burst and the sick person's throat has opened: and he was raised from near death and wished to cut himself because of his shortness of breath: they go to cut the Epiglottis so that the sick person may breathe over the wound site with some breath, and be saved from death: and for this reason they ordered to leave the open wound until the malice of the illness is consumed, and the malice lasts three days as if it were itself: therefore, they then ordered to cover the wound and treat it until it heals.
And I myself have seen that a maidservant took a knife and sent it into her own throat, and cut a part of the windpipe.
And I was called to treat her, and found her gasping, as the gasp of the dead does.
So I uncovered [the wound] and found blood that had come out from the wound to be small. I was convinced then that she herself had not severed the vein nor the windpipe, and air was coming out of the wound.
I therefore approached her wound and treated it until she was well: nothing else happened to the maidservant except a hoarseness in her voice, and she returned after some days to a better state of health.
From this I say: there is no fear in cutting the Epiglottis.
On the operation for hernia of the throat.
Chapter XLIII.
This abscess called hernia of the throat, is a large abscess, according to the color of the body; and it is much more common in women.
It occurs in two ways: either it is natural or it is accidental.
In the natural, certainly it is not a birth defect.
The accidental one occurs in two ways; of which one is similar to fatty nodes. And the other mode is similar to an abscess that forms from a swelling of an artery. There is a fear in it, and it should not be presumed to cut with the iron unless in the part that is small; and you test it, and examine it with an instrument. If you find it similar to a fatty node and not suspended with any veins, then cut it, as knots are cut; and remove it along with what contains it from the cavity, if it is in the cavity; and if not, then examine the entire area. Then take care of the place with what is required for treatment until it heals.
Chapter XLV.
Chapter on the operation for nodes by position.
There are many kinds of nodes, and I have already said all their types in division; it is necessary that here I tell the difference between a Node and an Exitura: although causing doubt.
I therefore say that an Exitura is heat, fever and violent pains until the boiling of superfluity subsides and putrefaction is completed; then indeed the fever and heat subside.
A Node however is neither heat nor fever, nor pains; and it contains them with the kistis sifachin, which is their own proper sac, and it is according to the color of the body; and it is a beginning of them like a chickpea, and it forms like a grape, and larger or smaller.
And they are according to two kinds: either fatty; or containing moisture. The colors of the moisture are many, according to what I have said in division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a Node, it is necessary that you test it and examine it first with the instrument called Intromissum, according to the form its chapter which comes after this.
And the method of investigation of abscesses and nodes of all kinds is that you receive this instrument, and insert it into a more moist location that you find in an abscess; and you move your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then, finally, place your other hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then withdraw the Intromissum, and observe what comes out following its track.
If therefore moisture runs out with any color; then cut it off with a superficial section, according to what I have said in other abscesses.
And if moisture does not run out in the track of the Intromissum; then you know that it is fatty; cut off above it with a section shaped like a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you; and suspend it with hooks, and scrape the skin from all sides with ease; and guard the kistis if you can over it, in order to extract the healthy one with the node.
If a cyst is torn apart during the operation and it cannot be extracted whole since it often happens thus, then extract it piecemeal until something remains of it.
If something remains of it, whether little or much, a nodule returns most often.
If it defeats you and something remains of it little: then fill the wound at its completion with some corrosive sharp powders; and tie up the wound and place upon it what sits a hot boil, and take care of it along with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If therefore a nodule is large, then its two folds and treat it along with whatever incarnates in it.
If it is a pulsating vein or not pulsating facing you: then proceed and fill the place with zegi ground, and leave it bound for two or three days until the wound rots and the boiling of blood subsides; afterwards return to cut what remains from the nodule.
Chapter XLVI.
Chapter on external instruments for cutting and puncturing.
Of these there are forms of probes, and they are of three kinds.
Among them is the great one, among them is the medium-sized one, and among them is the small one.
Make them of square iron tips accurately, so that they may enter quickly into a boil.
And these are the forms of Experts and no (puncturing), and one of them is called beris, i.e., piercing, and they are of three kinds.
From them is great, and middle, and small.
They meet so that they can be incised, excised, or lanced, and drained of pus, and abscesses from the bone which is between them.
And others become round, smooth, soft, such as the large needleheads which are held in place with cement, namely, of glass or metal, iron, copper, or silver.
Those that are made of glass are superior among them.
And experiments are also made with black lead which meet so that they can test abscesses whose hollows have reflections to soften them along with those reflections.
There are again three types. Because there are long ones, medium ones, and short ones, according to the size of the abscess or narrowness of its opening.
The form of scoops, and they have many shapes.
Because there are simple ones, namely those which have one curvature; and they have three types as you see, large, medium, and small.
And among them there are blind scoops; and they also have three types.
And among them there are scoops having two curvatures; and they have three types: and among them there are scoops having three curvatures, and they also have three types; and all of these are necessary in their place.
These are the forms of scalpels with which knots and nodes are cut and incised; and they have three types because there is a large one, a middle one, and a small one.
The tips where a cut is made are sharp, the other ends are not; they are not placed thus except as an aid during the incision of knots near the fear of cutting a vein or nerve; and so that healing can take place, and the weak person may find some relief from the heat which he finds during the incision of abscesses.
They are made from copper and are similar to a rod, like when alcohol is made: and at the end it has a wide point, hidden punctum Spatumilis: and within it flows both towards the inside and outside as you wish, just as you see.
The shape of punctum Spatumilis hidden among the fingers for the perforation of boils: and the weak do not perceive them: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The shape of Ventosarum with which the flow of blood is cut off: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Make them from copper or citron, round, slightly shorter in length as you see, and make them delicate.
And it is necessary that these shapes of Ventosarum are with you large and small: to cut off blood quickly when needed, and then when medicine is not present with you.
Nevertheless, do not use them for the removal of blood in every part of the body, and do not use them unless in fleshy parts: such as the thighs, hips, arms, breasts, abdomen, groin, and similar to these, from fleshy moist areas.
And sometimes they are made into small instruments similar to the fists, according to their shape: with which blood is cut off when it flows from a location of phlebotomy, or incision of vein, or artery: and sometimes they are round, according to this shape.
Chapter LXVII.
Chapter on the care of human breasts resembling the breasts of women.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell during sleep (that is, when they begin to dirty in sleep): and remain postemous, filthy.
Whoever recoils from that, it is necessary to cut across the breasts with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this form from line b to line g. Then scrape off all the fat. Fill the wound with a ointment made of wax. Then bring two lips of the wound together with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
If the breast, however, hangs down towards the lower part and softens due to its size, as happens with women: then it should be cut in two on either side with two crescent-shaped incisions similar in shape, one contained within the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller, according to this form from line b to line g. Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what I have said about stitches and powders, which is necessary for healing, until it heals.
If you do not make the incision as required, because of the restlessness of the sick person, or due to bleeding: then fill the wound with a sterile linen cloth soaked in a corrosive ointment and leave it until it burns away what remains of the fat. Then care for it until it heals.
On the lancing of an abscess, which happens under a boil.
Chapter XLVIII.
These abscesses that occur under a boil are of the types of hard strobila containing cysts, and among them are those containing liquids.
Those that contain liquids should be cut with a crescent-shaped incision according to this form from line b to line g. When all that is in the abscess has been evacuated through pus, then fill it with a sterile linen cloth and leave it until another day.
Then remove the wound and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the boil is of the kind of Strophulus nodes, then cut it open as we said in the section on Strophulus equal cuts.
If the wound extends so that it discharges pus, then administer cautionery, as we said in what was mentioned earlier.
Chapter XLIX.
Section on the Boil which occurs due to an Artery and a Vein.
When the artery bursts and the skin above it becomes consolidated, a boil often occurs; likewise, a boil or swelling occurs in a vein as well.
And the signs by which it is known that a boil and swelling are due to an artery or vein are as follows: if the boil is due to an artery, it is long, aggregated in the deep body; and when you press the boil with your fingers, it feels as if there is a hissing sound.
And what is due to a vein is round on the surface of the body.
Cutting open such a boil is an error, especially if it is under the armpits, groins, neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very dangerous. Therefore, its care should be avoided with an iron, and it is especially necessary to avoid such treatment on the limbs or head.
On that which is due to the expansion of an artery opening, make a cut on the skin in length. Then open the incision with scissors, then the artery; and free it from tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert a probe under it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, as I taught you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
Then pierce the place that is between two ligaments with a lancet until blood that is within it all comes out, and the abscess is resolved.
Then administer a treatment that generates pus until the ligaments fall off; then take care of it with suitable ointments until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to a vein incision, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what is possible from the abscess with the skin. Then insert a needle under the place that you held with your hand and make it penetrate; let there be a double thread in it, until you pull it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess with a good ligament; as I told you before, in the ligament of the vein, from two parts with two ends, with threads.
If you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another needle with a new thread under the whole abscess near the incision; press and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle of it until what is within comes out; then cut off the excess skin and let go of what is tied from there.
Then place a poultice made of wine and oil on top of the wound that you have submerged. Then administer treatment with linen cloths and suitable ointments until it heals.
Chapter L.
Chapter: An abscess that occurs from the twisting of nerves.
As it happens with an aposteme in an Artery and a Vein, similarly it happens with an aposteme in Nerves: what happens to them by striking or laboring excessively, or similar causes: and it mostly occurs in places where there are joints, or heels, and in any place where the connections move: and the aposteme is severe.
Its color resembles the rest of the body and it is in various positions without pain: and when it is tightened with vehemence, it feels weak like dizziness in it.
And the aposteme is not gathered in the deep body, instead it is under the skin, and itself moves to every part, and does not reach the front or before, nor does it go back to the rear parts.
What is therefore at the joints, should not be invaded with iron. For perhaps it will happen that a contraction occurs.
But what is from them in the head or forehead, cut the skin with a lance. If therefore it is a small aposteme, then hold it with forceps and drain it from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and strip it; afterwards remove it, and sew the wound with stitches: and care for it until it heals.
[Chapter LXI.]
[Paragraph on removing an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.]
Certain people often have abscesses in their bellies and in other parts of their body, which are called Fungalias, similar to mushrooms.
Whose root is subtle, and their head is coarse, and their lips are turned inside out. And it is small from them; and there is one from them that grows very large.
And indeed I have seen a man whose belly had two abscesses that were like large mushrooms to other things: there was no difference between them, white with small roots and their lips turned inside out, drained and moisture ran out of them constantly.
I made an incision, and found one to weigh about X and VIII ounces, and the other about VI ounces. The operation in making an incision of these is that you should consider if the patient is weak and pale, and the color thin, moist, and tender: then make the incision with a broad lancet, and have cauteries ready in your presence.
For often blood is expelled during the incision: therefore be careful if the blood overpowers you, then cauterize it.
If you see a weak, afraid and timid person from the incision with iron, then take a well-made wire of lead, and bind it with it to the athelul: its method is as we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then add lead in the ligature. Therefore do not cease to tie lead, whenever it presses in a thin place, until it is separated and falls out by itself without effort.
But if the thin place is large-rooted, then there is something to fear and be afraid of in making an incision of it; especially because it is in the abdomen.
However, it is possible to make an incision in the middle of it. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then take care of it until the wound heals.
And be careful not to make an incision in a thin place that is of a dark color, with few senses and foul appearance; for it is a cancerous apostema; and I will come back later with the reminder of Cancer.
Chapter LII.
Chapter on the care of hernias of the umbilicus.
A hernia of the umbilicus arises from many causes. Either it comes out through a fissure above the abdomen, and an althub or intestine comes out, according to what happens in other ruptures. From the blood that flows from a vein, or from an artery, according to what has been mentioned previously. From the obstruction of flatulence in it.
If it is due to a hernia in the scrotum, and a discharge: then its color is similar to that of an abscess; and it is soft, without pain; and its location appears diverse. And if it is due to an intestinal protrusion, then its location, as we have stated, is of more violent diversity. Therefore when you press it with your fingers, it disappears; then it returns and perhaps there is a sound along with it; and it becomes greatly inflamed at the entrance of the bath and causes violent pain.
But if it is due to moisture, it is soft, then it does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor can it be compressed, nor does it increase in size.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs an abscess appears towards blackening from the heel.
But if it is due to a piece of flesh: then an abscess is heavy, large, hard and heals according to the size of one unit.
But if it is due to flatulence, then when touched it is soft.
And the operation in it is to examine then whether the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or flatulence; then it is necessary that you refrain from treating it. For there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I said abscesses due to an artery or vein.
But if the protrusion of the navel is due to an intestine or a tumor: then you must command the sick man, so that he holds his breath and stands still, extended. Then mark (the place) with hot wax around the whole umbilicus. Then command him to lie down on his back between your hands (on the back). Then circle with a broad spatula around the place that you have marked with hot wax. Then stretch open the wound with a large spatula (or probe) towards the top (of the body). Then bind him around with a strong cord or with a silken rope that is tightly knotted (tied) firmly: and let the knot of the binding be alienated.
Then open up the extended wound above the binding (ligament). If then you find that the man is already caught by the binding (ligament): Then extract the alienated, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the inner parts of the abdomen: And if you find a hernia, then take it with a hook, and cut off its superfluidity.
But if it is contrary to you (i.e., an artery or vein), then circle him very much. Then return to your surgery (procedure). And take two needles and insert into them two strong threads: and insert the two needles into the circle that you made around the wound in the form of a cross, making them penetrate (through).
Then stitch (close) the wound in four places over the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the place until the rotten flesh extends: and let it fall off by itself; or cut it when it becomes soft and rots.
Then take care of him with what is necessary from ointments, until he is healed.
But if the protrusion of the navel is from a cancerous flesh on him, or from moisture: then it is necessary that you excavate (the wound), as we have said. And extract blood or moisture that you find in him.
Then treat him yourself, with whatever solves the problem.
Chapter XXXIII.
On Cancer Treatment.
We have already discussed the types of Cancer and its method of treatment with medicines; it is to be cautious about treating it with iron, as it should not be cut: and we have said that Cancer originates in the matrix, and cautery should be avoided in its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes Cancer is in a place where it can be eradicated; such as Cancer which is in breasts or hips and similar limbs, to remove it entirely: particularly when it is beginning small.
When it becomes old and large, one should not approach it.
For I was unable to heal from it anyone; nor did I see anyone else before me who reached that point.
And the operation on it, when placed as we have said, is to precede and dissolve the weak from black choler several times. Then you will find the phlebotomy itself if there is a clear swelling.
Then prepare the weak with a preparation where it is placed during the operation.
Then insert the hooks that fit into the Cancer. Then hollow it out from all sides with the skin, according to examination, until there is nothing left of its roots: and allow the blood to run, and do not cut it quickly, but rather press the places, and remove all the thick blood with your hand or with whatever is possible there with instruments.
If the flow of thick blood from the cut artery or vein opposes you; then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
Chapter on the Care of Hydrophisis.
Chapter LIV. We have already discussed the types of Hydrophisis, how it accumulates water, and all its signs; and the treatment of it with medicines.
That which is treated with iron, is nothing but the appearance of an abscess alone: and it should not be approached with iron the appearance of a tympanic membrane: nor the appearance of hypodermis deeply: for that is fatal.
When you have already been treated for this appearance of hydropic tympanic membrane with medications, and it has not improved, then consider. If weakness has already come upon the sick person, or if there is another illness besides hydropic membrane, such as cough, diarrhea, and similar conditions: then beware not to treat it with iron, for it is dangerous.
If you see a sick person who has an excess of strength and there is no illness other than hydropic membrane, and he is not a child nor an old man: then there is room for treatment in him. You should lift the sick person standing between your hands, and after him a servant should press his abdomen with his hand, pushing water downward to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a sponge needle with this shape. Let it be of two sharp parts, long, with an acute tip like a sponge needle. However, there should be something of shortness in it, so that you do not pass through it completely during the operation to the intestine and harm it.
Then consider. If the hydropic membrane is generated from the part of the intestines, then it must be stretched by cutting off a length of three fingers below the navel towards the lower parts above the chest.
But if the generation of hydropic membrane is due to liver disease: then your cut should be on the left, three fingers below the navel.
And if the generation is due to the spleen, then the cut should be on the right side: and it is not necessary for the sick person to lie on the side over which the fluid flows, so as not to flow excessively to the weak place.
Then pierce through the entire skin with an instrument. Then insert the spatula into this incision and lift your hand with the spatula between the skin and tissue as if you are peeling it off; let the amount that is to be peeled be like a nail or approximately so.
Then pierce the tissue until the spatula reaches an empty place; there is water there. Then remove it (the foreign body), and insert an instrument of this shape into the opening. It resembles a cannula; it is made of silver, bronze or brass, linen, cleaned; on its lower part there is a small hole, and on each side there are three holes, two from one side and one from the other; the end of it is cut in the manner of a calamus incision, as you can see; at the upper end there is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches water, then it immediately descends upon the instrument; therefore let out from the water a quantity of an hour (approximately).
Because if you let out too much from it, the sick person may perhaps die due to the resolution of his vital spirit; or he may experience a syncopis approaching death.
However, let out from it according to its potency, and according to what the signs of the sick person's condition indicate to you, and according to his pulse and the quality of his condition.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
This is because it should be immediately retained due to the skin that closes the opening on the tissue, about which I have told you to pierce it in this manner.
Then insert the instrument again on the second day if you see that the sick person can tolerate it; and let out from the water a smaller quantity as well.
Do this for several days without fear, and be cautious to avoid error; until no water remains except a small amount.
If however you fear the patient and let him depart from much water: then care for him with burial in warm sand, and much sweating in a bath and sun, and wait for thirst: and care for him with dry medicines, until he is cured: and cauterize above the stomach, and spleen, after extraction of water: according to what I narrated in that which preceded.
On the care of infants who are born with their urinary passages not pierced.
Chapter LV.
When any infant is born from his mother's womb, and the head of the cord is not pierced, or the opening is narrowed, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore, assistance must be given with piercing it immediately upon birth, using a very sharp spatula in this manner:
Then place a thin nail made of lead into the wound and tie it; hold it for three or four days.
When he wants to urinate, remove it, and mix (it with something). Then return it.
And if you do not place the lead, now it is possible that the urine which flows over the place does not allow it to close.
But for one whose wound is narrowed, he is treated with lead, as we said, for many days until it becomes wider.
Those in whom the opening is not in its proper place are injured. Because from those who are born, the opening is at the end of the spine; therefore, he cannot mix toward the front until he lifts the spine with his hand to a higher place. It is not a generation for him because the seed cannot reach the womb according to correctness; and it is a very foul illness.
And the method of operation in this case is that the sick person lies on his back. Then extend the head of his spine with your left hand using a powerful extension and cut the head of the spine from the location of priapus, with a sharp point or chisel; similar to the incision of a reed, or like you root something, so that the middle comes out similar to the head of the spine; and let the opening fall in the center as necessary.
And beware during your operation of blood flow. This often happens. Therefore oppose him with what cuts the blood, and care for the wound until it heals.
Section on Albathar (inflammation) that occurs in the prepuce and head of the penis, and corruption, blackening, and adhering to.
Chapter LVI.
These Albathers frequently occur in the vein, and it is an eminence of foul-smelling flesh.
And from this there is one that is malignant, and one that is not malignant.
Therefore, it is necessary to hang up the non-malignant one with a fine hook and cut it off, until you clean it all. Then place a dish submerged in Egyptian ointment on it. Then treat the wound itself with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.
If the Albather is malignant and of a foul color, then it is necessary to administer cautery after its incision and its excision.
If however the Albather is on a male slave's foreskin, not circumcised, and part of the Albather is inside the foreskin and part outside: then it is necessary to remove the Albather that is inside first, until it solidifies, then treat the exterior. Because when you treat it at the same time, the foreskin will not heal unless it bursts open.
And they also occur in the testicles, and a darkening and decay of the foreskin. Therefore, it is necessary to hollow out everything that has already turned black and what is about to rot or is already rotten.
Then apply linen over it after that with honey that has been beaten with flour and grated bark of walnut trees, and sieved herbs of the mill.
Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If there is a flow of blood, then administer cautery with lunar cautery in this shape.
For cautery is useful for two purposes at the same time, that is for a flow of blood, and for a wound when it is injured.
If the head of the vein is corroded and destroyed completely within an hour: then it is necessary to insert a cannula made of lead into the penis to mix weak urine on it.
In a real attachment of the foreskin to the head of the gland, and this attachment indeed occurs only in one who has a healthy foreskin and circumcision is not required: and sometimes an attachment occurs due to a wound or an abscess: therefore it is necessary to scrape off the scab with a blunt spatula until the ligament dissolves and the head of the gland is released from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish it precisely, then it is necessary to scrape off something from the head of the gland and from the foreskin. Because when the foreskin is thin, it may be perforated quickly on account of its thinness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the gland with a thin linen cloth that has already been made wet in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
Then it is treated with wine of cedar until it solidifies.
Chapter LVII.
On the purification of infants and their treatment due to errors that may happen to them.
Circumcision is not a solution to continuity, like other wounds; but since it comes from our operation, and its use is specifically for boys, it is necessary to mark it with a better sign and a lighter way leading to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their books; because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have learned through experience.
Because I found that most craftsmen and phlebotomists use purification by cutting with a knife or forceps; they use ligation with thread, and incision with the nail.
And I myself have already proven all these methods, and I did not find a better purification with forceps or ligation with thread.
Since in excision with a scalpel, the skin often escapes. Since the prepuce has two layers of skin, it is perhaps cut through the upper layer and the lower layer is spared; therefore it is necessary to make another incision, and pain will result. And when excision is done with the awl, that is, the thumbs, which shoemakers use, the extremity of the male member is not cut through; since it may enter its opening.
However, when excision is done with the nail, perhaps iron slips out and ruins your operation; since a child's skin is short by nature, and it often happens that such cases do not require excision; indeed I have seen this happen myself.
Furthermore, when excision is done with scissors and a ligature with thread, I discovered a good experiment for you; because scissors are proportionate to the incision, so the sharpness above is like the sharpness below. Therefore when you press your hand, the two sharpnesses correspond to each other and cut according to one operation at the same time; and a compression similar in shape occurs, containing the skin of the rod on all sides with which no mistake can occur at all.
And the method of your operation is that you should hold the boy, if he understands a little, so that you do not bind the thread on his rod unless you only tie it; and leave him until another day.
Then make him happy and cheerful in every way possible for you, from the fact that he receives his intelligence. Then make him stand between your prepared hands and not be seated; and conceal the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all nor anything of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into its sheath, and blow on the skin, and draw it upwards until the head of the arrow emerges. Then clean it thoroughly from any dirt that accumulates upon it.
Then bind the marked place with double thread. Then bind it a little lower with another ligature. Then hold it with your index finger, and with the thumb retain well the lower ligature, and cut between the two ligatures. Then lift the skin up quickly, and extract the head of the arrow. Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better); and put powder on top of it; and above the powder place a cloth in which a cooked lamb's lung boiled in rose water has been spread out, crushed with fresh good olive oil; and let it remain on it until the next day; and take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning is as follows.
Let them have two ends pointed, and let them be curved; so that the branch of the nail does not come out in them; and let the length of the points be equal to the length of two handles equally.
But an error occurring during cleaning is when the entire inner skin or part of it escapes at the incision.
Therefore, you must stretch it out with your nail from your hour before the excision of the place, and cut it equally.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a tweezers, and cut it.
If three days have passed and there remains what is inflamed under the arrow, at the site of the incision; then let it be, until the abscess settles down warm, and scrape off that area easily, and cut it according to how you prepare yourself; and take care not to touch the head of the arrow. That will not hurt him.
Treat that with it, as it heals the wound with the powders which we have mentioned in the treatise on powders: and if it is cut deeper than the measure and goes to the inner parts, it does not hurt him even then.
Treat it with that until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
On the extraction of a retained bladder stone.
Retention of urine in the bladder, occurs from a blockage made by stone, frozen blood, pus, flesh born, and similar things from those which we mentioned in the mode of treatment division.
And if the urine does not resolve and you see that its retention is due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary that he be weakened on his knees bent. Then place his feet on his back, and he should extend his abdomen from the upper part of his back, and he should strain as much as possible for him to breathe weakly. Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is compelled towards expulsion of the stone, the urine is released.
If it does not resolve as we said and the pain is strong over the weak one: then it is necessary to administer extraction of him with the instrument called syringe, whose form is as follows: It should be made from silver, and be thin, flexible, concave like a feather quill in delicacy, long like the palm of one hand and middle: to which there should be a thin cannula at its head.
And the method of urine outlet through it is that you receive a double thread and tie at its end wool or cotton, good binding: and introduce the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut if there is excess wool with scissors, but introduce into the cannula with force, as one pulls.
Then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and beeswax: and make the weak one sit on a chair, and warm the bladder and his member with moist oils and olive oil, and warm water.
Then introduce the syringe into the member with ease, until it reaches the root of the member.
Then double it from above the navel part.
Then push the syringe into it until it reaches the bladder and feels weak that it has reached an empty place: this is not done according to this order unless because the channel through which it passes is where there is a twist.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. Wool will follow the vein.
Then draw it out and make the vein run through the urine way: then repeat the syringe, and do not stop doing that until the bladder is emptied, and the weak alleviation is found.
Section on the quality of clysterization of the bladder with a syringe.
Chapter LIX.
When a wound occurs in the bladder or blood freezes within it or pus collects and there is a desire for distilled waters and medications to be poured into it: then let it be done with the instrument called Clepshydra, and this is its form.
It (the instrument) is deaf, that is, closed. And within it there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And there shall be a concave place where that which drives it is situated, according to its capacity without addition, until when something is drawn out with it, it is attracted by humidities; and when it is pushed, whatever is expelled with it goes far away: this is how the clepshydra works, from which naphtha, that is, Greek fire, is thrown in the battles of Mars.
When there is a desire to pour waters into the bladder, introduce the end of the clepshydra into the water and draw out with it what pushes it upwards; for humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clepshydra.
Then introduce its end into a rod, as we have described in a syringe. Then push the water with it, for indeed the humidity reaches the bladder immediately, so that the weak one feels it.
The form of a subtle enema to cleanse the bladder.
Let it be made from silver or brass; its head shall be higher like a syringe with a small cavity below where a ligament can fall.
Then take the bladder of a sheep and put water into it for cleansing the bladder. Then tie it with a strong thread between two cavity ligaments, and heat the water a little over the fire.
Then insert the end of the clyster in the vein, afterwards bind your hand over the bladder with a suitable amount of damp string, until the weak one feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If there is no bladder present for you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it completely from all its roundness. Then insert a thread into those holes as they are rolled up. Then gather the circle as glue is gathered; once you place within it what you wish from humidities, oils, and waters.
Then tie it up in the instrument; make it as you did with the bladder by pressing it with your hand until moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Chapter on Stone Extraction.
We have said about the types of stones, their treatment with medicines, and their differences between a stone generated in kidneys, bladder, or urethra; we have also explained the operation and section for that stone, and it is a stone generated specifically in the bladder; the one formed along the vein; I am now telling this with clear explanation and abbreviation.
Therefore, a stone generated in the bladder most commonly occurs in children.
And among its signs is that urine exits from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears within it as white sand, and the weak one scratches his vein, and struggles with it, and often hangs down. Then it becomes erect and exits together with it (the anus) in many of them.
And the healing of children is easy up to the age of fourteen years. It is difficult in old people. In young people it is medium [degree of difficulty], because it is between that which is difficult and that which is easy. And if the stone is larger, treatment is easier; but if it is small, the treatment is reversed.
When we arrive at the treatment stage, it is first necessary to cleanse the sick person with an enema, which draws out all the feces that are in their intestines; for sometimes it prevents the discovery of a Stone during examination.
Then the sick person should be taken with their feet and shaken and moved towards lower parts: so that the Stone may descend into the depth of the bladder or rise up from a high place several times.
Then make him sit with his hands in yours, and his hands should be under his hips, so that the bladder becomes completely empty towards lower parts.
Then examine him externally and touch him.
If you feel a Stone in the space, then immediately approach it with incision.
If it does not fall under your touch completely, then you must press the index finger with oil from the left hand if the sick person is a boy; or the middle finger if the sick person is an adult man; and insert it into his anus, and examine for the Stone, until it is under your finger; and gradually move it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger and push it out towards the outside towards the incision site; and order the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and order another assistant to extend the testicles of the right hand upwards, and with the other hand remove the skin that is under the testicles in the part where the incision is.
Then introduce a Spatula cutting instrument whose shape is like this. And find it (the Stone) between the anus and testicles, not in the middle, on the left side; and make the incision above the Stone, and your finger should be in the anus; and make the incision transverse, so that the incision is wide externally and narrow internally, according to the amount by which the exit of the Stone from it should not be larger.
Perhaps the finger, which is in the anus, compresses a stone during a cut, and it comes out without difficulty.
And know that from the stone there are angles and edges, which is why its exit becomes difficult because of this.
And it is soft, like a gland, and round; hence, its exit becomes easy.
To that which has angles and edges, add in a fissure.
If it does not come out in this manner, then you must apply pressure on top of it; or twist it correctly, with the end resembling the moon, which will press on the stone and not escape from there; or insert an instrument beneath it, with a curved tip.
If you cannot apply pressure on it, then enlarge the opening slightly. If something restrains you due to blood, cut it with a saw.
But if the stone is larger than one, then push on it primarily towards the bladder bone. Then cut into it (the stone). Afterwards, push a little one after that; and do the same if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then ignorance is to cut through it with a large incision. Since it happens to the weak that one of two things occurs, either death or constant discharge of urine; this is because the location does not consolidate at all.
But administer its expulsion until it comes out; or apply pressure on the fracture of it with forceps until you extract it piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with turpentine, aloe, and dragon's blood; bind it up; place over it a cloth soaked in oil or wine, or rose oil, and cold water; so that the boil may settle down warmly.
Then turn the patient over on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. As you loosen him, apply olive oil and water to the place.
Then treat him with dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until he is healed.
If however there is a hot abscess added and corrosive, and similar things: as if blood congeals in the bladder and urine is forbidden from it; and it is known that this is recognized by the exit of blood with urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood. For if it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder, and its putrefaction.
Then clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and apply to it every kind of remedy that is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And during the entire period of treatment, it is necessary to tie two legs together and bind them, because of the medicaments that are placed on the place.
If the stone is small and it is in the intestine and it pierces it and prevents the exit of urine: then treat him with what I mentioned earlier before you reach the incision. For often, by this treatment, you are excused from the incision; for I have already proven that.
And it is to take Perforatorium from the iron anvil, whose form is triangular at its end, sharp and fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie it to the rod under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the rod with ease until the Perforatorium reaches the stone; and turn the Perforatorium in your hand gradually on the same stone; and you compress its perforation until it makes it penetrate from the other side.
Urine is immediately discharged.
Then press your hand on the remaining part of the stone from the outer side of the vein. For it is broken and comes out with urine, and the sick one is healed.
If this treatment is not prepared for you for some reason that prevents it: then tie a thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut across the vein above the stone between the two ligatures. Then extract it (the stone). Afterwards, untie the ligature, and clean the frozen blood which forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread under the stone unless to prevent its return to the bladder: and another ligature above, unless so that when the thread is untied after the stone's exit, the skin returns to its place, and covers the wound: and for this reason, it is necessary for you when you tie the thread above, to loosen the skin towards the higher parts, so that it returns near the wound's edge, and covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
Chapter on the extraction of stones in women.
Insufficiently formed stone (precipitate/stone) in women.
If however it happens to any of them a stone (precipitate/stone), then its cure is difficult, and it is forbidden due to the many modes (complications).
One of them is: that the woman perhaps is a virgin.
And the second one is, because you do not find a woman who reveals herself to the doctor when she is chaste or married women.
The third one is, because you do not find a woman well-versed in this art, particularly the operation with the hand.
And the fourth one is, distance from the place of the stone: it necessitates deep incision, and there is fear involved.
If necessity forces [you] to this, then it is necessary that you take a woman-physician who knows well: and such are few found.
But if you are deprived of this [option], then seek a chaste physician, skillful, and a woman-midwife well-versed in matters regarding women, or a woman who is acquainted with the part of the art (surgery): make her present, and particularly advise her to do everything that you command her based on the investigation about the stone.
Firstly, that it is to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary that you insert your finger into her anus and search for the stone.
If he finds it [the stone], then grasp it with his finger and then command the midwife to insert her finger into the weak part (vulva) and search for the stone after she places her left hand on the bladder and compresses it with a good pressure.
If he finds the stone, then it is necessary that he moves it gradually from the bladder's opening towards lower parts with all his strength until it reaches the root of the hip bone.
Then cut above it at the opposition of the middle part of the wound near the root of the hip, from whatever side it is prepared for him, and feel stone in that place; and his finger shall not be moved away from the stone, bending under it; and let the section be small in the first place. Then insert a ray over that section.
Then insert a ray over that section. If he feels stone, then add to the section according to the quantity proportional to the stone as it exits from there.
And know that the forms of stones are many. For from these one is small, and large, smooth and rough, long, and round with branches.
Know its form, so that it may be indicated to you concerning what you want on that.
If blood conquers you, then add at the place crushed pumice and hold it for an hour until the blood is separated.
Then return to your work until the stone comes out; and make sure you prepare yourself with instruments, which I said for the removal of stones in men, to assist you in your work.
If the flow of blood conquers you and you know that expulsion of blood is from an incised artery; then place powder on the place and tie it with a suitable ligature; do not remove it; and let the stone remain, and do not extract it. Perhaps a woman weak will die. Then take care of the wound.
And when the sharpness of blood subsides after days and the place becomes rotten, then return to your work until the stone comes out.
Chapter LXII.
Section on a watery hernia.
The translation is: "A watery growth is not anything but an accumulation of moisture in the white scrotum, which is beneath the skin of the testicle; and it is called the scrotum.
"Sometimes it is within its own pouch which nature has prepared for it in the part of the scrotum until it is considered ripe; this is another egg, and it is the skin of the testicle between the white scrotum, which we have mentioned; it does not happen often.
"Certainly, the generation of this (growth) is from weakness that happens to the testicles; therefore, this material flows towards them. "Sometimes it happens as a result of a blow on the testicles.
"This moisture has many colors. "For indeed, its color is either yellowish-green, or bloody red, or foul black, or watery white, and it is this one that is more.
"And the signs by which it is known where there is an accumulation of water are these. "For if it is in the white scrotum as we have said, then it is an abscess that is round and smaller in length like the figure of an egg; and the testicle does not appear because moisture contains it from all sides.
"And if the moisture is within its own pouch, then it is an abscess that is round with part of the egg; and therefore a man becomes inflamed because it is another egg.
"And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, then it falls under suspicion.
"When you wish to know the color of the moisture, then experiment with the color of the moisture in an abscess with a probe inserted whose shape has been described before. "Therefore, according to what exits in the track of the probe, judge about this that is within it.
When therefore we come for treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you command the sick one, to be bled if it is possible for him, and see his body full.
Then he shall lie on his back on a raised bed slightly, and place many cloths under him.
Then you sit on the left of him, and command the servant to sit on the right, who extends his rod to one side of two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the scrotum.
Then take a broad probe and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length, up to near the comb: and make the incision according to the straight line dividing the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white lining enclosing it: and scrape it and observe it, or be careful not to cut it: and your scraping should be on the part which hangs more with the egg: and examine carefully with the scraping according to the amount that is possible for you.
Then perforate the scrotum full of water with a wide bore, and drain all the water out.
Then separate the edges of the incision with scissors, and stretch the scrotum upward, and do not touch the skin surrounding the testicles: and cut the scrotum as you are able to cut it, either entirely or in pieces, particularly the thin side. For if you do not examine and inspect carefully, there is no certainty that water will not return in the incision.
If however an egg comes out from its skin externally during your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the scrotum, return it. Then gather together the edges of the skin of the testicles with suture.
Then care for him as you would any other wound, until it heals.
If you find an egg corrupted by another blackness, then it is necessary that you tie vessels, which are supports, fearing blood flow.
Then remove the testicle with its support, and extract the egg; afterwards care for it with what I said.
But if water is gathered in two parts, then you know that there are two branches; therefore cut the other part equally according to what you did in the other one.
And if it is equal for you so that the operation is one, then do it; afterwards remove the blood. And insert into the incisions a wool soaked in oil or rose oil; and place another wool that you have immersed in vinegar and oil on the outside and spread it over two testicles, and inspect the intestines; and place on top double cloths, and they are small pillows; and tie them above with a cord that has six knots according to this shape.
Then take two cloths, let them be washed and filled with carmine dyed linen, as follows: make the ends that are pressed by the iron or wet wool; and join them with a binding at the loins; and one end should reach from the anus to the back, and the second should reach from the neck part; and the two ends below should be on the lower legs, and the other two ends above on the thighs; and bind the whole binding at the loins of the arms.
And sometimes this branch is artificially treated with a cautery at the site of the section with iron; and there is a need for you to receive a sharp surgical cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles with it; and it should be ignited, as we have said, until when the white fat containing water appears; then take the cautery, as follows.
The letters are assimilated to Greek ones.
Then, pierce it along with that sifac and set it alight until all the moisture has exited.
Then, stretch the sifac with forceps and scorify it with a fine cautery heated, and cut it as much as possible for you, until you have completely removed all of its root.
And beware of the egg, lest fire touches it.
And know that this operation is safer, and more distant from bleeding, and better than the operation with incision.
But if this opposes you at the time of incision or cauterization, or a boil, or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary that you take care of what opposes you from that with a treatment suitable for it, according to what was previously mentioned.
But if the sick person is timid and does not await this operation due to its horrible nature: then administer perforation according to what I told you, and it is done.
When you are certain about it through what we have said about the meanings that the ramik is watery, then it is necessary for you to make the sick person sit on a raised seat.
Then, pierce the boil in its lower part with a wide spatula: and position the perforation along the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until water runs out completely.
Then place it on a heated surface and tie it up, and allow the remaining water to drain: then take care of it until the wound heals.
But if there is an obstacle to the discharge of water at the time when you pierce it, and this is not due to anything other than that a white membrane opposes in the opening of the wound and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary to introduce a feather or instrument for extracting water from hydropic lesions, whose shape was previously mentioned, or add to the operation of the wound a little.
And know, that water returns and gathers again after six months, approximately. When it has gathered (again), then it should be perforated in the same manner, and the sick days will pass through.
Chapter LXIII.
Chapter on the treatment of fleshy branches (or sprouts).
Know that, in a section over this Rhamic, it leads to danger in many positions. Therefore it seems suitable for its removal from there.
And I am recalling the operation in that and the appearance of the excision.
I say therefore, that many abscesses happen in the bodies, from which testicles are composed; and this is due to various causes.
Or by excessive acidity or sharpness which flows towards the testicles. Or by striking.
And the color of an abscess is according to the color of the body and it does not find pain; and an abscess is heavy.
And perhaps it is a stone abscess, whose color is dark and it has no sensation.
And sometimes it happens from the swelling of the arteries and their expansion; as already mentioned its recall went before; or from the swelling of the veins.
What is therefore from the expansion of the arteries can be known by the position of the abscess, when you compress it with your fingers. And it is not necessary to touch it completely.
But what happens from the swelling of the veins does not discharge anything at the compression with the fingers.
And now it is possible that this shape can be sectioned and on the other parts of the flesh; and it is, to cut the skin of the testicles. Then stretch the egg upward and extract it along with the sifach white; release the suspenders from the bladder, and tie the bladder; and cut the suspender after you have released it from every part of the egg.
If the egg is solidified with those born flesh, then it is necessary to draw out the egg and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion between something from the sifach or within what is between the bladder; then it is necessary to release the entire adherence and cut it with a circular incision.
If it is a birth of flesh at the site of adherence which is behind: then it is necessary that you cut through the whole of it and extract the egg, as we have said.
When your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; afterward, take care of it with the remaining cure until it heals.
Chapter LXIIII (62nd chapter).
Chapter on the Care of Ramics (Ramie), which is related to Vine.
An abscess enclosed by some enclosure, resembling a gourd, with the softening of testicles is caused by the vine; and it makes difficult movement, exercise, and walking for the weak.
And in the care of this illness, there is fear due to the memory of what preceded it.
However, it is necessary that we say the operation in it according to what the first ones did.
I say therefore, that you should make the weak sit on a raised seat. Then push the suspender of the testicles downwards. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with reeds that are near the rod; and let another servant hold it, and stretch it with strong tension.
Then cut with a broad, sharp scissor-like instrument across the length of the vessels, until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape off from all sides, as I told you regarding the extraction of Arteries that are in the temples.
Then place a needle with double thread in them and tie it at the first places where the vines occur; and tie it again at the last of those places. Then cut them in the middle crosswise along the length of the body, and extract what accumulates from corrupted foul moisture.
Then care for the wound with treatment of other wounds, where pus is generated, so that vessels which nourish one testicle fall. It is not bad through that (method).
If however it happens that the grapes have rotted in all the vessels, then it is necessary to extract the testicles with the vessels, so as not to deprive them of their nutrition through the incision, and for them to rot or burn, and not be useful with them.
Chapter LXV.
Chapter on the care of internal herbs.
The outgrowth of this internal herb occurs from a section that happens in the siphax stretched over the abdomen in the inguinal part of the liver.
Why do the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles? And this rupture is either from the siphax or its extension.
These two types occur from many causes: either by striking, jumping, shouting, lifting a heavy object, and similar things.
And the sign is when it is due to the extension of the siphax. It occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly; it is an abscess equal in depth to the direction; therefore, because the siphax compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it when it is due to the section of the siphax, because it causes a violent pain suddenly from the beginning; and it is an abscess different, appearing close to the skin: this is due to the exit of the intestine, and its course towards the exterior of the siphax.
And sometimes it exits with the intestine, called the internal herb and the siphax; and sometimes it occurs with diarrhea.
And sometimes feces run into the intestine and are retained there; it is a danger for the sick person because it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
In the treatment of this condition's symptoms with iron, there is fear; therefore, care must be taken to avoid mishaps in it.
The method of operation is to command the sick person to place their own intestine back into the concavity of their abdomen, if they obey. Then he shall lie on his back upon his neck between your hands; lift up his legs.
Next, extend the skin that follows the skin towards the upper part and cut the entire skin of the testicles along its length. Next, fasten the hooks of the incisions on two lips of the incision, as much as you need to open the incision with them; and the incision should be according to the quantity that is possible, so that the egg may come out from it.
Then scrape the scrotum, and whatever is under the skin of the testicles until the scrotum album is hard from all sides; then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, into what is between the scrotum album, which is below the egg's skin, and between the scrotums according to it, and without the adherence that is in the back part of the egg.
Then move with your right hand to the inner skin of the testicles; and at the same time, stretch the scrotum album upwards with your left hand; and lift the egg with the scrotum album towards the part of the incision; and command the attendant to extend the egg upward; and you loosen the adherence that is behind the complete solution.
And search with your fingers if there is nothing there from the intestine rolled up in the hard scrotum album. If you find something from it, then push it down to the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of linen from ten threads; and insert it at the last scrotum, that is, the membrane beneath the skin of the testicles following the incision; then cut the ends that project from the thread until there are four threads. Then compose some of them over others with a figure in the shape of a cross, and bind them with alsifach, which is under the strong ligament of the testicles, until no fluid from the vessels that nourish them can pass to them; so that no hot boil may occur there. Then position another ligament beyond the first one, at least two fingers away from it. And after these two ligaments, let two ligaments of sifach, which is under the skin of the testicles, be removed in quantity equal to the size of a digit; and then cut the rest completely in round shape, and remove the egg from it.
Then, on the lower part of the scrotal skin where blood and pus run, make an incision as we have previously said.
Then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the ligament as we have said. And sometimes cauterize the white sifach that was mentioned after making an incision, to prevent bleeding. This often happens. Leave the ligament until it falls off by itself.
If the case does not heal on its own, then embrocate with hot water; and place on it what was said before until it falls off.
Then care for the wound as is the treatment for wounds, until it heals.
Chapter 66.
Chapter on the Poultice of the Ram.
In this poultice of the ram, I have not seen anyone who dared to treat it with iron.
And first they said that it is made as previously described in the poultice of the vine. This is to bind the vessels after cutting them at a lower level; then cut it in the middle, and later heal it with what opens it, until the vessels fall out; and care for the wound as previously said, until it heals.
"Chapter LXVII.
"On disruption which occurs in the groins.
"When rupture occurs in the groins, as we have said, and there is a protrusion of the location that does not extend to the testicles from the intestines; but if it does extend, it is slight, and returns in all hours: however, if this condition persists with the same time, a tear is added in the scrotum, until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
"And this occurs from the extension of the scrotum, which is in the groins, as we have said. "What happens is that the scrotum extends; then it becomes softened, the location is pressed out.
"And the care for this is with cautery, as was previously mentioned in its narrative.
"And sometimes it is cured with iron, according to this method: and it is as if the weak person lies on his back between your hands. "Then cut the location of the rupture and the protruding part with a section across its width, according to the size of three fingers.
"Then tie the scrotum and, what is beneath the skin, until the white part of the scrotum that follows it is revealed.
"Then take a probe and place it on the protruding part from the scrotum and press it deep into the abdomen.
"Then make two protruding parts at the end of the radius from the scrotum and connect them with a suture; then remove the end of the radius.
"And do not cut the scrotum at all, nor stretch the testicle, nor anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal branches.
"Then treat this with wound healing. "When you make a cut, clean it and restore the wound until it heals.
Sisach is contracted and no eminence is added for Rupture.
And the cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
Chapter on softening the scrotal skin.
The skin of the testicles is frequently softened in some men, due to which the meats between them become soft and its appearance is spoiled.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who asks for its cure to make the weak person lie on his back, and to cut the entire skin that has been softened over the natural skin.
Then gather two flaps with stitching: and if you wish, or preferably, remove the excess of the softened skin with three or four stitches, and make a firm stitch.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then take care of the healing of the remaining wounds until they heal and the thread falls off.
Chapter LXIX.
Section on castration.
Know that castration is forbidden by our law; and because of this it would be permissible for me not to remember it in my book; and the memory of it is not necessary unless for two reasons.
One reason is that this should be known by the physician when questioned about it; and so that he may know the cure for one to whom it happens.
And another method is that we often require castration of certain animals, for our benefit through it, such as rams, hogs, cats, and similar ones among animals.
Therefore I say, Castration is done according to two methods. Or by attrition. Or by making a cut and division.
In the one that is done by attrition, the method of operation is this: that we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and become tender, and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and are not noticeable when touched.
In the castration by making a cut and division, it is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then bind the glands and cut above all of the eggs with a single section until when two eggs come out: then cut those where you have scraped off the skin from both, and do not leave anything on them except the membrane that is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one by attrition: because attrition perhaps leaves something from the testicles, for which reason the animal desires coitus.
Then take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter LXX.
Chapter on the care of hermaphrodites in two methods.
Hermaphroditus from males is according to two modes. One of them is when it appears in him that follows a gap or in the skin of the testicles, in what is between two testicles, with the figure as if it were a female vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine runs out from what is in the skin of the testicles.
In women there is one kind and it is the female wolf on the forehead like small male testicles protruding to the outside; one of which is like Priapus in a man, and two like two male testicles.
The treatment for the three kinds, two from men and one from women, is as follows: because it is necessary to cut the added flesh until the impression of them escapes. Then treat these wounds with the remedies for other wounds.
For the second kind of men's species, from which urine comes out, which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is any treatment for it at all.
Chapter LXXI.
Section on the incision of tentigo (itch) and protruding flesh in women's ulcers.
Itch is perhaps added to what is natural until it becomes ugly and its appearance is disfigured; and sometimes it grows so much in some women that it expands like in men and reaches as far as intercourse.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold the excess itch with the hand or with a tweezer, and to cut; not too deep in cutting, especially in the root, so that there is no bleeding.
Then treat this with the remedies for wounds until it heals.
Flesh that arises is the flesh that is born in the opening of the womb until it fills it; and perhaps it comes out to the outside like the tail, for which reason some call the disease tail-like. Therefore, it is necessary to cut this as one cuts an itch and treat it until it heals.
Section on the treatment of alratic ulcer, which is a female wolf that has not been pierced through.
Chapter LXXII.
The arterial vessel of a woman should not be pierced, or it should have a small hole. It is either natural, or it is accidental.
It is accidental due to the preceding illness; it occurs either from flesh born along with it, or thin, or thick; and it takes place in the deep of the womb, or in its sides, or above it, or below it; it forbids coitus and impregnation, parturition, and possibly menstruation.
Its recognition is made by the observation of an obstetrician, if the opening is apparent nearby.
If it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers, or with a rod.
If the opening is from thin flesh and is close to two lips: then press it, and break it apart.
It is as if you put two small pills on top of the lips.
Then place your index fingers of both hands simultaneously, and let the woman be above her back with her legs spread out. Then stretch the two lips forcefully until the thin flesh is torn and the opening is opened.
Then take wool and dip it in oil, and place it on the spot; let the woman sit on it every day to prevent the location from being closed by another thing.
If the flesh is thick and hard: it is necessary that it be cut with a broad, flat leaf of myrtle.
If the opening is from flesh born along with it: then hang it with hooks and cut it; have with you medicines that stop blood flow without cutting, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and resin of onion mixed with egg white.
Then administer a large cannula made of lead to prevent the wound from closing quickly; hold it for several days; then apply linen cloth, then treat the rest with healing, until it is healed.
And sometimes birth occurs in the matrix of other flesh: therefore it is necessary that they be cut as follows: while it is not a cancerous aposteme, for the aposteme which is in the matrix is not at all contrary to iron.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil and Bothor concerning redness in women's private parts.
Hemorrhoids indeed are an opening of the veins' orifices, until much blood continuously flows out from them.
Since therefore hemorrhoids become hardened, they become piles: and I have already said in the division of their types, and the signs of them; and here I will say what receives treatment from them, and what does not.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids which are in the matrix's opening and do not appear to the senses: then there is no treatment with iron for it.
But those which are on the matrix's opening over which falls the sense, are those which can be treated.
Therefore it is necessary that you introduce a woman into a cold house. Then Athehelil spreads out with forks, or with a rough cloth, and cuts them from their roots.
Then powder over them at the flow of blood from one grinding stone without crushing it: such as ashes of oak, dragon's blood, and pitch, and similar things.
Then push his feet against the wall for an hour. Then put her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then have her sit in a decoction of sumac, and pomegranate bark, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and knead it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on his back.
If therefore blood is cut with it (the instrument), it is good: and if not, let adhesive plasters be applied to the back and nipples, without making an incision.
Then take linen and dip it in the juice of tarathit or arnoglossa or aglanter, that is, elm bark, Pontic wine, and apply it as an adhesive.
When therefore the abscess has ceased to be active, then treat the spot with ointments until it heals.
Albareth (Albucasis) is red and resembles the heads of al-hassa, and it has a rough appearance.
Therefore, it must be cut away as I mentioned before in the text on thelesion, and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter LXXXIV.
Chapter on Perforation of the Expelled Fetus in the Womb.
In the womb many types of abscesses occur, such as cancer, stone abscess, ulcers, adubelas, alekilas (herpes), fistulas, hemorrhoids, ragadias, thylili, and hot abscesses.
And I myself have already said all these diseases and their types, their signs, and their treatments in another book: it is necessary that I say here about the hot abscess that occurs in the womb, which is one of the abscesses that collect pus, and to know how to make its opening with iron.
Therefore, consider. If the pain of the abscess is sharp at its beginning with striking and burning and fever, and you see it turning red when it touches the senses, then do not proceed with perforation: instead treat it with what helps its maturation until the sharpness of symptoms subsides.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a seat which has two armrests, and she should recline or lie down on her back, and bring her feet to the lower part of her abdomen: and her thighs should be spread, and she should place her arms beneath her knees, and tie each with a band appropriate for that.
Then let the midwife sit on the right side, and administer the tool to open the opening of the matrix (womb).
And it is necessary that when you administer this tool, you probe with the rounded end of the woman's matrix to ensure that what enters from the tool is not deeper than the depth of the matrix and injures the weak.
If the tool is deeper than the depth of the matrix, then it is necessary to place pills on top of the covering of the deep part of the matrix: to prevent the entire instrument from entering into the deep part of the matrix: and it is necessary to place a stirrup on the upper side which runs in the instrument: and to hold the instrument and to turn the stirrup, until the deep part of the matrix is opened.
When the expulsion appears, and it is touched with the hand, and it is soft and yielding: then it is necessary that she herself separates herself from her head with a broad spatula.
When the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary to place a linen cloth dipped in rose oil or green oil, with some styptic substance on it: and place the linen cloth, and make an incision in the deep part of the matrix.
And place outside on the matrix and on the comb, a clean wool cloth dipped in water in which boiled mallow has been steeped.
Then it is cured after two days with an ointment suitable for that, until it heals.
And sometimes the matrix (afterbirth) and wound are cleansed, so that they are washed with water and honey; then, after washing with water in which the root of the lily has been boiled or long aristolochia, return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden internally within the afterbirth, then it is necessary that treatment with iron be prohibited for it; rather, treat it with what was said in the section on division.
Chapter LXXXVI.
Doctrine of Childbirth, how are fetuses that have come out unnaturally alive to be treated, according to their figure.
It is necessary for the Midwife, first and foremost, to know the form of a natural birth.
Therefore, among its signs is that when you see a woman being pressed towards the lower part, and she desires to smell the air and is alleviated above her in the area of childbirth, and hastens the exit of the fetus; then you shall know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and it is an exit over its head, and the second one with it: either hanging, or suspended by the navel.
If you see these signs, then it is necessary to press her abdomen so that the fetus descends quickly.
For when it descends over its head, the second one comes with it, and it is cleaned from these excesses with a good cleaning.
But he who is outside of this birth is unnatural, inadmissible.
For sometimes the fetus comes out over its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and its feet or one hand; or only one foot; or its head and one hand; or the navel; and perhaps it turns over its neck, and similar unadmissible figures.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be prudent, subtle in these matters, and avoid error and deception; and I am showing every figure from them, and how the intellect is present in it, and it will be indicated by that, and it will stand over it.
When the fetus emerges from its natural exit, and it becomes strong upon the woman, and delivery is difficult for her, and you see the force of her weakening: then make her sit on a chair, or let women hold her; and apply warmth to her vagina with boiled fennel, and with moist oils.
The midwife should insert her little spatula between the fingers and separate the second [finger] with it, and cut it with her nail, until what is within it from moisture runs out; and press the woman's belly, until the fetus descends.
If it does not come down, then it is necessary to enema the woman with a decoction of fennel mucilage and sesame oil.
Then order her after the enema to be tightly bound; and make her sneeze with a powder, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. The fetus will come out immediately.
If two hands of the fetus emerge first, it is necessary to draw them back gently. If she does not obey at the entrance, then put the woman on a chair, and raise her feet upwards; then strike the chair on the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall during the shock.
If the hands do not come out and the fetus dies; then cut them, and extract the remaining fetus; tie the hand with cloth and extract it equally; for it will come out by itself.
Delivery of the embryo through its foot. When the fetus comes out through its feet, then push them upwards; then turn the fetus gradually; afterwards extract it equally.
Then take one of its feet and stretch it gradually.
When they [the instruments] have advanced up to the hips, then command him [the patient] to apply pressure, and make her sneeze with powder: it will come out if God wishes.
If it does not come out as we have described, then gradually draw back the fetus until you place it in its natural position. It will then come out easily with delivery.
If it is forbidden with what we have described: then take from the resin of althea, oil of sesame, and dissolved gum; grind it all well in a mortar by good beating; afterwards anoint with it the womb of the woman, and below her stomach. Then make her sit in warm water until she feels the afterpains.
When you see that the lower parts have become heated, then give her a sip of myrrh and place it under her. When an hour has passed, then make her sit on a chair. Then make her sneeze; and pinch her nose and mouth; and press the lower part of the womb gently. The child will come out immediately.
Delivery of the Child above the Knees and Hands. When it comes out in this manner, then he [the midwife] will insert his hands gently. Then the woman lies on her back, with her feet hanging downwards; and she lies on the bed, and clasps her hands together. Press gently above the womb. Then take out what is under her feet from the breeches and prepare it below. If the child does not come out, then take hold of his feet and move them forcefully. Then press gently above the womb until the fetus rises to higher parts. Then insert your hands, and press the fetus gradually: and command the woman, to compress until the fetus comes out.
The fetus, hanging obliquely from the hands, has come out. He makes an incision for reducing that hand. If it cannot be reduced, then lift the woman and make her walk.
But if she cannot walk, then lay her on a bed: and strike the legs violently.
Then administer the ointment which you have prepared from mallow.
If she receives it in labor, then let her sit on a stool. Then strive in reducing the hand and press the fetus according to its natural form: and make the woman sneeze, and command her to compress herself until it comes out.
The fetus has come out on his neck, with spread hands, and his face is towards the back of his mother. The midwife must hold the hand of the fetus, then gradually turn it over and press it gently.
When it is pressed, then place it on the wound that I told you about, from oil and mallow.
Then command her to move slowly. When you have done that, then let her sit on a stool, and command her to lean towards the right side. Then command her to compress: and make her sneeze with powder.
The fetus is prepared on the side. When it descends through the mother's opening in this manner with the placenta, then cut the placenta with your nail until it separates from the moisture.
If the fetus hangs on its face and neck, then make an incision from the navel so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus towards the inside until you place it as required; and command the woman to press herself several times; for it will come out easily by itself.
Delivery of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and there are times when three or even four are born. Nevertheless, this is unusual and rarely occurs.
Five is beyond nature and do not live long; and it contains them, even though they multiply, by the second one; and they are separated by the siphunx (a type of instrument), distinguishing between them bound at the umbilicus of each one.
Sometimes they come out as a single fetus does with a natural easy birth; and sometimes they come out with an unnatural exit, as we have described.
If some of them are difficult during childbirth and reach the state described in the unnatural figures, then care for them as we have described; and let a skilled midwife be there, and she shall do what she does with ease and slowness, and innovate according to every figure with that which is prepared for her by her skill leading to safety.
Remember this: what forms in the womb from embryos and miscarries.
Sometimes it forms in the womb as one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten; and it has been verified by me that a woman has miscarried seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
What was done with the measurement of the wise man.
Therefore, this must be in the knowledge of obstetrics. For perhaps it may reach a similar state; therefore, let her oppose it with what is necessary (for treatment).
Head, LXXVI.
Chapter on extracting a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus as I said in the division of medicine and it does not come out, and you must operate with your hand, then it is necessary to consider.
If the woman is of good health and not with any accident that is feared for her loss, then it is necessary to make the woman lie down on a bed on her back, and let her head be inclined lower, and her legs raised: and the attendant should hold her from both sides or tie her to the bed so that her body is not pulled out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then wet the mouth of the womb with moist oils (such as) olive oil, mallow gum and linseed.
Then the midwife will wet her hand with those oils and gums, then she will insert it into the womb easily. Then she should seek with her the place where to grasp the hook from the fetus and places suitable for that.
Therefore consider then if the fetus is ready to descend onto its head: then seize the hooks in its eyes, or its neck, or its mouth, or its palate, or under its beard, or in its armpits, or near its ribs and below its hips.
If the descent is on its feet, then seize it at the breastbone (sternum) and its middle ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand and place its head between the fingers of the left hand: and insert it with the left hand easily, and seize the hook in one of those places that we mentioned, until it reaches the empty space (vagina).
Then seize another or third hook with the opposite hand if needed, to have an equal contraction and not to decline to one side.
Then it should be extended equally, and the extension should not be only in a straight line, but rather it should move to all parts, so that its opening is alleviated: as it happens with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary for what is between it [the tooth], that the extension be softened. If a part is retained from it [the tooth], then it is necessary that the midwife insert some fingers with oil, and insert them from that side, to turn with them what is retained.
If, therefore, a part of the fetus comes out, then change the forceps to another higher place: do this until the entire fetus comes out.
If a hand or other part comes out first and it is not possible to reduce it due to its dislocation: then it is necessary to cover it with a cloth. Then pull it out until when the entire hand comes out, cut it either at the joint of the foot or at the elbow: and thus you should do the same with the other hand and both feet.
If the fetal head is large, or there is a dislocation in its exit, or water has accumulated in its head: then it is necessary to insert a pointed spatula (Spatumile spinosum) between the fingers and break the head with it, and extract the water; or tear it apart with the instrument called Almisdac, whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter following this.
Similarly, do the same if the fetus has a large head by nature, then it is necessary to cut off the afterbirth (algenge) with scissors; or pull it out with misdach as we have said. Then pull out the bones with forceps.
If the head comes out and becomes dislocated at the neck, then it is broken, until the moisture that is in the chest is released.
If it [the wound] is not complex and does not follow the direction of exit: then cut the head intermittently, as much as possible for you.
If it [the tumor] is below the abdomen or there is hydropsy [edema] within it: then it must be punctured until the moisture runs out from it.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction towards the bone of the matrix [pelvis] is gentle.
If it [the dead fetus] is twisted within the abdomen or chest: then it must be extracted along with a cloth you have wrapped around your hand; and pierce the abdomen or chest until what is within them runs out.
If other parts are removed and the head returns: then the midwife should introduce her left hand. If the bone of the matrix [pelvis] is open, then insert your hand deep into the pelvis and search for the head with it; and draw out the head with your fingers as far as the bone of the matrix: then insert a hook or hooks and draw it out along with them.
If the bone of the matrix [pelvis] is twisted due to a hot tumor that has occurred to it: then one should not labor over it, but rather administer liquid medicine with moistening properties and oil; and apply poultices; and sit in baths that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, it can be turned: then administer what I have said for a living fetus.
If it cannot be turned, then it should be cut intermittently and extracted.
And one must not leave anything from the afterbirth completely inside.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what I have said for hot tumors that occur in the matrix [pelvis].
If bleeding occurs, then lower in water and administer the remaining treatment.
I myself have already seen a woman, whose womb contained a dead fetus; then she conceived again on top of it, and afterwards another fetus died as well. A long time later, a boil occurred on his navel and it became swollen until it opened up, and started discharging pus.
I was therefore called to treat him, and he was treated for a long time; but the wound did not heal.
I therefore placed on it some strong adhesive plasters; and bone came out of the place. Then a few days passed, and another bone came out. I was therefore astonished because there was no bone in the belly.
Therefore it occurred to me that the dead fetuses were from bones.
I therefore examined the wound and removed many bones while she was in a good state; and she lived like this for a long time, and now discharges little pus from the place.
I did not reinforce this foreign matter here unless because there is knowledge and help for that which the skilled doctor administers with his hand in healing.
Chapter LXXVII.
Chapter on the necessary forms of instruments for extracting a fetus.
The form of the handle used for opening the matrix.
Here below is the shape of a Stricktor, which makes equal books, having two equal spindles at both ends of two pieces of wood. However, this spindle must be more refined than the Stricktor; and it is made either of ebony or of boxwood.
And the width of all wood should be as thick as two fingers; and the edge of each of both is as thick as one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half, or more but less; and in the middle of the two pieces of wood there are two additions made of the same kind of wood, which have already been secured on each, whose length is half a palm and more, and width as thick as two fingers or less.
These two instruments are inserted into the matrix's bone to open it when you rotate the two handles.
Another shape similar to it but finer and lighter.
Make it from ebony wood or boxwood, in the manner of forceps. However, at its end there should be two extensions, as you can see here above: and the length of each extension is about a palm: and the width of each is two fingers.
When you wish to open the matrix with it, then have her sit on the bed, with her legs spread apart, opening what is between her thighs. Then insert these two extensions connected together into the matrix: and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her hips. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, equally according to the amount that you wish from the opening of the matrix, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of another handle mentioned by the ancients, known as the Pusher, used to push the fetus.
The form of Almisdac, which crushes a large head; it is similar to forceps but has teeth at the end, as you can see.
And sometimes it is made long like forceps in this shape, as you can see, with teeth like the teeth of a saw, by which it cuts and crushes.
The form of the uncus (hook) having one spike.
The form of the uncus (hook) having two spikes.
The instrument called Spatumilis has two ends for cutting off a head.
The form of the broader Spatumilis, too, is of two ends.
All these instruments are applied [in surgery], and the more their variety multiplies, the better prepared they are by the craftsman for their use, and taller among men due to their quantity.
Therefore, do not disregard from those instruments one which is prepared for you. Indeed, the necessity of these things is inexcusable.
Chapter LXXVIII [on the extraction of teeth]: The method of removing a
Section on the Extraction of a Second Tooth.
When the Second Tooth is retained during childbirth, then it should be instructed that it holds its breath. Then make her sneeze with the fingers in her nostrils and press your hand over her mouth and nose. If it exits through this method, it is good.
If it does not [exit]: then take the pot and perforate a hole in the lid; and put inside herbs opening the mouth of the womb such as wormwood, rue, anise, chamomile, thistle, wood-betony and centaury; take all these herbs or some of them and submerge them with water and put them on fire.
Then place an embolus of reed on the opening of the cover pot's hole, and hold the other end on the bone of the matrix; and let it remain until the vapor reaches the concavity of the matrix.
Then make her sneeze, as we have said. For it will come out easily in second.
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then order the midwife to immerse her hand in sesame oil or aloe mucilage. Then insert your finger into the womb and search for the Second. When he finds it, then take it out gently and stretch it slowly.
If it is attached deeply within the womb, then insert your hand as previously described until you find the Second and extract it gently according to its direction so that it does not fall out violently; rather, it should be moved gently from side to side; then a counterbalance should be added. For it will yield then, and be saved, and exit from the adhesion.
If the bone of the matrix is twisted, as we have already said: treat it with sneezing and with medication from the pot with herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have said, then take care not to tire yourself in the repeated extraction.
But what comes out of the bone of the matrix from there, tie it to the woman's hip. Then cleanse her with tetrapharmacon ointment. For it will rot her after days and dissolve, and come out.
However, when it rots, raise the bad smell from her stomach and head, and injure her weakly. Therefore, it is necessary that appropriate fumigations are administered for that.
Certain of the ancients had already tried fumigating with dried figs and watercress.
The shape of the tool for fumigating a woman during retention of afterbirth and menses.
Make a tool like a bellows or a tube, and let its wide end be over the fire; the fumigation shall be placed on plums; hold it until that fumigation is consumed; and repeat another.
Chapter 79.
Chapter on the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born whose anuses are not perforated, which the syringe has already cauterized with subtle sifak oil. Therefore, the midwife should perforate it with her finger; and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp spatulum; and let her be careful, lest she touch him.
Then place over it a linen cloth dipped in water and oil. Then take care of him with ointments until he is healed.
If one fears that it may burst open, then place a tube of lead into the hole for many days, and remove it when the boy wishes to defecate.
And now, anus may burst open due to consolidation of wounds or abscesses. Therefore, it is necessary to cut that consolidation, then take care of it as we have said in the treatment and with lead.
Chapter 80.
Chapter on the treatment of fistulas occurring in the lower part.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part are swelling (Nodatio) and swelling that occurs near the outside of the anus; or in the space of one part; and it is a single fistula or multiple fistulas.
When therefore that ancient nodulation is opened, there flows out from it watery whiteness or thin pus.
Sometimes they are penetrating from these fistulas. Therefore, they are recognized by what is discharged from the opening, and with windiness, when the sick uses the purge; perhaps a worm is discharged from it.
These are fistulas when they penetrate into space up to the bladder, and up to the meat of the verge. These are penetrating up to the joint of the hip, and up to the knot of the tail.
From that, it is known which penetrating fistula is up to the anus, even from one not penetrating, by inserting your index finger into the anus; and inserting a probe gently into the fistula from air or iron when there is no twisting.
If there is a twisting in it, then insert into it a probe gently made of lead or a horsehair, until you feel the probe or the hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it completely, nor does anything from the discharge come out of the opening, nor windiness, nor worm as I said; then you will know that it is not penetrating; therefore approach for treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to the bladder or urethra; then the sign of it is the discharge of urine from it, and the prevention of it from this place so that the location may be strengthened with medications.
But if it is penetrating up to the hip joint or hip bone; then the sign of it is that the probe reaches there, if there is no twisting as far as the bone; and the pain is found around the part, and there is always a discharge of pus from it; and the medication does not work in it, nor is it strengthened with an ointment.
In these fistulas penetrating there is no cure at all; and the cure of them is pain and futility to him, over whom a fool among physicians is formed.
In what is not penetrating, and not ancient, healing is hoped for with a scalpel; as I tell you, and I have already proven. And there lies the sick one upon your hands on his back; and tear the legs of his up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his belly. Then insert a lead or copper rod, if there is a twist in the fistula, until you know where the probe has reached.
If the sick one feels it around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel the probe has already passed through itself, detected by your finger and between the probe and anus or flesh; then you certainly know that it is penetrating, not to labor in it because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
They say that in some men the flesh heals, and from the medication which is hoped to be helpful for him, it is, that you cauterize with a subtle fire, according to the size of the fistula, as before, and insert the burning substance into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then do this twice or thrice until you know that all those added fats filtered, which are similar to feathers of a bird's quill, have been burned.
Then care for it with linen strips wrapped in butter until those fats burned come out; then care for it with ointments that produce and solidify flesh.
If therefore it heals, good.
And if not, then it shall never heal with any other treatment.
If it breaks out and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick membrane of flesh between it and the wound, or if you see a Fistula on that which follows the skin surface, then cut the skin from the beginning of the Fistula, and you go cutting with the wound what is in the fistula until the incision reaches where the end of the wound is, and the wound is released and falls off.
Then clean those fleshy areas resembling a bird's feather quill, so that there remains nothing of them.
If blood prevails and breaks through between you and the operation, causing those fleshy areas to separate: then it is better to cauterize it with fire or a sharp medicine.
Since cauterization with fire brings about good conditions, the heating of those fleshy areas, the coagulation of blood, and the drying out of moisture is added.
Then treat that with linen folded in butter or cooked reeds until the place emits pus and the burnt fleshy areas are discharged into the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments that cause hardening of the flesh; there are medications containing styptic and drying agents.
For when it is restored, then it heals; do not be afraid to repeat the treatment.
If the Fistula has reached the depth of the anus and is elongated from the body: then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
If you feel a membrane between you and it, which is of flesh or skin, and is close to the penetration: then there should be no operation on that unless according to the way of trust and hope.
That is because it (the lesion) is administered in one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we said; or to excise it, until you reach its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert a linen cloth and cure it immediately. And do not proceed much with the excision, so as not to cut the muscle containing the anus, and may there be an unfortunate outcome of expulsion without will. Then treat that as we said.
Perhaps it will heal: or stretch out the membrane and cleanse it after cutting it as we said, either with a bladder or with another sharp-tipped instrument. Then cleanse the fleshy parts that are cut, as far as you can examine them.
Then attempt the healing of the entire wound together with the excision and the superior opening where it is consolidated: and there remains an open fistula in the internal part of the anus, which will be less harmful to the patient.
And sometimes a fistula is drained in this manner: and it is when you insert the bladder into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and edge of the anus: then take the perforated-tip bladder, which is like the aleskef beak, that is prepared hides, according to this shape. And insert into it a thread rolled up from five strands, and around that. Then insert the bladder with the thread into the fistula, until you reach its concavity.
If it is piercing the edge of the anus internally nearby, then pull out the thread from that hole: so that you insert your finger into the anus and pull out the tip of the thread, and tie together both ends: and tighten each end, and let go of it for one or two days: and as much as the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well, until the tissues between the ends of the thread fall off and drop away: then treat the wound, until it consolidates and heals.
If however the orifice of the Fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate in whatever way you prepare it, unless it is very deep. For you there is no need to do so, that you should cut the arm because of it.
Then proceed as we have said, until it heals.
The shape of the spatulum for the fistula with a very sharp edge, whose surface is highly curved and one part is not sharply curved so as not to cut what is not necessary, as you can see.
Chapter LXXXI.
On the suture of hemorrhoids from which blood flows upon their incision and care for fissures.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds. Or they are within the anus, like bladders of charcoal or prunes, or as if they were grains of millet. And some are small and large; blood flows from them always, and there is one and many of them. And they are outside the anus and at its extremities.
Nevertheless, those that are outside the anus are of few in number and moist with juice that runs a small amount of lemon water or a little blood by constant course; and they are according to the color of the body.
And the care of that which is within the anus is to command the weak one to fast: and it is expressed until it comes out the anus, and appears to you as atheles. Therefore also hold them with tweezers or keep them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
If they are not held by the tweezers due to their moisture and softness; then take them with a rough cloth or with a glove made of double wool and remove them with your fingers. Then cut them (the vessels), and sprinkle some warm powders over them after the incision to keep them in place for the cautery. Cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterizing. Then care for them with the rest of the treatment until they heal.
If the anus does not obey the evacuation, then cleanse the sick person with a small purgative enema, so that it cleanses what is in the anus, and let him obey the evacuation quickly when he expels himself, the sick one.
But if they are external ulcers from the anus, then their state is light and easy: and it is to grasp them with your nail or with a pair of forceps, and cut them. Then care for them with what I said before, until they heal.
And whoever recoils from the incision with iron, then it is necessary that you administer a suture for them in this way. Take thread wound round and insert it into the point (of the needle). Then draw out the ulcers upwards, and make it penetrate with the point into the root on the other side: and wind the two ends of the thread around the needle, and let them be broad: and tie the ulcer tightly with a strong suture. Then knot the thread and draw out the needle.
Do this with all ulcers, and let one of them remain free: nor should you yourself cut it, lest excess blood flow from it.
Then put on the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch, and place it over the anus: and tell the sick person to rest. Then let him go until he falls asleep.
Since the ulcers fall off, care for them with ointments and the rest of the treatment, until they heal.
On the treatment of fissures. For they occur frequently due to drying of feces and constriction of nature.
As they become old and medicine does not work on them, then it is necessary to shave with a spatula or your nail until they become moist and the outer skin layer that prevents healing is removed. Then treat them until they heal as required.
If they do not heal, then shave them again with a more vigorous incision than the first, until they bleed much and are drained. Then treat them until they heal.
On the treatment of ulcers that are turned inwards and not inwards, as well as scrofula (Athelil) and anthrax (Formicae).
Chapter 82.
Know that Almirmar is not anything other than a round node similar in color to the body and resembling a nailhead. It occurs throughout the body but mainly in the lower parts of the feet and fingers, and it causes pain during walking.
Therefore, it should be cut off at the base of the nail and held with forceps or a nail puller and pulled out by its root.
Then care for that: and if you wish to cauterize it according to what preceded in its chapter.
Furthermore, there is one elevation that is small and rough, filtered, round on the surface of the body. And it often happens in boys' hands.
And its treatment is to stretch the little finger and cut it; or stitch it with silk thread; or with hair, until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or a sharp medicine; and now the little fingers that have turned are being removed, not the ones that have not turned with the tool that I will mention.
Moreover, there is also a small, filtered elevation that is large on the surface of the body and goes very deep; and when it is found cold, it feels like the bite of an ant on it, and it spreads throughout the body; and it most often happens in hands.
And its treatment is to take a reed from a goose feather or the strong feathers of an eagle; and place the reed over the ant bite so that it contains the circle formed by the reed on its parts. Then rotate your hand with the reed until it separates from the edge of the ant bite; and place it in the deep flesh and remove the ant bite by its root.
And if you wish, do this with a reed of metal or iron, in this shape.
Let the upper end of the reed be pulled upwards to a height and turn it over so that it relieves the finger and its rotation.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant bite as was mentioned regarding the little finger in the chapter on cauterization of little fingers.
Head LXXXIII.
Chapter on the shapes of instruments used for enema administration in diseases of the anus, and solutions of the abdomen, and colic.
When the clyster is made of silver, or gold, or copper melted, or beaten.
And sometimes it is made with small and large instruments, according to those in whom it is administered.
Therefore, what is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose anus are weak or painful, so should their clysters.
Large clyster.
The head of the cannula, that is, the upper part where it is tied to the uterus, should be wide according to this method; and it should have a separation so that it can be tied to the uterus as you see, and its lower end, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt, that is, not open, soft, very, drawing towards fineness; and on one side of it should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the size of the hole be according to the thickness of the fingers, and slightly larger, and let the uterus in which the medicine is placed be from the bladder of an animal; or from a sheep's skin, which should be small, like a little sow's ear: whose root should be one palm.
And let it be pierced with many holes as it is rolled, and let the space that is between every hole be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into the holes a thread perhaps from raw yarn, which should be from ten strands or about that, and bind it with it like a little sow's ear. When the uterus is placed in it, the head of the clyster should be tied with strong constriction at two distinct points. Then clysterize with it.
And this is the shape of the circle depicted here, and the holes.
The quality of clysterizing with it is: to fill the bladder or the sac from medicine which should be heated according to the tolerance of the sick person; and take care that it is not too hot nor too cold.
Then the sick person lies on his back and raises his legs towards above; and put under him a cloth or skin upon which people lie.
Then anoint the end of the clisterium with oil, or with white goose fat, or with mucilage of fenugreek, or similar. Then introduce it into the anus with ease. Then let the servant take the bladder with both his hands at once, and squeeze it forcefully until all that is in the clisterium passes into the intestines.
Then remove the clisterium, and the sick person raises his legs towards the wall.
If the medicine forces him to leave, then hold as much as possible. And if he sleeps through that night with it, it is more effective for healing.
If you clisterize him in the illness of the bladder and he desires to leave quickly: then clisterize again until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or wounds in the anus: then let the clisterium be very subtle, soft, from clisteria with which children are clisterized.
And this is the form of a soft and subtle clisterium, over which the skin is rolled.
Chapter XLII (Roman numerals).
I have already said in the division on the treatment of wounds that it belongs to a book; here I will tell you about their treatment with hands and with medicines according to completion.
Therefore, wounds are distinguished according to what kind of wound they are and according to the place where the wound falls.
Therefore, wounds are like a stone thrown: or by sword cut; or struck with a spear, wood, arrow; and similar things of many kinds.
Wounds that are made according to the parts of the body are such as a wound on the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or back, and similar ones from those members.
And I am telling the treatments for certain wounds, so that I place the reasoning and rule over the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, since the reminder of the compositors will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore (I say). If a simple wound occurs in the head and there is no bone fracture, consider then if it was caused by a stone or similar object, and it has only broken the skin; and the wound is large, and you fear an abscess of hot pus; then act quickly, and make a venesection of the head immediately; and do not delay this; and draw out from him according to the strength of it as much blood as possible, unless there is something prohibiting venesection, especially if the blood flowing out of the wound is scant. And let the venesection be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the venesection be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And take care that the sick person does not fill himself with food or heavy drinks.
If something prevents reduction (the amount of blood), then reduce from the food, and let him not approach meat or wine.
And place on the wound if it happens to him an abscess of hot pus, boiled mustard seed in rose oil only, or with wine in which there is wormwood.
If you are safe from a hot abscess, then place on the wound if it is recent with its own blood, and has not changed the air, the powder which I will tell about in a moment; and if it has already changed the air, then place on it some unguents until it is healed.
If the wound is large or made by a sword cut and similar ones: and its edges are not brought together by pimples, then gather it together with suture, according to what I will tell regarding the wounds of the abdomen in their suturing.
If the wound has already been found from the bone and hangs, and there is no retention of it except in a small suspension: then cut it. Then care for the wound with medicines, and restore hard flesh in its place where there is a scar, and instruct the sick person to eat foods with thickness, such as heads and cooked wheat, until it becomes soft; and similar ones.
And if you find a rottenness in the skin that does not adhere to the bone: then cut out the entire rotten part, and throw it away; then care for that.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and it cannot be cut off by medicines, then investigate above the artery. If you find it not cut, then cut it with a spatula or tie it. And if necessity demands when it does not provide what has been said, then cauterize it until the blood is cut off.
If these wounds are small and simple, then the matter is easy and light; so that you sprinkle this powder on them; because it consolidates them before air changes them.
§ Method of the Powder for Consolidation. Take one part of olibanum, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburnt lime; grind it all very well, and sieve it; fill the wound with it, and tie it tightly, until it adheres well on top of it, and coagulate with blood.
Then tie the same above with sutures, and leave it, do not loosen it until it remains, so that it does not come undone. The medicine is not to be uprooted from him until he is healed.
And at times plaster alone does that, when there is not olibanum or dragon's blood at hand for you; and also lime performs the same operation in many deep wounds when it is applied upon them and they are sutured, and the wounds are recent with blood that has not been altered by air.
If air has already altered it in some way, especially during the summertime, then there is no use for this powder; so take care of it as we have said, placing on them certain digestive unguents, or place on them poultices made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until pus is emitted. Then take care of the rest of the cure until they are healed.
But if it happens that the wound is a fracture of the bone, and it is slight, then extract it with trepan (Gesti); and now I shall tell you the treatment for fractures of the skull which will follow.
Chapter on Neck Wounds.
If a wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple wound of the head.
If the nerve or artery of the neck has already been cut, if it is a nerve, then there is no skill in its treatment except that care must be taken to avoid causing violent constriction, such as ziniar and zegeh, and similar things. Because they harm nerves and cause them to contract.
And do not place anything cold at all on the wound; because the substance of nerves is cold and its continuation is with the brain which is above the organs; so let that which is used for treatment be from soft medicines such as plaster mixed with sweet water several times infused with oil or rose oil, or tuthia when it is washed even with sweet water; and other mineral stones, in this manner, and moist unguents.
If a wound is large, then administer suture; or sew it up with tied flaps and small pieces of wool. Then take care of it until it heals.
If there is depth in the wound or if a cavity forms at its lower part and already accumulates pus, then puncture it deeper in that location.
If an artery has already been cut in the wound and blood flow is obtained: then separate or sever it and tie it; or cauterize it if such a need arises.
If the windpipe (spondile) has already been severed, completely or partially, and the trachea is saved: then sew up the skin flaps with suture over the wound in the windpipe, and do not touch the windpipe; instead apply it evenly and reduce it to its natural shape. Then tie it with a suitable suture and leave it for some days. Then take care of it with ointments containing styptics (styptic substances) and astringents until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then probe it; if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all such fragments that you can; leave what cannot be prepared for this purpose until the wound decomposes and separates and heals from its outlet.
If the wound is recent, then sprinkle it with powder as I described earlier. If a bone appears in the wound and a fistula forms: then treat it as described in its own chapter.
Chapter on wounds caused by spatha (sword or spear).
If it is a wound caused by a lance or knife, and you see its depth, then assess the situation. If from a wound there comes out pus, when sick with breathing from it, then you know that the wound is mortal.
If there is no depth to it and it is fresh with its own blood: then do not put powder on it at first hour nor bind it, so that the blood does not remain deep within it and returns to the heart and kills the sick; but put ointment of attraction on it and dissolve it twice a day.
If ointment is not present to you, then put on the wound's opening an old piece of clay, so that it absorbs what comes out from it due to humidities: and make the sick person sleep over the wound, so that it runs towards it and gathers together in it.
If three days or more have passed from the wound and no spasm occurs in the sick nor a bad heart tremor nor tightness in breathing, and you see the remaining dispositions of it good: then you know that the wound is healthy. Treat him (the wounded person) with linen cloths and the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
If healing is exhausted in him and it is always opening, then you know that it has become a Fistula (fistulous tract). Treat it (the fistula) from its root.
If the wound is from a sword or knife cut and is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with what preceded from suture, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
If the bone has already made an impression and cut pieces from it: then examine the wound and rush to extract those pieces, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them until the wound decomposes; for it is useful to extract them when it has decomposed.
The judgment for treating wounds on remaining members, is the judgment that we have mentioned.
On wounds of the abdomen, and the exit of intestines, and of their cure.
A rupture that occurs in the abdomen, is great, medium, and small.
From a great one, at times, intestine or number of intestines exit.
Therefore, their insertion and suture is stronger and more difficult.
And a small rupture also becomes difficult by another manner. Therefore, their reduction becomes difficult if you do not hasten to its insertion to its place immediately; because it swells, opens, and grows larger; therefore, its entry becomes difficult.
Therefore, it is better for a medium rupture to be operated on; because with this one, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is with these two types.
Know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four modes.
Two common sewing methods come together in the abdomen and in the suture of other body wounds; and two other sewing methods properly belong to other wounds. Nevertheless, they are more proper for the suture of the abdomen; and I will tell you each one with its explanation and clarification.
Therefore, when a wound is small and something from the intestine comes out of it, and it is difficult to reduce it; then this is because of one of two methods. Or because of the smallness of the rupture, as we said; or because there is swelling in the intestine due to cold air.
When it is like this, then it is necessary to warm it up, so that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in warm water alone. Boil in water the bladder of a squirrel, cyperus, pepper and myrrh, and mix them with the affected intestine until the swelling is resolved.
Sometimes it makes wine in which there is a stoppage; and it is better than water alone for the resolution of swelling.
When you see that the swelling has already been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which artemisia or wormwood has been boiled. For this reason, a small amount of an alum solution is applied to its opening.
If the return has not yet been restored after this treatment, then fill up the opening slightly with a tool used for cutting hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when prepared, than the operation; and there should not be a forced cutting after necessity and lack of instruments.
Let one part of it be twisted, sharp, and the other not sharp; and let the tip not be thin with the subtlety of a needle, but rather slightly blunt; and it is the one that resembles an onion, as you can see.
When the wound is enlarged and the intestine enters, then it is necessary that its return be in its natural shape at its proper place, if possible over it; because it is better.
But when the opening is large at the lower part of the abdomen: then it is necessary that you make the sick person lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then raise the head and chest higher than the lower parts.
And similarly if the opening is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then your aim and attention should always be that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other.
And so, it should be admitted into large wounds and into medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds, place it as you have prepared it.
Then make sure that a faithful servant is present at your hands, who holds the entire rupture with his hand: and bind the lips together. Then, cut out some thread for the one who follows to sew something after something: and this is the common method of suturing one.
And it is that you receive a needle or a number of needles according to the size of the wound. Then, from the end of the rupture, let a space of one finger width, that is, of the physician, be left: and sew the needle once through the skin in two places where the sifac, which is under the skin, comes out from the inside, until you make it penetrate from the other side: and you have already bound together the two edges of the skin, and the two edges of the sifac: and four rows are made.
Then sew with double thread around the point of the needle repeatedly from both sides until the two lips of the wound are bound together properly.
Then leave a thickness equal to one finger and sew another needle there: afterwards draw it with thread as you did with the first needle. Therefore, do not stop doing this with the needles that you need until you complete the closure of the entire wound.
And let the needles be of a medium thickness between thin and thick: because very fine needles easily pierce the flesh; and large ones are difficult to enter the skin; therefore they should be of medium thickness in both fineness and thickness.
And it is not good to sew the needle through both edges of the skin closely together: so that the flesh is not cut quickly and the wound opens before its healing; and so that they are not lengthened even when sewn, so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
Then cut the end of the onion so as not to harm the sick during his sleep; and place small pieces of cloth from all sides around the end of the onion; and let them be until you know that the wound has already healed.
This type of stitching is more suitable for small wounds with onions like this. Because one or two needles are sufficient for their sewing, or about that many.
The second type of stitch is common, to gather with the stitching the ends of four: the ends, two skin and the ends two sifac in place of one, with a needle containing an equal thread in fineness and thickness.
Then when you pierce with the needle these four ends, bring back the needle from the side where you began, so that the thread dropped from the upper part of the wound remains retained; thus the stitch will be like a seam stitch for sewing fabric, and place between each stitch an amount equal to the thickness of a little finger.
This type of stitch is known to humans.
And with this stitch I sewed my own wound that happened to a man in his abdomen, who had been wounded with a knife, and the wound was larger than one palm; and there came out from the intestines about two palms of intestine from the middle intestine, and the rupture was in the middle of the abdomen.
Therefore I brought it back again after the intestines of his had stood out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound has therefore healed in the space of about fifteen days; and I cured him, and he got well; and he lived after that for many years, converted to his own ways.
And physicians had judged that he would not get well.
And it was a miracle that I did not cure him with ointment. Since I was in a place where no ointment was found nor any medicine. I therefore placed on the wound an old pot two times a day, and I attended to its cleaning with water of honey until it healed.
I will speak of two types of stitching as described in the narrative.
And it begins with sharp stitching: and you insert a needle from the outside to the inside part.
When the needle penetrates into the skin, and along the length and width of the entire body: release the end at the side where you inserted the needle, and let it penetrate the other end from the inside to the outside in the opposite side with a thread.
When you have made it penetrate there, then let it penetrate thus in the same side thread with a needle from the outside to the inside: and release the end that is on this side, and let the needle penetrate another end from the inside to the outside: and let it penetrate together with your penetration which you make it penetrate in the side thread at the other end of it, until it reaches the entire thing.
Then begin also from this side, and pull out the same with the end that is on the other side of the thread: and extract the needle from the skin where it penetrated.
Then return it to the same skin and pull out the other end of the thread on the other side with this end thread: and extract that from the skin at that side, and do one side, then the other: and do one side after the other until you pull out the entire thing according to this example.
And the sum of this stitching is that you do this stitching of skin as it is made with skins: thus one side of the thread from one end of the skin: and you release it on the other side at another end, until you complete it.
Second type of suture, as Galen named it.
This speech is told as to sew it in the same way that some physicians do, by joining every part to its corresponding part by nature: and applying the end of the sifac to another end, and the end of the mirach to another end. And this is done as I told you.
It is necessary that you make the point of the needle near the end of the mirach on the outside part, and let it penetrate to the inside only; and you release the two ends of the sifac. Then turn the needle and let it penetrate from the outside to the inside through both ends of the sifac, namely on each side.
Then turn both (of them) and let both penetrate from the inside to the outside through the other two ends of the mirach, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common easy one, and it is the suture that was previously mentioned.
This is also the speech of Galen.
And they said some. The abdominal suture is reinforced with two needles. What is meant is that you insert one thread into each of them: and begin with the insertion of the needle from where it is with you, and let it penetrate to the other side according to the equal suture of those who sew leather.
And know that when rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than those of the other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the medicine for the wound, is the judgment of all wounds.
What is meant is that when you seize a fresh wound with its own blood before it changes into air, and reduce the bowels, and attach them, and prepare them; then put it on a bed of dry powder.
If the wound has already changed (rotated): then place on it certain ointments which are present to you until it produces pus; and the threads fall out, and it heals up, and it becomes firm again. Then treat that wound as you would any other wound, until it heals.
But if no medicine is present to you, then immediately place on it something old, from which pus begins to flow; and change it twice a day as I have taught you, until it heals.
For you do not require other medicine in many cases, when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may affect the main limbs in injury, then it is necessary to immerse linen cloth in oil of mild heat or rose oil; and place it around the areas that are between the groins and under the armpits.
If it feels pain, or punctures, or rotting in the intestines (for this often happens), then cleanse it with a potion of warm wine, black, steeped: especially if rot has already reached the intestine and made it perforate to the concavity of it.
And know this, that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal; and that which is from the small intestines is more difficult to heal.
The intestine which is called Jejunum does not heal from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its abundance, because it is made up of veins, and the size of these veins, and because of the subtlety of its body, and the proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what comes from the wound is worms, and you follow it recently: return it according to your usual method of returning intestines equally.
If the time has passed and it has already turned green or black, then it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place where it has become blackened, so that there is no bleeding. For in it are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of the thread hanging from the bottom of the wound outside it: to alleviate the attraction of it upon you, and the removal of it in case of accident, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
Reminder of the wound that occurs in the Intestine.
When there is a small rupture in the intestine, it is possible to be restored in certain people: because I have seen one who was wounded in his abdomen with a lance strike, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound had been old: and it became a fistula, and discharge occurred from it, and flatulence.
Therefore, I applied a treatment until I was not convinced of its healing: nor did I cease to probe it, until it was healed, and the place had solidified.
After I saw the place already solidified, I feared for the sick man, that an accidental evil might occur in his abdomen: and it did not happen to him from that accidental evil. And he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking, and passing urine, and entered the bath, and exercised in his diets.
And some of the experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and is small, then it should be tied in this way. And it is to take ants with large heads. Then gather two lips of the wound, and place one ant with an open mouth on both lips of the wound. When therefore it falls upon that (thing), and contracts its bone, cut off its head, for it adheres and is not loosened.
Then place another ant next to the first one, and do not cease doing that as the ant after the ant according to the size of the whole wound.
Then draw it back, and suture the wound. For those heads remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is eaten, and healed, so that no harm comes to the sick man deeply.
And now it is possible that the intestine can be tied also with a fine thread; which was removed from the animal's intestine, attached to it when it is inserted into the point.
And there is, that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and much of it is excavated. Then tie a fine linen thread at its end. Then insert the thread into the point and suture it with the intestine. Then draw it back to a disjoint state.
And this method of suturing with ants and intestine is not except by the way of trust and hope.
Know that, a large wound, wide, especially if it is on one of the slender intestines; then there is no skill except subtlety, nor is its healing entirely.
Chapter on Zucchum and Fistulae.
Know that every wound or boil when it becomes old and decayed and turns into an ulcer and does not consolidate and always emits pus and is not incised; then it is universally called in whatever member it may be a Fistula, and we call it Zucchum.
And indeed a Fistula is in truth a hard, white, filtered nodule; without pain, which has the hollow of a bird's feather; and for this reason some call it Risati, that is, feather.
And it is in some hours moist, which discharges pus. And perhaps humidity is divided in some hours. And sometimes this humidity is much, and it is little; and it is thick, and it is thin.
And now I have already mentioned the division (referring to wounds), that every ulcer which does not heal, is not born of flesh within it, is not that except for one of nine causes.
Of which one is, either because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or because of its maliciousness; or because hard flesh is between it and the skin, preventing the growth of flesh; or because there are many sores and putridity; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter that is discharged from it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for its healing; or because corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence, as it happens in Caesaraugusta: where digestion of diseases becomes difficult, and the healing of boils slows down naturally; or because there is one bone or number of bones in it.
And now I have shown all these causes and their signs, and the cures of them along with medicines in the division; and here it is necessary that I make you know the cure for fistula and ulcer, which are made through the way of surgery with the hand.
Know therefore, that fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For from these come fistulas that reach to the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or intestines; or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs; or to some of the spondylus (vertebrae) of the back, or to some of the joints made up of several parts: such as hands and feet; and from these come those that approach the proximity of the main member and similar ones.
Which of these fistulas is so according to this manner, is one of difficult cure, and does not receive treatment, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If it is one of the fistulas whose depth does not reach those places which I said and you hope for, trust in its cure and wish to attain knowledge about it, then take a probe made of copper or iron, if the fistula tends straightly, and explore it with the same.
But if there is a curvature in the fistula, then investigate it with a thin probe of lead. Since lead, because of its softness and bending around the curvature, is suitable for this investigation.
If the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to sign upon it with a probe. Therefore, close one of its openings from among the openings.
Since the moisture which you introduce through closure runs back to other openings and flows out from them.
Then investigate and examine carefully according to the method which is possible for you: so that you know whether there is a bone or nerve where the fistula has a hollow depression deep or shallow; or it is a single fistula with many openings, and stands over all of it, when exerting your utmost strength, when questioning the sick person, and finding pain upon compression by your hand on the place, and similar indications and signs of injury.
When you have stood at your true station over all of it, then proceed to treatment according to confidence; and you should consider whether the fistula is near the surface or in a distant safe location away from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or single spot among those I have mentioned to you. Then, if this is so, cut the fistula as previously stated in my narrative, remove what grows within it by filtration and corruption of flesh which arises in its opening or cyst or similar things; and care for it until it heals.
If however the Fistula is of deep depth and is straight: then it is necessary that you cut it as deep as possible for you. Then clean it from all the rotten flesh of it.
Then apply a linen wrapped in sharp medicines and insert it up to the concavity of the Fistula which you have seized with iron. Do this repeatedly until the sharp medicine has corroded all that remains in the concavity of the Fistula due to corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals.
But if it does not heal by this, then cauterize it as we have said before.
If the cause of the Fistula is bone, and it has been certified to you that this is so: then investigate it, and cut it according to what I have told you. If it does not prohibit you from anything from the vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we have said.
If it is determined to you that there is bone with something corrupted and blackened: then grind it away until the corruption of it has been removed entirely. Then care for it with what causes it to heal, until it heals.
If it does not heal and emit pus as it did: then you will know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption.
Investigate therefore above it again and examine its reason, and clean it with utmost force of yours.
Then restore it. If it heals, that is good: and if not, then you will know that the corruption is in a deep remote part of the body which you have not reached. It is not for you in this matter, except to leave it to nature.
If a small bone is corrupted and it is possible for you, draw it out with fine forceps which fit it.
If many bones are present, then carefully draw out all of them, do not leave anything from them with your strength.
If something prevents you from it due to the moistures, and there is no fear or mistake in the incision of them: then cut those moistures and fleshes if they are present, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones from your time, then place it on the wound so that it rots itself and leave it until it rots what is around the bones from fleshes and moistures.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal. And tighten the incision which you made in your operation. Or place it on top of it if you fear it, cotton soaked in crushed sulfur with oil; or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any green ointments.
For when those moistures rot and separate the bones, the removal of them will be alleviated, and the drawing out of them.
If there is a large bone such as the leg bone or hip bone and similar ones, and what is corrupted from it is a large part: then scrape it with the last rasp, until that blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
If what is corrupted in it is a large part and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to saw it and cut it entirely up to where the corruption reaches; then care for it until it heals.
And I tell you about a case that happens to a man in his leg: so place it as an example and aid on your operation.
A man of about thirty years old had pain in his leg due to a cause that moved upon him within the body, that is, from the inside, until the matter reached his leg, and he was cut out with a large incision: and there was no external cause for it.
The time was extended with the error of the physicians until the abscess was opened, and much matter gathered around it. His treatment was delayed until the leg became fistulous, and many openings were made in it: all of which discharged pus and bodily fluids.
A multitude of physicians treated him for about two years, and there was no skilled hand in his care until I was called and saw his leg, and the matter running from those openings in a great course: even the entire body of the man was already wasted, and his color was jaundiced.
I then inserted a probe into one of the openings, and it reached the bone.
Then I examined all the openings: and found that they penetrated into one another from all parts of the leg.
I then approached, and cut open one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone: and I found it corrupted: which was already rotten, decayed, putrefied, perforated, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
I then sawed what was exposed to me from the rotten bone and prepared it for removal.
And I decided that there was no bone but only the corruption, which I cut off and sawed. And I had already removed it.
Then I placed a dressing on the wound with consolidating medicine in a long space. And it is not consolidated.
Then I tried and opened the wound above the first finding: and I found continuous corruption with bone: and I scraped what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I attempted a restoration of it. And it was not restored.
I therefore opened it again, and did not stop cutting the bone piece by piece, and attempted its restoration: and it was not restored, until I cut from the bone about one palm's breadth, and pulled it out with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it healed quickly, and was cured: and this repetition in the operation and section of it was not necessary, except for the disposition of weakness in the patient, and his lack of tolerance, and my fear over him regarding death; because bad syncopes from excess evacuation occurred to him at all hours.
Therefore, it was cured completely by healing: and new flesh hard grew at the place of the bone, and good arrangements were made for its body, and his strength returned: and he turned back into his dispositions: and no harm whatsoever was done to him in walking.
If however the prominent bone at the place of the body has already been broken: then it is necessary to scrape it, according to this method: and it is as follows: take a ligament, and tie it at the end of the prominent bone; and command someone to stretch it upwards; and place another larger ligament on the first. Then bind it over the flesh that is near the bone; and extend its end to pull the flesh towards the lower parts; and you will scrape the flesh above the place which you want to scrape, so as not to harm the scraper.
Place a stick or board under the bone below it well placed; since when you do that, it is not forbidden to cut corrupted flesh.
It is necessary that the Serrature be above the corrupted place, so that there is no corruption of the bone in a concavity: and it does not appear to the sense in its appearance, and it compels another for its Serrature.
If the bone is corrupted and not projecting but rather adjoined to a part of it, and the corruption is in the middle or part of itself, then excise all the flesh from all parts. Then place the stick underneath.
Then saw it from one side where the corruption is, until the saw meets on the other side: and let the saw be according to the length shorter than the corruption as we said.
If the corruption is at a joint, cut the corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it adjoins from the other side.
But if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no skill but to remove it by grinding.
If the corruption is in the beak of the hand or foot, then there is a great difficulty in that matter. However, you must examine the corruption to see how it appears to you. And grind it away and cleanse it according to whatever position is possible for you, and with whatever skill it can be corrected for you: when it does not cause opposition to the Vein or Nerve.
And know that these bones for cutting and sawing are many according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their sharpness, their size, their smallness, their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare an appropriate tool for every type of operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you the type of tool that you need according to the nature of your study when it requires long effort. And the knowledge of the methods of this art, bears witness to the modes of illnesses: then you shall find for yourself what is suitable for it from the instruments for every affliction.
And I am strengthening you with the number of instruments at the end of this chapter, which you shall place examples upon as you carve, and proof on others as you try.
Form of Another Saw.
Form of a Razor for Joints. The head of this rasp should be shaped like the head of a star-shaped nail; and its points should be shaped like the points of a file.
It is not suitable unless it is used to smooth the heads of joints when they are broken or for a large and thick bone.
Form of a Larger Rasp.
Form of a Broad Rasp.
Form of a Rasp with a Convexity (concavity).
Form of Another Fine-Toothed Rasp.
Form of Another Rasp with a Curved End.
Form of a Small, Fine-Toothed Rasp.
It is similar to a Drill and its end is like a Saw; it is used in many places when cutting bones.
Form of a Rasp suitable for cutting the bone that has been bored out.
The extremity of it (the limb) is a triangle, sharp-angled.
It comes from India. And similarly, it is necessary that everything which we have said should be made from files, incisors, and saws.
[Section heading: On the Incision of Extremities, and Bone Sawing]
Rottenness occurs at the extremities, either from external causes or internal causes.
If you have treated that corruption with medicinal remedies but it does not improve and you see that the corruption is spreading in a limb which does not respond to any treatment: then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to where the corruption stops, so that the weak one may pass through it from death or from the greater evil caused by loss of part of the member.
And the sign that this happens is that the limb turns black until it seems so: what fire has burned it or rot has occurred after turning black: until the corruption reaches that part of the limb which follows it and creeps throughout the entire body.
Therefore approach it for amputation and similarly if the cause of corruption is a blow from some venomous creatures such as sea-scorpions, weasels, nettles, and similar ones.
If the corruption or blow occurs at the extremity of a finger: then amputate the finger and do not leave any space for the corruption to spread, so that it may not reach the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand: then amputate it at the root of the wrist and do not leave any space for the corruption to spread until it reaches the arm.
And if it invades it (the hand or arm), then amputate the arm at the elbow joint.
If however the corruption passes beyond the elbow and you see it: then there is death for the weak one. And any treatment beyond that (the amputation) is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly do the same for the foot when corruption invades a toe: then amputate it at one of the joints; and if it reaches the front part of the foot: then amputate the entire foot. If it [the abscess] rises to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
If corruption [of the limb] has already reached the knee, then there is no skill in it, except for amputation, and leaving the sick to die.
The method of cutting a member or sewing it is to tighten the ligament below where you wish to cut and tighten another ligament above the place. And stretch one of the ministers [assistants] to the lower parts, and stretch another minister to the upper parts. And you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments with a broad spatula until all the flesh is exposed. Then it is cut or sewn.
And it is necessary that you lay a flax cloth over all the parts and not touch the healthy place with the knife; and let an additional injury be added to the sickness, and let a hot abscess come out.
If there is bleeding internally while you are working, then quickly cauterize the place or put some powders on top that absorb blood. Then return to your care until it [the wound] is complete.
Then bind the wounded member with a suitable ligament and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you what happens to a man in his foot, the same thing that I have told you will happen.
What happens is that there occurs blackness in the foot, similar to burning like fire; and corruption starts first with a toe until it covers the entire foot.
Therefore the man was ashamed of himself when he saw corruption occur in his limb with intense pain that he discovered from the pain and burning; and he cut it at the joint, and he healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, the same corruption occurred in the index finger of his own hand.
Therefore, it came to me, and I attempted to recover that excess with what I placed on his hand from the medicines after mutilation of his body; but it was not found, and it began to progress to another finger; until corruption started in the hand.
He called me to cut his hand; but I did not want it, hoping for a recovery of the excess [of fluid]; and I also feared death due to the incision of his hand. Because the strength of the man was over his fall.
After he had given up hope in me, he returned to his own land; and he came to me about that [incident], because he had hurried and cut off his whole hand; and he was healed.
And I did not bring this narrative unless as aid for that which falls under the genus of this disease; and as signification, and according to how it is done.
[Title: On the Treatment of Sinusitis, and the Quality of Enemas with Medicines.]
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy parts, and the space of the abscess continues until it makes a collection of pus; then it breaks or perforates, and what is inside the pus comes out, and leaves a hollow place as if it were a vessel; and the skin that is above it becomes thin like a cloth that has been softened; and it does not reach its final corruption, nor press on the bone, nor on the nerve, nor on the ligament; it deserves to be called Sinus; but it is not called Fistula; however, if the space continues until corruption presses into one of these organs, then it is called a Fistula, or a boil.
And its treatment is to cut the whole skin as it rolls out; and especially when it has been softened and made like a cloth; and trust that it will not stick because of its own corruption.
If you think that it adheres to the skin and does not follow by that ultimate corruption: and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then treat it with a poultice; and it is, that you consider for the sinew.
If it is large, and the pus that comes out of it has a foul smell: then poultice it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and zinc oxide mixed in equal parts, heated in a vessel until the medicine turns red and thickens to the consistency of honey.
Then take what is needed from it: and dissolve it with water and honey, and poultice the sinew with it; and bind the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for two hours' quantity.
Then remove it with pressure: make this daily until the sinew is purified and the foul smell is removed.
And when you are not able to use this medicine, poultice with water and ashes; and it is, that you take the ash of grape wood, or the ash from oak trees, and throw water over it. Then cook it well, and poultice with it until you are confident that the sinew has been cleansed.
If the patient is not able to bear the Egyptian medicine or water and ashes, then poultice it with water and honey, into which something from crushed zinc has already been mixed. Or poultice it with honey and wine mixed, since the property of honey is to cleanse and purify; and wine holds the sinew, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness in wine.
When you are certain that the corruption of the sinew has been removed, then poultice it with what causes flesh to grow in it.
And it is to be noted that from the plaster dyafinicon, you shall dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic wine, or you shall purge it with certain medicines and other unguents, whose properties I have written about in the treatise on unguents.
If the orifice of the Sinus is narrow and does not accept a cannula for cleansing, then expand it slightly with iron, or place within it a linen cloth rolled up in Egyptian ointment, or in Basilicon ointment until it expands.
And similarly, if the orifice is also wide, then approximate its lips with suture, and allow the amount in which the cleansing can enter without addition.
And similarly, if the orifice from which pus flows is elevated towards the superior, then cut it at a lower place that is within it so that pus runs out below; since when pus is constricted in the depth of the Sinus, it prevents flesh from generating in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the Sinus below as you wish, then try to prepare a limb so that pus can run out from it with ease according to your preparation. Try not to retain anything of the pus at all in it; and take healing medicines that are placed on the sign, which suit your purpose. Spread them out on a linen cloth. Let the linen cloth be of such size that there is communication throughout the whole Sinus. Then make a hole with scissors directly in the orifice of the Sinus, larger than the orifice of the Sinus. Then spread a layer of soft ointment over another cloth, according to the size of the hole; and place it above it at a distance from the orifice of the Sinus so that the exit of pus from it is relieved; and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days in succession.
He who is above the opening of the Sinus should be removed at all hours so that what accumulates in it due to pus may exit; and know, whether what flows from it is much or little, digested or undigested.
And again, consider the place of the Sinus itself, whether its master feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess there or not.
Since your treatment is so extended and you see the material that exits from the opening of the Sinus, then know that the Sinus already adheres or approaches adhesion; then therefore dissolve it in the morning or on the third day; and when you dissolve the wound, then change the linen and renew the ointment.
If, however, pus flows out of the Sinus for a long time, do not despair of its adhesion, for healing is approaching; because there are some who have a slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are others who act contrary to this.
If, however, for many days an undigested pus flows out of the Sinus, then know that the Sinus is not adhering.
Therefore, if the adhesion of the Sinus is delayed and its treatment prolonged; then add to the drying remedies, but let the doctors ensure that they are in substance moist and in effectiveness dry, such as ointment dyafinicon when superfluous addition is added from zegi.
And from the most remote treatment is that you receive ointment dyafinicon, which is dissolved with rose oil and shaken over it ancient wine equal in substance.
Then make it with this and use it.
And now do the same with this action when you are not present ointment dyafinicon, honey, when you cook it until it thickens, and use it. Receive myrrh, and aloes, and frankincense: grind it all, and pulverize it on honey while it is over fire. Then cover it with linen cloth and bind it over the bladder: and line it with honey that you have boiled, until it thickens; and sprinkle powdered spices over it, and place it on the linen cloth and bind it.
And at times, long aristolochia, celestial lily roots, and lily itself are administered: and the flour of herbs, and centaury. Use them in simple form or compound, grind them and sift the powder: and sprinkle it over the honey that I have mentioned, and use it.
If the bladder prolongs and is not cured by this treatment: then know that there is corruption within it: or it already makes an impression on the bones, or in other hard members, or ligaments: then treat it with fistula cure, according to what has been mentioned before.
Section on panaritis and the scratching of the nails, and the addition of a digit incision, and section.
Panaritis is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb or foot, and perhaps arises in other fingers.
If it prolongs and is neglected in its treatment, and is abscessed with hot abscessing: or it becomes corrupted and emits pus until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it corrupts it completely, and the corruption reaches the bone, until there is a foetid smell; and the end of the digit becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
When you treat it, when you have done what I have said in division, and your treatment does not help: then it is necessary that you scrape off the entire superfluity that remains from the nail with iron. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. Indeed, cautery is very beneficial.
If the bone is healthy and so is the nail, and there are empty additions of the nail that press the flesh towards the inside and begin to pierce it and injure it; then it is necessary that you place fine radium under the edge of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it up; and cut the flesh easily, and put on top of what remains of the flesh from medicines that burn, corrosives, until it is removed entirely. Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If the corruption has already pressed into the bone, then it is necessary to cut that bone and remove it; for a rotten bone will never heal while it remains in there.
If you see that corruption and decay are advancing on the finger, then cut it at a knuckle, as previously mentioned. Then care for it until it heals.
If the nail should happen to be rubbed or struck and a very severe pain occurs, then it is necessary to use the phlebotome first on the weakened. Then cut the nail with an acute cross-cut of the spatula from above as desired.
And beware that the cut does not reach the flesh that is beneath the nail, for you will cause a very severe pain to arise above it and this will lead to an addition of flesh at the site.
Then care for the place with something that alleviates the pains.
The finger added to certain human hands is possibly all flesh; and it may be that some of them have bones, and it may be that there is a nail in it: and some of them are born at the joint of the root, or its birthplace is in some knuckles of the finger. Therefore that which is born in certain knuckles of the finger does not move; and that which is born at the joint of the finger may possibly move.
Therefore its cutting is easy if it is all flesh. It is to cut it at the root with a broad spatula.
But its care is difficult if its birthplace is at the joint of the root. Therefore refrain from cutting it.
In that one which is born at the end of the finger at a knuckle, then it is necessary to cut the flesh with a round cut until the bone. Then cut the bone with a saw that fits among those suitable for it. Then treat it until it is healed.
However, the consolidation that occurs in fingers often happens multiple times either due to birth itself, i.e., being born with it, or from a wound consolidation, or burn by fire, and similar conditions.
Therefore, the consolidation should be removed until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place linen or cloth soaked in rose oil between them to prevent quick consolidation and separate them; or put a thin lead plate between them until the location is healed as required.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers with the palm, then remove that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the member's shape.
Chapter on the Fault of Incision.
Wounds are swollen veins, thick, filled with melancholic fluids that occur in many parts of the body; and most commonly they occur in legs, especially in the legs of travelers and laborers, and those carrying heavy loads.
Therefore, it is necessary to administer a strong purge for the body at times due to black bile.
Then, let the bloodletting of the patient be made on the basilic vein.
The cure for them (swellings) with iron is according to two methods. One of them is, that they should be lanced and black blood be drawn out. And the other method is, that a vein shall be opened up and all drawn out.
Cutting is done according to this method (lancing). Pour a lot of hot water on the leg first, until thick, foul blood is resolved. Then bind the weak leg from its upper part of the hip to the lower part of the thigh with a bandage. Then cut the vein at one or two or three places in a wide cut.
Then draw out the blood, that is, extract it with your hand from the lower part of the leg upward, and it is necessary for the leech to attend to the patient first. Then cut the nail and draw out from the blood as much as you see is sufficient, and as much as the strength of the patient can bear.
Afterward, bind it (the wound) and tell him to abstain from foods that cause black bile; and repeat the purge and bloodletting when the veins become filled, and this is harmful to the patient.
The drawing out (of pus) is done according to this method (opening a wound, draining it, then applying a poultice). If the leg of the patient has many hairs, shave it. Then introduce it into the bath, or apply embrocation to his limb with warm water until it turns red and veins appear; or exercise it with strong exercises if there is no bath available, until the limb becomes warm.
Then dry the skin directly on the vein incision along its length; or in the end part of it near the knee, or in the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with combs and scrape the vein from all sides until it becomes sensitive; at its appearance, as you see it turn red towards blackness. When it has departed from the skin, you see it white like a cord.
Then insert radium under it until it rises and comes out of the skin; hang it with a blind comb, gently.
Then make another incision nearby that incision with three fingers. Then scrape the skin from the top of the vein until it appears. Then remove it with radium as you did before and hang it with another comb as you did at first.
Then make another incision, or several incisions, if necessary. Then remove it and cut the last incision at the heel.
Then extract the part that is above the incision.
Do this until you have extracted it from the higher incision, or all the incisions, until it comes out entirely; then cut it.
If it does not obey you to be extracted and removed; then insert a sharp needle with strong thread and tie it and extract it yourself; or insert radium under it and move your hand over all parts until it comes out. And be careful not to cut (it). For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult for you to remove it and from that it causes harm to the sick person.
When you have removed it completely: then place linen soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil, on the wound site, and care for it until it heals.
If it is a vine (grapevine) with a twisted shape and coiled at parts, not as we have said in a straight manner: then you must make an incision over all its twisted parts and the coiling sites of it.
Then hang it with hooks until you have pulled out the entire thing: and be careful not to cut any vein or wound during your incision; for it will be difficult for you to pull or extract it if you do. Therefore, exercise caution.
The method of treating a vine (grapevine).
The method for treating a blind boil.
Its scab is not like that of other boils, nor is it sharp-ended so as to pierce a vein; and it is rather large and flexible, soft; for if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein with its subtlety; on the contrary, its excessive size is superfluous, as we have said.
The method of extracting a leg vein.
This vein is generated in the warm lands of Egypt, as Azizgi said, and in the dry, hot, sandy areas with little vegetation, that is, where no herbs or trees grow.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
Its generation is indeed from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, as it happens in the bodies of snakes and roundworms (ascarids) and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
The sign of this vein's emergence is that it occurs when there is a severe inflammation of the leg. Then let the area be bled. The vein starts to come out from that spot of bled area, like a root of plant or animal.
When it appears from that end, then it is necessary to wind around it a piece of lead, whose weight shall be one and a half drachms, up to two drachms and a knot; and let the hanging lead be released from the arm.
Whenever something comes out of it to the outside, wind it around with lead and knot it. If it prolongs much, then cut a part of it and wind the rest. And do not cut its root before it comes out completely. Because if you cut [the ligature], it contracts and enters the flesh; causing an abscess to appear, a bad ulcer and pus.
Therefore, it should be treated gently and slowly extracted until it comes out completely and nothing remains in the body; and from this vein there comes forth in some men what is of its length five palms and ten. And now it has come to me, because the man has come out of twenty palms (i.e., 20 cm).
If it is cut during your treatment, then insert a rod into its opening and perforate it with a long rod along with the body until all that is inside it from the matter comes out; and administer medication for decay of the place for several days. Then care for it with treatment for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or on the foot itself; and openings occur for it in several places, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Take care of it as we have said in the division, and with what has been previously mentioned.
The ailment concerning worms generated beneath the skin is called Bouina.
This ailment is called Bouina in a certain land among us: because it often occurs in cows, and there is a small worm born between the skin and the flesh.
It moves throughout the body, ascending and descending; and it is revealed to sensation during its movement from limb to limb, until it bursts at any place where it bursts through the skin, and emerges.
Its generation is from the corruption of certain fluids. Just like worms and snakes, that is, earthworms and roundworms, occur in the abdomen.
It is feared because of its mischief. Because when it moves within the body and rises to the head and arrives at a place, then perhaps it opens there and emerges, and destroys an eye; and this often happens.
Therefore, when one wishes to treat it and extract it, this is not done except during its movement and the appearance of it to sensation.
Therefore, one must bind what is above it, and what is below it with a strong bandage. Then cut on top of it, and extract it.
If it has penetrated into the flesh, and you do not find it; then apply a hot iron to the place until it dies.
And the greater thing that is feared is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we said.
If you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind under it with a good bandage. Then cut on top of it, and extract it.
It is necessary for the sick person to use self-cleanliness of his body, with medicines that dissolve foul, bad fluids.
And let them avoid food causing putrefaction to themselves.
On Section for the Ailment of Nakir.
This ailment is known in our land as Nakir: it is a pain that occurs in certain members, then it shifts from member to member.
And I myself have already seen it, as I am telling you. I was called to a sick woman in some villages. And she extended her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And after staying for an hour, I saw the swelling moving with a worm-like motion, quickly ascending to her shoulder as if quicksilver flows from one place to another.
Therefore the pain left that place and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then she sat for an hour, and it ran throughout her body until it reached another arm.
Then she told me that she was revolving in her entire body, as I had seen.
I marveled at the swiftness of its shifting from member to member. And I myself had never seen this ailment with my eyes before in such a way as now. Yet I saw many who found pain shifting from member to member: I did not see it as I did in the woman.
And I do not think that it was anything else than because the woman was from those who are from the villages of the detected veins: hence it appears that the swelling was shifted.
And it is necessary that it not appear according to this reasoning in those who are delicate and moist bodies of concealed veins.
When therefore you wish for the cure of it and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to you with the eye, as we said, then tighten above it, quickly beneath it; cut above it until that constrained wind escapes; cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your eyes: then cure it by excision of the body and with that which expels winds, and crush them with foul-smelling pills and pills of turpentine, and similar things.
Chapter on the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows are classified according to their types and according to the places where they fall on the body.
The diversity of arrows is as follows: because there are some that have large points and small ones; concave or blunt. And there are those that have three angles. And those with tongues. And those with stars.
Those that fall on the limbs are twofold according to mode. Or limbs are from the hollow members like brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar ones. When an arrow falls into one of these hollow members and you see signs of death as I am about to tell you, then it is necessary to seek the extraction of that arrow from them because death follows him who has it in many dispositions. And when you do not see these bad signs and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it yourself and heal the wound.
From the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the bone, and exits on the top of the brain, are: because from this occur soda vomiting, scotoma, dizziness, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasm, confusion of intellect, and cholera vomit. And perhaps blood comes out from the nose, or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off and voice is destroyed. And from the wound place comes out whiteness similar to plaster. And out of it comes forth like a watery flesh-like substance.
If these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment and remove the arrow if it does not come out by itself.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are as follows: that it is near the left nipple; and it feels as if it is fixed in a solid rather than in a soft thing. And perhaps there is motion similar to the pulse movement, and blood runs out from the wound in black color. It follows this coldness of limbs, and a cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore that death approaches without doubt.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is as follows: foamy blood comes out from the wound; and containers that follow the neck are to be removed, and the complexion of the ill person changes. And it breathes out a large, high breath and seeks cold air.
If the arrow falls into the abdomen, which is in the chest; then it is near the small ribs; and a great panting with strong pain occurs along with sighing, and all limbs of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested comes out from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the abdomen and lodges there, something like feces comes out from the wound or pus, or an already disrupted intestine. Therefore, there is no hope for his cure, nor for removing the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes out; and something proceeds from it to outside, and the pain is stronger over the sick person; then know that it is fatal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, spatula, aid, dorsal spondiles, crossbar, hip, leg and similar members are to be healed according to several dispositions: when the arrow does not hit an artery or a nerve; and the arrow is not venomous.
And I tell you what I saw of these arrows, that you may know by it concerning your treatment.
It is, because a man had fallen an arrow into his tear duct of the eye, at the root of the nose. Therefore I extracted it myself from the other side, under the ear fat of him; and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen on him under the lower eyelid of his eye; and the arrow was already hidden, and I only obtained a small part of it, which adhered to the wood of it; and the arrow was large among the arrows of the Turks, with a soft iron, in which there were no ears.
Therefore the Jew was healed, and no harm came to his eye as a result.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and he has ears. Therefore I cut it across in two; and it was already immersed in his throat. I therefore sharpened myself with it, until I extracted it; and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen it on his abdomen; and we thought that he would die as a result of it.
After thirty days had passed without anything changing with regard to him in his treatment, I therefore cut across the arrow; and I sharpened myself on it, and extracted it; and he was healed, and no harm came to him as a result.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow fell upon his back, and the wound was healed over it. After seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow fell into her belly, and the wound was healed over it, and the arrow remained within her; and no change occurred in her condition from her disposition, and the woman did not find any harm to herself in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow fell on his face: and the wound was healed, and remained, not causing him much pain; and similar things happened many times.
And I extracted an arrow from a prince of the king that had fallen on his nose, which had already turned slightly to the right side; and the arrow was completely hidden.
Therefore, I was called for its treatment after the loss of the arrow up to three days. Therefore, I found the wound of the arrow to be very constricted.
Therefore, I probed it with a delicate probe, and did not feel it; but he himself found a puncture and pain under his right ear. Therefore, I hoped that the puncture was at the end of the arrow.
I then covered the spot with a plaster containing an attractive and digestive agent, trusting that the spot would open up, and I would see the sign of the arrow so that I could cut it; but this did not happen in the place that indicated that the arrow had struck.
Therefore, I kept the plaster on him for many days; but it did not happen, and the wound became more and more consolidated; and he remained weak from its extraction until he felt the arrow one day within his nose. And he told me that (it is).
And he told me that (it is). I then applied sharp and corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened; when I probed it, I felt a subtle tip of the arrow adhering to the wood.
Then I added through the opening of the wound a sharp medicine until the arrow tip appeared visibly to us; and it passed by me during about four months.
Then when the wound was swollen, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move it, and it did not obey to come out; then I did not cease sharpening, and working on it with means of ingenuity, until one day with well-made forceps, according to the form they would take at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I healed the wound.
And indeed physicians judge that cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I therefore healed it, and the wound was consolidated, and became healthy again in a strong health; nothing harmed him at all.
And I tell you the quality of extracting some arrows; that you may place this rule and meaning on what I did not say.
Since the parts and distinctions of this art are not comprehended with the narrative; nor does that book contain it, and the wise craftsman compares little with much; and with what is present, regarding what is absent; and he finds a new operation, and a new tool among descents of things foreign to this art when they occur.
I therefore say that arrows do not come out from the members on which they are fixed, unless in two ways. Or by attraction from the place from where it entered. Opposite part of another.
And that which comes forth where it entered is either an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place and is both attracted and exits.
If it does not obey to exit at the time it falls: then it is necessary that you let it be for some days until the flesh around it decomposes and the attraction disappears and its exit takes place.
And similarly if it is fixed in a bone and does not obey to exit, then let it be also for some days; and move and shake it every day until it exits.
If it does not obey to exit after several days, then it is necessary that you pierce around the arrow on the same bone from every side with a fine chisel in order to make the arrow swell up. Then attract it and pull it out.
If the arrow is already concealed in a part of the body and hidden from sensation; then seek it with probing. If however you feel it (the part to be operated), then draw it out with certain instruments suitable for its drawing out.
If you cannot go over it (the arrow) due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead; and there is no bone, nerve or vein there: then pierce it (the arrow), until the wound expands so that the arrow can be pulled out.
If there are ears attached to it (the arrow), then free the fixed flesh from all sides, in every way you can; and the instruments, if it cannot be moved by simple pulling on the flesh of the ears, and by twisting them, until it comes out.
And you, when you perform the extraction of an arrow, wherever it is located: then use twisting with your hand, together with pliers in all directions, until you make it come out; and gently, with the utmost subtlety, so as not to break the arrow, and its drawing out becomes difficult for you, and its extraction.
If you cannot move it within an hour: then leave it for several days, until what is around it (the wound) becomes putrid. Then return to it (the arrow): the dressing (tunic) will heal by itself. If however a flow of blood opposes you: then administer what we have said in its treatment as described in its chapter; and take care to avoid cutting any vein, nerve or tendon.
And apply all means of pulling out the arrow in every way possible for you; and let it be with ease, calmness, slowness or firmness, as I have told you.
And it is necessary that when you pull out the arrow, it be weakened in the same way as it was at the moment of the arrow's wounding. Because it is more helpful (to do so). If it is not possible for you [to perform the operation], then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
An arrow that emerges from the opposite part of another [body], or already proceeds to the outside: or makes a swelling at the tip of the arrow by sensation on the upper part of the skin near it, and you see it protruding: then cut above it, and let the incision be according to the quantity that will be able to grasp tweezers in it.
Then draw it out; for it will become easy to remove.
If it is held in the bone, then turn your hand according to its roundness until the arrow presses into the bone and expands itself: then draw it out.
And if not: let it be for some days; then try again until it comes out.
If the shaft of the arrow is in it [the wound], then push it out with it.
If the shaft has fallen out and you wish to give a pushing force: then insert a concave instrument into it so that it enters the concavity of the arrowhead; then push it out with it.
If the arrow is concave, then push it out with the instrument inserted into it. For the arrow is held by that [thing].
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to excavate all the flesh where the poison is; if it is possible for you [to do so]. Then treat it with that which suits for that purpose.
If the arrow falls into the chest, or into the abdomen, or into the bladder, or into the side [of the body] and is close to that which you touch with your hand, and it is possible for you to make an incision above it: then make an incision, and avoid cutting a vein, or a nerve, and remove it.
Then look at your wound and care for it until it heals.
And here is the shape of forceps with which arrows are extracted.
The ends should be like a bird's beak, made of iron; when they grasp an arrow, they do not release it.
And various shapes are made from them, large, small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, its smallness or largeness, and the size and narrowness of the wound.
The shape of a plunger is concave.
The shape of a deaf-plunger is spherical.
This is the shape of a deaf-plunger like a radius, so that its entrance may be applied to a concave arrowhead and it may be pushed with it.
Chapter on venesection (bloodletting).
Veins for bleeding, whose custom runs in the body, are thirty.
From the head there are sixteen: two Pulsating Veins, which are behind the ears, called Two Herbs: and two Arteries, appearing in both temples: and two Veins, which are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, called Looking-at: and Prepared Vein in the middle of the forehead: and a Vein at the end of the nose. And two Jugular Veins, which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins which are bled in the arms are five in every arm.
One of them is the Cephalic, and it is from the side of the woods; and the people call it the vein of the head. And the Black one. And there is a Middle vein, and it is made of the branch of the Basilic, and the branch of the Cephalic; and the people call it the vein of the body. And the Basilic, and it is placed on the domestic side; and it is also called Titillicaris. And the people call it the vein of the abdomen. And the Sinew of the arm, and it is placed on the elbow; and that is the one which is bled, and it is the one which appears above the thumb in a clear manner.
And the Saluatella: and it is the vein that is between the ankle and the toe; and there are two branches to it.
And in the leg and foot, there are three veins. One of them is a curvature under the nail on the side of the little finger. The second one is the saphenous vein, and its place is at the heel by the inner side. And the vein of Naessa: and its place is at the heel on the outer side.
And in another limb, there are three veins like these [veins].
Chapter on phlebotomy of two veins after the ears.
However, phlebotomy of the two veins that are after the ears, is beneficial for old catarrhs, and headache, and scrofula, and ancient evil ulcers on the head.
And the quality of phlebotomy is as I have said [explained]. It is to shave the head of the sick man, and rub his neck in the place of the two veins with a rough cloth for good friction. Then, the sick man tightens his neck with an ointment until the two veins appear. And their places are behind the ears in two depressed places on the head. Therefore, seek them with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark it with a hot iron [branding].
Then take the lancet for phlebotomy, and it is called Incisor [cutter].\] Then insert it [the lancet] under the vein into the flesh until the phlebotomist reaches the bone. Then pull your hand with the vein and skin upward, and cut the vein with an incising incision. And let the length of the incision be the size of two joined fingers or approximately that, and make as much blood come out as you wish.
Then tie it [the wound] with threads, and let it heal.
And now we proceed to the beginning of the book with the incision and cauterization of them [the veins].
On the two arteries which are for phlebotomy in two time periods, it is beneficial for old headache and pains of the neck, and also for continuous sore throat and running nose with discharge of sharp fluids towards the eyes.
And the method of phlebotomy for these is as I told you. The sick person should tighten his neck a lot until two veins appear to the sensation in a clear manner and their pulse is shown under your finger. Then make signs with incense.
Then loosen the skin over the vein with your index finger upward and insert the lancet from below, and loosen the vein toward the top. And cut it as you did with two other veins and let blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
Then relieve the constriction of the sick person, and place your finger on the vein at the hour one. After that, place the cotton and powder over it and tighten it strongly above with a strong constriction; and let it be until it is healed.
And now the reminder of these, their cutting, and their extraction has passed at the beginning of the book.
The beneficial effect of the phlebotomy of the forehead vein is after phlebotomy of the Cephalic vein, for old face pains, headache and redness, and for foul ulcers.
And the method of its phlebotomy is as I told you. The sick person should constrict his neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called Fossorium.
Place the pointed end which is at the head of the Fossorium on the same vein, and strike upon it with a mallet or another tool in this manner: let the blood flow according to the amount you wish. Then loosen the perforation of the patient and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide leech. However, it should not be the one with an acute tip like other leeches, rather it should be broad tipped. And the leech shall make an incision obliquely, because the bone is near; and perhaps it will break the leech when it is sharp.
The remedy for the two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, is for itchy and reddened eyes, as well as diseases of the face.
And the quality of venesection for them is to bind the patient's neck with a plaster. Then make an incision in those veins: you be standing on his head.
And the venesection shall be made obliquely along a length that is not much, with a wide and narrow leech, for there is no flesh in that place. If the leech is sharp-tipped, it may break.
Then let the blood flow out as much as is necessary for you. Place a bandage over them and bind them at night and loosen them in the morning.
The venesection of the Nasal veins is useful for acute fever and strong cough, as well as diseases of the face such as hemigraine and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
The quality of phlebotomy in this case is to tighten the sick man's neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a fine and long phlebotomy lancet, and fix it in the middle of the leprosy itself, between that which separates the nose according to its straightness. Since the vein does not appear to sense there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that your hand with the phlebotomy lancet be kept at the end: and let the blood run according to your need. Then tie it up at night. For this reason, it recovers quickly.
The help of Guidi's two phlebotomies is for the constraint of breathlessness, and the onset of leprosy, and melancholic ailments, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and those that are corrosive, i.e., herpes or scabies.
And the quality of these phlebotomies is to tighten the sick person under each neck with a bandage: and let the craftsman stand over the head of the sick person, and the sick person sit on a chair.
Then make the phlebotomy vein slightly larger than the broad phlebotomy. Then draw out a measured quantity of blood, or according to what you see for the necessity that is at hand. Then do the same with another vein.
Then loosen the bandage, and tighten two veins tightly in the middle: so that the sick person does not suffocate. And release it until morning. The wound heals.
Chapter on the phlebotomy of veins (by Algeberich). Algeberich's vein phlebotomies are beneficial because they help with intoxication in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers, fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you make the sick person sit before you, and tighten his neck with a bandage. Then roll up his lip, and look at the two veins: one is from the right lip, and the second from the left; and a demonstration of both is by blackening them both. And that is true: because around their course there are small, dark veins. Cut therefore both with an incision cutting into them.
If there is doubt over you and you do not know which one they are: then direct your attention to the larger incision of them, and make it clearer.
And likewise do with the two veins that are on the upper lip, and indeed there is a custom with this; and cut the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Chapter on Phlebotomy - The Vein Under the Tongue After Cephalic Phlebotomy. But of the two veins that are under the tongue, phlebotomy is an aid: because cephalic phlebotomy is for afflictions in the throat and the sickness of the voice, and the sicknesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is that the sick person sits before you with his head towards the sun: and you loosen his tongue, and look under the tongue on one side, and on the other side a vein; and the color of both descends to blackening.
Cut therefore one of them: and be careful not to cut your hand while phlebotomizing them. For there are arteries under it, and perhaps blood will flow out from these arteries.
But the three veins that are phlebotomized on the arm, their phlebotomy has a custom in all men.
And phlebotomy [is done] according to two modes. Or piercing with a broad-bladed leech: or applying oil to the decline: or cutting with a sharp-edged knife and it is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from these [there are] wide and narrow [species], according to the width and constriction of the veins. The form of the leech is wide, as you see. And it fits to open hollow veins, full, projecting, appearing, thick, and those which contain thick, turbid blood.
And this leech [is] of smaller width, and more subtle for thin veins.
And it fits to phlebotomy of thin veins which contain fine, yellow blood
The phlebotomy of the basilica, which is one of these three vein phlebotomies, is beneficial. Because it draws blood from the ailments which are under the throat and neck, following the chest and abdomen; and it fits for the leech to phlebotomize it, so that he may be careful, and it is over fear because under it is an artery. If therefore he [the leech] misses and adds in the prick of the leech, he will cut that artery, and bleeding will occur. Therefore it is necessary that [the leech] does not prick it with the leech: rather it should be cutting with Alnesil.
If the basilica does not appear by a manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you touch [it], and replace it with another, or look for one of its branches; or seek a rope of the arm in place of it (for the leech). It is evident and cut it with leech Anesil, as we said.
If you wish for the leech's application of this same [person], then it is necessary before the constriction of the arm, that you touch the place until you know the location of the pulse. Then mark the place with pitch, afterwards the arm, and cut the vein with a hollow-edged knife by leech Alnesil, as we said. And be careful that the blow does not fall into the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligament, swelling in the place which you marked with pitch, then that swelling is swelling of an artery; avoid it therefore.
If you see blood to rise at the leech like urine of a boy, and it is thin, red: then know that it is from the blood of an artery. Then therefore hurry, and place your finger on it in a long space, afterwards remove your finger. If therefore the blood is cut (many times it is cut), then tighten the arm and let go of it; and beware the weak man from movement of it, and it should be on watchfulness over it.
And do not move it for several days until it is healed.
If the blood does not flow and overpowers you, and there is no medicine present for you at that moment, then cut the artery if it appears to you. Because its extremities contract and blood flows out.
Or take the bark of a fig tree and grind it; take one half of it and tie it over the appropriate place of the vein constriction with a ligament and pepper until another day.
If blood flows out then it is good. And if not [the artery]: then care for him himself with the remembrance of the place from where powder-like substances removing blood flow are removed; and the cutting off of his blood is not difficult in many dispositions, due to the small size of the wound, and the possibility of a ligament from the arm.
The phlebotomy of the dark vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for this reason, it is composed of a branch of the Basilica, and a branch of the Cephalica, as we said before.
Moreover, it is fitting for the phlebotomist to know that it [the dark vein] is above a nerve. Therefore, if the phlebotomist makes an incision and finds a nerve during phlebotomy, there occurs fainting and healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it will not be healed completely.
This nerve often appears to touch (or feel). If it is hidden in some people and is subtle and not visible, then you should place the phlebotomy at that point where it can be phlebotomized with the incision of Alnesil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
On the Cephalic Vein. The phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and contributes to eye diseases.
And in this vein (the cephalic), if you want, it is appropriate to have the phlebotomist anoint with olive oil or myrtle oil when phlebotomizing; for it is safer than all veins, since it is neither beneath an artery nor a nerve.
It is fitting for you during phlebotomy that you ask the barber only to cut the head of an arm and seek a less painful spot; it does not harm him if it cannot be found with the first strike, but you should repeat over it several times with the phlebotomy.
Perhaps sometimes a tumor occurs in some men when not bled in the first strike, but it does not harm him that tumor in any way.
Chapter on the usefulness of phlebotomy and the precautions to be observed in it. The quality of phlebotomy and its accompanying circumstances, in whose correction you must think.
First, you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and its continuance, and caution against the onset of diseases.
And phlebotomy is to be performed in one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely Cephalic, Fusca, and Basilica. And phlebotomy is to be performed at the beginning of spring following a fast, during summer and autumn, and winter after eating, when signs of filling appear.
Phlebotomy is to be performed on the first or third day, after three hours have passed since the previous day.
But phlebotomy administered in diseases has no fixed hour; rather, when necessity and suitability call for it, it is performed at night or day, and in every hour, and in any time.
Children should not be bled until they reach the age of fourteen. A pregnant woman should not be bled except from the fourth month to the seventh. Old men who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
If someone wishes to undergo bloodletting for any reason, it is necessary that they clean their intestines before the procedure with a gentle enema, if there is much fecal matter retained within them: so that during bloodletting no putrid waste from the intestines attracts to the veins and harms the main limbs.
The patient should not be bled while suffering from toxicity (satiety of nausea) or drunkenness or inebriety. It is necessary that this be removed from them first. A person with dropsy (hydropisis) should not [be bled].
Be cautious about bloodletting again after an attack of the colon, vomiting, diarrhea, increase in sexual activity, labor, exercise, wakefulness, fasting, and any other thing that weakens the body or animal strength.
Then consider the subtlety of humors beforehand, if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medications: if it is possible for him to do this.
Then let a bath be entered, if it does not forbid something else: or exercise with some exercise to make the blood subtle.
And let the bloodletting of his be on his chest around the third day, as we said before: and strive for his chest to be evacuated that day from all bad conditions of animals such as tightness, anger, fear: and from all bad physical conditions such as labor, punishment, excess, and similar things.
And let him have present things with which the custom of mankind is accustomed to run by way of aromatics, and fragrances, and perfumes, and similar things, insofar as their quantity allows.
Then let the bloodletter sit on a stool higher than the stool for bloodletting: then he shall draw out his arm and rub it twice or thrice with his own hand. Then tie the ligament with a suture, and roll it twice.
And let the constriction be even, because an uneven constriction, either due to excess in constriction, then it prevents the flow of blood; or due to looseness, then it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then after constriction, it is necessary for the phlebotomist to rub his hands together until the veins swell and become palpable to the touch.
Then the phlebotomist cleans the lancet with a little oil, using an old one specifically.
Then place the index finger of the left hand on the same vein in the desired location, slightly pressing to avoid the vein fleeing and the blow being scattered. Because from the veins you find one like a string fleeing at phlebotomy; and from those which are full of wind, it contracts under the phlebotomist, deceives the phlebotomist, and does not open the vein; and if it opens it, it is constricted. Therefore, it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be firm and careful in all these matters.
Then lay down the lancet. If a vein is opened by one blow, then it is good. And if not, then do it again with another blow in the same place slightly or above it quickly; if the spot is not pierced through.
If the spot is pierced through or if the weak person faints, then let it go for a day or two; and do not tie the ligament. Perhaps a hot abscess may attract it (the lancet). Do not enter the bathhouse.
Then perform phlebotomy again, if it is necessary.
If the opening is small or the blood flows subtly and you fear that not enough blood will flow out; then perform phlebotomy again in the same opening according to correct procedure, and add a little more in the operation.
Make it quickly before removing the location, for the place to be excised is often in many people during a small operation.
If you see it (the tumor) already excised, then do not go over it at all, for it does not excuse anything from you. And place something made of oil paste upon it (the wound): because it will soothe the flow of blood. It is better in this place than oil itself, and than other olive oil.
And similarly administer oil paste in every bloodletting where you are prohibiting the flow of blood: and this is made by Tyrian alkarab, and Sagzenea, when it is placed over the place.
For the blood becomes refined and dissolved when it is thick.
If it happens at the location of bloodletting that a large tumor occurs, which often happens especially to those who are not bloodletters except for that time or when there is only a small opening of the vein, then hurry and place over the spot a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated slightly: and squeeze it for an hour: because it dissolves.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood comes out of the vein itself when it is complete, or from another vein.
If something remains in the place after days that is black or greenish, it does not harm it: and if you wish, place over it something of aloe or myrrh dissolved; or something from the juice of mint, namely camphor or something similar to it.
Many times indeed tumors and elevations occur during bloodletting in the Basilica (hospital).
Place your hand on it (the tumor), then if you find softness under your pressure on it, then that elevation is bad. "Therefore, place something on it from what I mentioned. "Perhaps blood from the artery will flow out of it.
"But make an ointment for him with that which has styptics (stopping properties), so that the place hardens. "Then take care of him with the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
"And it is necessary to draw blood from every man according to the strength of its virtue. "And what appears as a swelling over the blood (blood clot) in color.
"For if the blood is black, then let it come out until it turns red; similarly, if you see it thick, let it go until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp (pointed), let it become blunt until its sharpness is removed.
"And it is necessary for a person who is full, strong and in need of bloodletting once, to increase the bloodletting by the vein and be a vein-bloodlet; and for one who is weak, it should be on the contrary.
"And it is necessary to draw it (blood) in the veins and that the opening should be narrow; and what is administered by bloodletting through the vein is better if it is a cross-section rather than a puncture.
"This method of bloodletting is safe from blood flow and nerve injury; it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting by width and length.
"And to one who often comes for bloodletting (phlebotomy), it is necessary to eat a little piece of bread soaked in water and muscatel or a dry biscuit if he is hot; and draw blood from him in three or four veins.
"And if he has a cold constitution, then before bloodletting let him eat bread soaked in honey-syrup or aromatic honey with spices, or aromatic fragrant syrup.
If it happens that fainting occurs during bloodletting and the cause is excessive bleeding, then one should take meat water and subtle fragrant syrup in drink. And he should use aromatic substances along with alum and wash his chest with it. And he should use the remaining things that we mentioned in the division chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
Whoever wants to let down his arm and release blood during the second phase, it is necessary for him whose bloodletting is due to excessive evacuation, and his strength is weak, to release blood gradually according to the strength's amount over continuous days.
However, whoever wants to let down his arm and release blood during the second phase, and his body is weak, then he should do this after seven or nine hours from his first bloodletting.
Whoever wants to attract blood from his body towards the opposite part where it has fallen, it is necessary for him that this be done on the second or third day.
In whose body there is much blood that has become hot and sharp, causing a fever, it is necessary for the blood to come out once, and a large amount to be drawn: and the opening should be expanded as long as fainting occurs. After you have ensured all conditions of bloodletting, place your hand on the pulse of his arm along the course of the blood, so that death does not occur in place of fainting. It often happens when the bloodletter is unaware and falls because of negligence.
And it is not necessary when one wants to let down the arm and release blood during the second phase, if the orifice of the vein has already been closed, and the exit of blood becomes difficult, to press on it with force and quickly stretch out the curved arm. It is very bad, rather let it be, until it is bled again in the second stage.
Remove with sharpness the clotted blood from the vein's opening and place upon it something of salt dissolved in water. And put upon it some turpentine, or alfaroch, or sageweed, and press it gently until the blood comes out.
If it is a vein that has been cut off, then let it be, and do not cover it, until the tumor settles down.
If necessity demands the resolution of blood in a second stage and there is no excuse, then either lance it at that place or on another vein in the other arm.
The band of the arm is bled at the place of Fusa and Basilica, since they are not found and hidden, because it is made up of them.
And the quality of lancing is such that a weak hand should be inserted into warm water until it turns red, and the vein appears clearly.
Then tie it over it with a bandage of moderate constriction. Then lance it crosswise gradually, not widthwise or lengthwise; and make the opening wide, and make your lancing on the junction of the hands partially.
If the outflow of blood is forbidden, then dip your hand into warm water and let the blood flow in the water until you achieve your need.
If it is during summer days, then you are excused from dipping your hand in warm water. And indeed a great number of bloodlettings are put in hot water during winter time.
And the lancing of this vein is safer than all veins because it is not beneath a pulsating vein nor a nerve.
Phlebotomy for Saluatella (a specific condition) of the right hand is related to the illnesses of the liver.
The quality of the phlebotomy (procedure) for this (condition) is as follows: you should tie a leech to the hand with a ligament or your own hand, after inserting it into warm water, until the vein becomes inflamed and is felt strongly. Then make a crosswise incision (on the affected area) for the phlebotomy. And if you completely cut it (the leech), it will not harm her/him at all.
And be careful, do not overdo the procedure of phlebotomy with your hand. For under (the affected area) are the nerves of the fingers exposed from the flesh.
Then immerse your hand again in warm water and let the blood run out in it. For if you do not repeat it (immersing the hand) in warm water, the blood will clot in the vein opening and prevent the flow of blood.
Therefore, when you have extracted the required amount of blood, put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not clot quickly.
Similarly, it is necessary to do this with every tightened branch (blood vessel).
But the help for this (condition) comes from the left hand: because it is related to the illnesses of the spleen; and similarly do this in the phlebotomy of the second (hand), as you have done in the first, equally.
The help for the saphena (vein) phlebotomy is in the illnesses that are located in the lower part of the body, such as menstrual problems, kidney issues, old ulcers on the hips and legs, and similar ones from other illnesses.
And the quality of this (procedure) is as follows: an ill person should insert his foot into warm water, and make friction on top of it until the veins appear; then tie a ligature above the joint of the foot with a thong. The location of the vein is near the heel, appearing towards the thumb; and many branches branch out from it on the face of the foot.
Therefore, perform the incision on a larger branch of it, or near the heel at its aggregation: for it is better and safer.
If you perform the incision on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
Place your lancet for the incision as if you wish to make the incision obliquely; and let the lancer be called Nesil.
If the flow of blood is forbidden, then immerse his foot in warm water; and release the blood to run into it until it is evacuated.
If the vein is missed by the lancer on the first attempt, then he should return with the lancer to a slightly higher position; for it is safe, and you need not fear any harm from that, as long as you beware of the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the Sciatic veins, as we have said, is near the heel on the side of the forest (or woods).
The help for this lancing is, for pain in the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
The quality of the lancing is that it enters an unwell person into the bath and makes haste; and bind the leg from the side of the ankle to above the heel with fine and long plaster, for it does not appear unless because of this.
When it appears, then perform the lancing as is possible for you according to your skill; either obliquely or crosswise; and it is better, either to make an incision or to sever it with a cut. The location is very well-hidden, and it is extremely concealed within many humans.
The location is very well-hidden, and it is extremely concealed within many humans. If you cannot find it (the lesion), and it does not appear at all to the senses: then make an incision into one of its branches, and that which appears on the back of the foot, and turn towards the auricle; and beware of the nerves, and let a quantity of blood flow as much as you wish.
Then dissolve the constriction, and place skin over the incision site, and tie it up. It heals quickly.
On Venotomy (Ventosation) and the quality of its use.
Ventoses are made from horns, iron, and glass.
And ventotomy is done in two ways. With incision and bloodletting; the other is ventotomy without incision.
And this ventotomy without incision, is done in two ways. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the ventoses that are administered with incision and bloodletting, there are fourteen sites on the body. One of them is Ventosatio Alnocrati, and it is the last part of the head; Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; ventoses Alhagdahim, and there are two plates of the neck from both sides at the same time; ventoses of the brain, and it is under the lower jaw; ventoses of two spatulas; ventoses of Alachosos above the tail end; ventoses of two bellows, and they are in the middle of both arms; ventoses of two legs; ventoses of two ankles.
And Ventosatio does not draw blood from you from the scattered small veins in the flesh, and because of this, its virtue does not fall out from them, as is the case with that event from phlebotomy. It is not necessary to administer ventosatio whether with fire or without it for any illness that occurs due to congestion, until the whole body has been evacuated.
If necessity compels ventosation due to illness or custom, it is administered at the beginning of every month, at its end, and in the middle of it, as well as at any other time.
Because there are men whose blood, when it is multiplied, until it needs to be extracted through ventosation, finds in his head a heaviness and swelling.
And from them are those who find congestion and redness in their face, head, and neck. And from them are those who find itching on their face, forehead, and darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And from them are those who have a scalp spot for their ventosation. And from them is one whose laughter is multiplied. And from them is one who finds the taste of blood in his mouth; or the tongue is loosened and cleansed the blood. And from them is one whose sleep is multiplied. And from them are those who see blood and redness in their sleep, and the dead, and wounds, and things similar to these.
When we see something from these [symptoms], especially if it is during the third week of the month: we then order ventosation to be performed, after two or three hours have passed since that day.
The benefit of ventosation for the neck is this: because it relieves the heaviness in the head and what is discharged goes to the eyes. It is necessary that it [the wound] be afterwards, after evacuation of the whole body.
This indeed is a ventose in place of cephalic phlebotomy.
And it shall not be used by one who has a cold temperament, or in which there is a catarrh. For it causes him great harm.
And therefore, it should not be used by old men, and in whose head there are cold diseases.
But if one is to make constant use of it, forgetfulness will be generated on him.
And therefore, you must warn the ventosator to put his hand with the ventose for a while towards the lower parts, fearing the production of forgetfulness.
Ventosation or Alkehel, is in place of phlebotomy Fuscous and basilican phlebotomy, and therefore it causes coughing, constriction of breath, panting of the instrument, coughing, filling [the body], and tumescence.
And it is necessary to force the ventose Alkehel for a short while, since if it is placed lower, it generates weakness of the heart and stomach.
Ventosation Alhagdahim causes accidents of pain in the head, migraines, hemigrainae, perforation, and tooth root pain: it is in place of basilican phlebotomy.
And you must warn the ventosator not to press his hand with scarification, lest he cut an artery and there be a flow of blood.
Ventosation under the chin causes drunkenness in the mouth, corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth: it stands for another phlebotomy, which are on both lips.
Ventosation of spatulae causes alchafacha, which is caused by lying down and heat.
Interior partitions' ventosation provides assistance to phlebotomy of three veins, Basilicae, Fuscae, and Cephalicae, because it draws blood from all the small veins that are in the flesh; and these small veins draw blood from larger ones until the attraction reaches the three veins.
It is necessary to instruct the Ventosator not to proceed too much in scarification, since the area is stripped of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The ventosa that is applied to the anus provides relief for hemorrhoids and lower ulcers.
It is necessary to instruct the Ventosator that the ventosa should be large and made of metal, because the area requires strong suction, and perhaps delicate ventosas may break; and it should be scarified with a deep scarification.
The ventosae of the legs diminish with an obvious decrease, because they draw blood from the entire body and provide relief from old pains in kidneys, uterus, and bladder; induce menstruation, cause bothrodesis and amenorrhoea; and stand where phlebotomy is performed on two saphena veins and alhorcobenia.
However, they weaken the body greatly and cause fainting in many people.
The relief provided by ventosae of alhorcobenia is close to the relief provided by ventosae of both legs.
The quality of the position of the ventosae is to place the ventosa first in a vacant area and to apply moderate suction; and do not prolong the position of the ventosae, but place them quickly, and remove them quickly, so that humors come to the area at an equal rate; and do not stop repeating this and continuing until you see the area redden and swell, and the redness appears as blood; then scarify, and repeat suction gradually. Then, consider in the arrangement of bodies.
For whoever is from soft-fleshed people, with few pores, it is necessary to scarify him only once, not more: so that the place does not ulcerate.
And command the Leech (physician) to enlarge the scarification and not to dig deeply; and moderate the suction in ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is thickening in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify him twice. In the first vein (artery or vein), an opening is made for the subtlety of the blood and its wateriness; and in the second scrutiny (inspection) of the thick blood, the extraction of the coagulated blood.
If the blood is extremely foul, then let there be a scarification for the third time: to follow the last (option).
And finally, when we wish to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, it is sufficient for us with one scarification. If we wish to make the extraction of blood many times, we will scarify with multiple scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to be scarified with a deep scarification: and the end equal in the scarification, is the depth of the skin.
§ What is that which must be administered from oils in the position of the Leech (physician), and what must the Leech be careful of when sucking blood?
In the one whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, it is necessary to anoint the places of the Leech with open, soft, resolving oils: if it is in summer (season), such as alkali oil, or volatile oil, or oil from sweet almonds, or oil from the seed of a cucumber.
And if it is in winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil from lilies, or oil of chamomile, or sarsparilla: and similar ones.
And if excess is large and cold, then use oil of amaracis, or oil from balsamitum, or oil of alben, or oil of anethum: and similar ones.
And if it is a large and tender wound, then it should be prevented from oil, and it should be washed with rose water, or cold water, or sea water, or water of cucumber, or water of purslane: and similar ones.
For him whose blood has much moisture, wash the wounds with vinegar, or water of myrtle, and sumac: and similar ones.
For him whose excesses are large, wash the wounds with old wine, or water of sassafras, or a decoction of anethum, or chamomile: and similar ones.
And it should be cautioned against wounding in the bath or near the bath, rather it should be administered after leaving the bath for an hour or for two hours.
And one should not sleep after being wounded.
What is it that must be regulated before wounding or bleeding?
And after that, you should consider first: then if the wounding or bleeding person is choleric and the sharpness and inflammation prevail over his blood, then it is necessary that he receives cooling, such as musk-grape: also honey with vinegar and lettuce, and sour milk, and cucumber juice, and yogurt: and similar ones.
And place his food for the chicks, and cook the mutton meat, and prepared foods with herbs: and similar things to it.
If its complexion is cold, he should take syrup from honey or almiua or alsecaniabin made from seeds in his drink; and he should take medium-aged wine that is between old and new; and it is prescribed that he use sparingly food. And put his food for the chicks, and roast it; and sparrows, that is, small birds; and he should peel the young pigeons.
It is necessary that the drink on the day of venesis and phlebotomy be more than the food; and it is necessary that in some people, during the hours of tyriaca alfaroch or medicine from musk, that is muscata, or alesselithe be given before venesis; and before or after phlebotomy, so that the main limbs are strengthened and the blood becomes more subtle. And it is not necessary to drink it in heated drinks.
Chapter on Venesis without Scarification. Venesis without scarification are those that are placed on the liver, spleen, podagra, and on the abdomen, umbilicus, flanks, and achilles tendon; because these members do not tolerate scarification upon them.
And it is not sought through these except for the attraction of blood from one member to another; such as placing a venesis on the breasts in sickness of nasal bleeding. And we use them to dissolve cold and unpleasant congestion of blood in a member; such as placing a venesis on the abdomen and umbilicus. For it makes the member thin, warms it, and removes pain because it dissolves that congestion.
Also, it is placed on the kidneys when there occurs an ulceration or stone in them. By virtue of its attracting power, perhaps it opens an ulceration or removes the stone from its place.
Similarly, when placed on the liver and spleen for the purpose of reducing swelling in both.
These swellings are treated with emptying by incision alone. And sometimes they are treated with fire.
And sometimes they are filled with warm water for the diseases of pleurisy: and this is done to fill the swelling and make it large, with warm water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable for the occasion have been boiled.
§ Form of a swelling treated with fire.
The width of its opening should be two fingers apart, as we have defined: and the depth of it should be half a palm: and on the side of it, in the place that is about halfway along its length, there shall be a small hole, according to the size required for an awl to enter it: let it be made of brass or citrine, or lead sheets, equal in thickness, smoothed: so as not to injure the limb when placed on it: and let there be a cross bar transverse across it from brass or iron where the candle with the fire is placed.
And now this swelling becomes large, larger than we have said, but smaller than that, according to the diseases and age of the person using it.
Swellings in children and weak individuals are different from swellings in adult males and those with large bodies.
The quality of placing this swelling with fire on a limb is to light a linen cloth or small candle made from tallow and place it over the middle cross bar that is in the center of the swelling: so that the fire is ignited about the lower part of the swelling, so as not to burn the body of the weak individual.
Then place on the limb, and let a finger be over the hole I mentioned, until when we grasp the bladder; as needed, remove the finger, and the bladder will come out through that hole, and the bladder will immediately burst open.
Then apply linen cloth according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary.
In the bladder used in pleurisy with water, there is no cross-stick or hole. It is not administered unless it is filled with water and only placed on the limb.
And this is its shape.
And the bladder is better when it is larger so that it can hold more water.
Chapter on Suspension of Sanguisugars.
Sanguisugars are not administered in many cases, except where the positioning of bladders is not possible due to their small size, such as lips, gums, and similar areas. Or on denuded limbs, such as fingers, nose, and similar areas.
And the quality of their use is: to come from Sanguisugars that are in sweet, clean waters, free of decay.
Then they should be placed in sweet water both day and night until they are hungry, and there remains nothing in their stomachs. Then the body is evacuated first with bloodletting, and with bladders. Then cleanse the sick limb until it turns red. Then place them on top of it.
When they are filled and drop, and there is a possibility of squeezing the place with a bladder, then it is more beneficial for treatment; and if not, then cleanse the place with vinegar. Then with much water, rub and press out.
If the course of blood persists after a bleeding (of the teeth), and it is oozing: then immerse a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the oozing stops.
If much blood flows out, then sprinkle powdered zegi, or gallnuts and similar substances from styptic plants on top until the blood stops flowing.
Or place halved and peeled fava beans on the location: and allow them to remain until the fava beans stick to the location, for blood is stopped by this.
And it is necessary that if repeated bleeding (of the teeth) is required, whenever possible, to change them.
But if bleeding (of the teeth) is forbidden by suspension, then clean the location with recent blood. Or fix a probe into the locations until something comes out from the blood. Then place them (probes), for they themselves will immediately adhere when they feel something from the blood.
When you wish that they (the teeth) fall out, sprinkle something from powdered aloes, salt or ashes on them, and they will fall out immediately.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of a fracture, and dislocation of accidents in bones.
Know that, o sons, the foolish physicians and ignorant people boast about this chapter on fractures and dislocations, and those who have never read an ancient book nor read anything from it.
And for this reason, that method (of treating fractures and dislocations) is lacking among the learned on our land. And I have never encountered anything good in it entirely, and I have not acquired from it that which I have acquired except due to the length of the reading of ancient books, and my zeal for understanding them, until I extracted the knowledge of it from them.
Then I adhered through experiment and study over the course of my life.
I have now described for you everything that my knowledge contains on the subject of this Chapter: and above what my experiment has passed, after I have abridged it for you, and freed it from occupation and length, and abridged it to a conclusion, and showed it to a conclusion: and I have formed many shapes in it from the shapes of instruments which are used therein, since it is a matter of addition, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary that we say in the prologue of this Chapter the main points and chapters to which one must be directed first in his understanding for the craftsman concerning their truth: namely, so that you and those who are quick may know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
Therefore, I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or accident occurs to someone, it is necessary first to hasten to bleed him and to loosen him, or both at the same time: unless something prohibits this, such as weakness of strength: or he is a child who has had one of these things, or an elderly person in decline: or it is a time of violent heat, or violent cold extremely.
Then let him be content with his food, cold vegetables, onions, and beans; and forbid wine, fat meats, and to be filled with foods and any food that fills veins with blood. Until he is secure from a hot aposteme and no longer fears the issue of matter to the limb; then let the sick person return to his own regimen first with which his custom was accustomed.
When the fractured bone begins to heal, then it is necessary for the sick person to eat nutritious foods in large amounts, thick, heavy, with viscosity; such as foods made from cooked wheat with water, rice, heads and feet of animals, intestines of sheep, eggs, fresh fish, thick wine and similar things. With this regimen, the healing of the fracture occurs more quickly and better.
And you should know that fractured bones, when they are in men who are in the first old age and decrepit, it is not possible for them to be held together and consolidated according to their nature always, due to drying of their limbs; and they consolidate and hold together what are from those bones at the end of softness, like the bones of small children.
However, nature connects something similar to gluten around the fractured bone from all sides, in which there is thickness, by which it adheres and tightens it until they consolidate with each other, and bind together until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until it does not forbid something from its operations; and for this reason it is necessary that you put the nutriment of the sick person in foods that are thick, viscous, and heavy, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse, according to the difference of the members; for a fracture of the limb is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone; and similarly all other members are different one from another; and I come with the reminder of every type of fracture explained in its own chapter distinguished from the others. The types of fractures differ among themselves as well.
For a fracture is sometimes curved, except that studs occur in it. And sometimes a fracture is along the length of the bone; and there are fractures which are studs (astellae), that is, studs, and additions proceeding, such as in a reed when it is sharpened with a knife for writing. And not proceeding; and there is a fracture with wound and rupture in the head; and there is a fracture of a small crack.
And every type has its art or specific tool in the restoration of it, according to which its reminder will come, distinguished in their respective places.
And from that which the bone fracture is known, its curvature and protuberance appears; and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
When therefore no curvature appears in the place, nor a sound to your touch when you touch the bone with movement, nor does it have a great pain; then there is no fracture there, but it may be that there is a curvature or a small crack; therefore, you should not move it with your hand and compression at all; rather, lay medicines upon it, whose reminder comes after that which suits the place; then compress it with a fine ligature.
And know that when a place bows and is divided into two, excepting what happens to it in the form of pus, yet every part is removed from its comparison: then it is necessary for you to begin from your hour for its correction, equalizing it before hot suppuration occurs.
If hot suppuration occurs, then leave it for some days until the pus subsides. Then equalize it according to whatever method is possible with gentleness and skill.
And know that the restoration of this, and its equalization, is easier than the bone, in which pus occurs.
Then tie it up according to your recollection of it.
If in a bone pus occurs, then the extension of this broken member is necessary from two parts, if it be a hand or foot; or with your hand, if the member be small; or with two ropes, or with a rope and your hand.
Let your position be such that you place the member on an equal location according to its natural shape, until the parts of the broken member are extended; then try with all skill and in whatever way you can to make the additions return to their places, and in the best way possible at their locations: and beware according to your strength, so that pain or injury does not occur due to your operation; and try according to your strength to apply one of two bones together with its companion, according to the best forms.
It is necessary in that hour for you to attempt and touch it with your hand. If you see something different there, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your strength.
And beware of vigorous extension and strong compression, as many foolish people do. They often cause a hot abscess or contraction in a limb by their surgery, as we have seen it many times from their surgeries.
Then attach [something] after the equalization, and a proper surgical procedure, and a tightening of that limb, and calmness, and peace: and warn the patient regarding it. And make him beware, not to move himself during the hour of his watch, and sleep, at the time of rotation, and agitation, and at the time of hunger, and all movements, in the utmost strength of his power. And that he beware, so that the position of the limb is not followed by pain. Since when he feels pain or injury in the position of the limb, then it is necessary that he be moved to another position which does not cause pain.
And beware with him so that his position is equal and straight, so that no tortuosity occurs in the limb when it is restored.
And the quality of the tightening of the broken limb is as I have told.
Know that broken limbs are differentiated according to their smallness, their size, and their shape.
Those which are small, such as the arm, finger, spade, and similar things, then it is necessary that there be a soft, fine wrapping of cloth. And those which are large, such as the thigh and leg, it is necessary that there be a wide, hard wrapping in them.
Since a wide bandage connects a large limb and tightens it from all sides with an equal tightening, so that no spot is entered by it.
Then after your evacuation, place the appropriate lining on it from the equalization, in soft wool over the location of the fracture itself. Then begin to roll the ligament over the place of the fracture with three or four rolls, according to what the limb deserves; and tighten your hand slightly with the ligament.
Then go to the upper part from the place of the fracture and tighten less than your previous tightening with which you tightened the fractured place. Then extend yourself with the roll from the place of the fracture a little, and soften the tightening gradually until you take a large amount from the healthy place.
Then take another piece of gauze, and roll it again over the fractured place with rolls. Then go to the lower part from the fracture with the roll. And let your operation be in the tightening of the rolling and its softening, according to what we said in the first roll.
Then place between the rolls of soft wool or cloth, which equalizes the curvature if there is a curvature in it; and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then roll over another piece of gauze. Then place stars evenly spaced immediately over these rolls, if there is no swelling or hot abscess.
If there is swelling or an abscess: then place it on that which sits on the abscess, and remove the swelling; and leave it for some days. Then tighten the stars over it.
The stars should be made from the middle parts of a wide reed, shaved and skillfully formed; or they should be made of wood from which cribra are made, which are made from pine, yew, palm branches, or calingi; and the size of all the stars should be according to this shape and this same form.
However, the star that is placed over the suture should be a little thicker and wider than the other stars; and the length of the star should be according to the size and smallness of the member.
Then bind on top of the star with another plaster, according to the first binding's tightness. Then bind well with thread, as we said concerning binding; and it is that your binding over the place of the fracture should be more than the fracture itself; and the farther away from the fracture it becomes, the less the binding should be.
And it is necessary that the threads are of medium size and fineness, and they are made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the work of foolish men placing their threads from twisted cords of linen, it is a great error; because the binding falls with them beyond quality.
And again, very thin threads do not agree; for you will not obtain what you desire through the binding with them.
It is not necessary that there be less than a finger's breadth between stars.
If the sick man is harmed by the ends of the stars after binding in healthy places: then put under them from soft wool or carded wool until nothing is harmed from it.
When there is a fracture with a wound, and a tear occurs in the skin, I will come with its discussion in the second chapter according to its particularity.
And know that not every broken member should be bound with stars from the first day. For when the member is large, it is not necessary to put stars on top of it unless after five days or seven or more, according to your safety from the occurrence of a hot abscess.
And this is the method of plasters which the ancients used to restore them, which are placed on a fracture and a luxation.
¶ The common method of emplaster shortened, restoring a fracture, suitable for many complexions, especially women and children; because it is from that which heat does not prevail, nor cold.
And it is to receive from the flour mill dust, and it is the kernel of wheat that hangs on the walls of the mill near the movement of the millstone; and you shall make it as it is, except that sieves it with egg white; and place its mixture not too thick, nor too thin. Then use it [the mixture].
Another method of plastering, for the treatment of a fracture, and dislocation, and twisting. Prepare almess, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mugath; and grind all of them with 10 parts of myrrh, and 5 parts each of aloes, and 20 parts of alcohol; then sift them, and mix with water of alcohol, or with egg white if the dressing is warm for the weak. Then use this plaster [mixture]. For it is of good composition, it quickly restores broken bones and benefits many people.
Another method of plastering, which also treats a fracture and twisting. Prepare mugath, mess, white altheae, all ground with 10 parts of myrrh, and 5 parts each of aloes; Armenian pumice 6 times pulverized, and sifted; and make a paste with water or egg white; and administer them.
Another method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places; it relieves the pain and splintering of the bone, and fractures. Wool is to be taken, immersed in vinegar and boiled oil; and placed on the location [of injury].
In this plaster there is no power of restoration, but it is good for the relief of hot abscesses; and it expels pain properly.
Method of Plaster, which restores a broken bone. Take the leaves of figs from the deaf and the leaves of wild papaver (opium poppy); grind all of them together and make a plaster from both.
Method of the quick-acting plaster for the restoration of a broken bone, and when you wish to hasten the removal of an abscess residue. Take equal parts of the roots of marshmallow (althea), chamomile, wild flowers, herb flour; grind all of them and make a paste with wine if the limb is not heated.
If it is heated, then make a paste of it with water of coriander, or with water and use it.
Another stronger method for resolving a hard abscess during the restoration of a limb. Take equal parts of the roots of marshmallow (althea), flax seeds, boxwood, vetch, tansy, chamomile, and wild flowers; grind all of them and make a paste with willow water, or with sweet water, or with wine. Apply it according to the warmth of the limb, and the calmness of its heat.
But Hippocrates did not say in his book that it should be placed over a broken limb during its restoration, unless made of pitch, and oil; nothing else; and he said that it should have a consistency between thickness and subtlety.
Galenus thought that they should be placed over a broken limb during its restoration, which have the ability to dry heat, such as myrrh, aloes, and frankincense, and similar substances from what we mentioned.
Method of plaster for injury and pain. Make a paste by grinding equal parts of barley meal, hare's wool or human hair, goose feathers, madder root (altea), and salt; and make it into an ointment.
The amount of the paste required for binding depends on whether pain persists, there is itching or if the fractured bone moves from its place; in such cases do not dissolve the paste for many days. If there is severe itching or distressing pain or swelling at the site; then urgently dissolve and remove the paste within an hour and apply a soft cloth or sponge soaked in warm water and wash the area until the itching stops and the pain subsides.
If there is severe itching or distressing pain or swelling at the site; then urgently dissolve and remove the paste within an hour and apply a soft cloth or sponge soaked in warm water and wash the area until the itching stops and the pain subsides. Then allow the limb to rest for one hour. Then place on it a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil; bind it over at night until you are certain that the hot swelling has passed, the limb's inflammation has subsided, and the pain has disappeared.
Then apply a thin bind and small ointment; do not tighten with your first binding, but with the fine one until it heals.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling and all signs have been completely removed; if you need an ointment and binding, then do as before equally.
If nothing of what was said happens to the limb, then do not dissolve it unless after three or four or five or seven days. And when a month has passed, as the appearance of the limb from dissolution suggests, as we said, until the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh on it is close; add more to the binding than your first binding in its entirety; also increase the amount of weak food, according to the remembrance of its previous state.
If you see that the place of the fracture is already draining and thinning out more than is necessary, then you will know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Therefore, anoint the fracture with warm oil and water at every place where you soften it, and let this be done for three days, and then loosen the bandage a little.
By this operation nourishment flows to the limb, and it heals quickly.
What the foolish surgeons do instead of restoring a limb fracture, when it is not restored properly according to what is required, and is restored by crooked means, is an error in their operation, and there is great fear. And if it were right, they would have said that in their books, and operated accordingly.
And I have not seen anywhere the footprint of such a thing, and it is better that it not be done.
Chapter on making an opening in the head.
Types of fractures are various, and their shapes many; and their causes are distinguished.
For there is a fracture that occurs from a blow with a sword, and the blow removes bone completely up to the siphac, which is under the bone, as an ax does in wood; hence this type of fracture is called "Axial.
A sword has cut something of a bone and has split its face, but the incision does not penetrate it to the end; this is called the type of fracture Kalan, that is, Absolute Leuation.
And there is a wound from two kinds of fractures, either large or small.
And from the fracture there is one that is compression or abrasion; and its cause is a blow with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also penetrating, which approaches the fabric (panniculus) that is under the bone; or it is on the face of the bone; and there are wounds from these two kinds of fractures, either small or large.
And from the fracture there is one that is hidden in the bone at the subtlety of hair; and it is a small crack, and because of this it is called this type of fracture Capillaris.
And there is a fracture caused by falling or striking with a stone and similar things that make the bone layer enter internally and form a hollow place; just like it happens to crucibles of metal when they are struck, and part of them goes into the inside.
Most often this occurs in the moist heads of bones such as those of children.
And all these types of fractures, namely separated fractures, are treated similarly; and I will return when I remember this matter completely at its place.
We recognize all these types of fractures by examination on it and investigation of them with probing instruments, as well as removal of the corrupted flesh that is over them.
The type of Capillaris is recognized by this, that it protrudes above the bone and is scraped off and smoothed over it with an iron; for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, consider first the conditions of the patient; then if you see among his symptoms something that indicates fear, such as cholera vomiting and extension, loss of intellect, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, eyes discharge, redness of eyes, and similar symptoms in many other dispositions, most likely it will not be cured; but if you see symptoms that do not frighten you and hope for a recovery, then begin its treatment.
If a wounded person comes to you first, and he is wounded during the winter days, then it is necessary that you should study the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all preparations.
If it is during the summer days, then you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the bone decays due to the fat, and those things happen that I have mentioned.
If the fracture of the bone has already reached the fat touching the brain, and it is with crumbling and attraction, then it is necessary that you cut the fragmented and smoothed part according to what I tell you.
It is necessary that you shave the head of the wounded person and scrape over the bone as much as possible for you, according to the shape of the wound and what is light on what is weak.
If it happens to you during the scraping of the bone, a flow of blood or hot abscess occurs, then you should apply what is necessary. It is necessary that you fill the place with soaked rags in wine and rose oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess settles, and be safe from bleeding. Then begin in the healing of the bone, and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
One method is to cut the bone with a scissors sharp blade; and this is its form.
Then administer another scissors, broader than the first one; and this is its form.
Then also administer another scissors even wider than the second one.
The second method is that you have a number of scissors of various sizes; some of which are wider than others, and some of them shorter than others; and they should be at the end of their sharpness, and made of iron or hardened; and use them with ease when striking the scissors, so as not to strike the head and harm it.
If the bone is hard and tough: then it is necessary that you perforate around its circumference before you administer Incisions, with Terebrirs which are named Terebra not penetrating too deep; and they are not called this unless because they do not pass beyond the limit of the bone's flesh to that which is behind it. This is because the Terebra has a round extremity above what is beneath its head, sharp, similar to an edge, and a small circle prevents submerging, and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is necessary for you to take a great number of these Terebrirs, each one appropriate to the thickness of the bone, until there is no more bone left for the Terebra; whose sharp extremity's size in length and width should be according to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the shape of three kinds of Terebrirs or Trepans.
The quality of perforating the bone's circumference when it is broken, is: that you place the Terebra on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then change the Terebra to another place, and put what is between every hole of that size, or approximately that size.
Then cut with Incisors what is between every hole in the bone; and do it more delicately than possible near the edge of weakness, as we said, until you have removed the bone, either with your hand or with some other tools which you have prepared for that, such as tenaliae and delicate forceps.
And it is necessary to be careful with all caution, so that the Terebra or the Incisoria does not touch any part of the syphax.
When you perforate the bone and separate it from the syphax, if it is continuous with that, and you remove it, it is necessary to file and make even the remaining extremity in the bone with a similar Incisoria tool. The translation is: "Nevertheless, it should be thin and subtle more than other incisors.
If anything remains from the small bones and cartilage, then take them with ease, along with what is at hand from your instruments. Then, care for the wound afterwards with linen cloths, and the ointments that were mentioned.
Another method of operation is easy and completely far from fear; this is what Galen said, and he praised it greatly; and this is his speech. First of all, you must begin to uncover the bone part from the place where the fracture is more violent and clear; continue doing so until you have exposed that part, and then place the rounded end of this oval incisor under it.
The rounded part does not cut anything; the sharp part of it goes along both its sides to a length as you see; so that the rounded part is connected to the siphac with the face of the sharp part incising the bone.
Then strike the oval incisor with a small hammer from one side until you have cut through the bone with ease, as it is rotated; and be careful that no accident occurs in the incident, which you fear completely.
If the healer were not the most foolish of men, nor ignorant of it, nor sleeping, then if anything remained attached to the bone from the fat in certain places, he would cut it with the rounded end of the incisor and free it with ease. It is freed without harm, and without fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate to the fat, and what is cut away from the bone is its face, and roughness and subtle cartilage remain in it; then it is necessary for you to grind down the roughness, and remove the subtle cartilage with finer rasps which you have prepared in various quantities, so that it is possible for you to apply them more conveniently and correctly in every place according to what the operation leads you to, and the broken bone, and its shape. It is necessary that you administer it according to your own proportion, firstly cutting the bone more broadly with those broader scrapers. Then use a finer instrument on it afterwards.
It is necessary that you administer it according to your own proportion, firstly cutting the bone more broadly with those broader scrapers. Then use a finer instrument on it afterwards. And do not cease to do this continuously until you reach the point of administering it more thinly and more finely than all the others.
In each and every small crack or fine break, it is necessary to take care according to that which leads to its correction.
And there is a thing that should not be hidden from any person who applies himself to this art, and it remains on top of what we have written and shown in large fractures.
If a piece of tissue is detected and retained when you excavate the bone: then it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, dip it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another linen cloth, either doubled or tripled, dip it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first piece: and do this as easily as possible on top of it, so that it does not become heavy with pus.
Then administer a broad ligature on top of it: and do not tighten it unless by the amount that holds the wound: and leave it with this care for one day, or two days, until you are secure from the hot inflammation. Then dissolve it and administer afterwards medicines with which excessive dryness is present: such as the roots of the lily, wheat flour, powdered incense, aristolochia and similar substances: and there should be, that you make a powder from these medicines which is sprinkled on the wound like dry ones.
And universally administer all medicine of a nature that cleanses and does not harm. And be careful according to your virtue, so that the wound in your treatment is clean: let there not be dirt from ointment in it, nor dirtiness.
And be careful according to your virtue, so that the wound in your treatment is clean: let there not be dirt from ointment in it, nor dirtiness. Let not pus gather on it entirely: because when pus gathers on a brain tissue, it corrupts it and makes it rot, and afterwards evil comes upon the sick one after that: and already this has happened with the skull, when the bone is being cleaned from it, especially when care of it is neglected, a blackness arises on its surface.
Therefore, if such sicknesses occur as I said, know that it is certainly dangerous to avoid them.
And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine that is put on it and it is in the virtue of this medicine to make it black: then one must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and wash with them cloth. Then place it on the skull: afterwards take care of it with suitable remedies for healing until it is healed.
Chapter on the restoration of a broken nose.
Know that a nose is not broken except by the two upper parts of it at once, or one of them: because they are two bones; since below it is cartilaginous, it does not break, and it does not happen to it except through injury, and twisting, and crookedness.
If one of the two parts of it is broken, then one must insert a small finger into the nose and align the fracture with the little finger and thumb on the outside until the nose returns to its natural shape: and this should be done skillfully, with ease. And be careful that your treatment does not cause pain to the sick one.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it is not reached by a finger: then it is necessary that the tip of the radius be made equal, in which there should be a small swelling.
If the fracture is in two parts, then make it similar (to the other); and approach with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, at the rest of the cauterizer (surgeon), with warmth.
Then insert linen cloth (cotton swab) at the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part; or insert two pieces of linen cloth if the fracture is in two parts: and there should be a bulge in the cloth of such size that it fills the nostril opening.
And some of the ancient restorers said that they should be soaked (dipped) in butter and changed every day. But that does not seem good to me, rather it is necessary that the linen cloth be soaked in egg white, made with miller's flour. Then release (remove) the linen cloth when the bone has set and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the nose instead of linen cloth after it has been covered with soft fabric; and this holds the nose fracture more tightly, and prevents the sick person from being prevented from breathing.
And this is not necessary (true). If you want, do that; if you want, do it with linen cloth.
If the nose happens again while you are cauterizing an abscess with hot cautery, pack the nose with caustic (caustic paste), or with ointment infused in rose oil, or a little bit of opium.
But if no hot abscess occurs, then it is necessary to pack it with wheat flour and incense powder mixed with egg white. Then place a soft cloth upon it (the wound), and do not tie the nose with anything at all.
If however the bones of the nose are broken and fragmented or ground, then it is necessary that you split them apart and extract those with instruments suitable for it. Then (you should) make an incision and care for it with that which coagulates and heals, using appropriate plasters or ointments for it.
If (the wound) should occur between the nose and the wound, then it is necessary that you treat it with linen cloths: and apply a leaden cannula until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of the lower jaw when it is torn apart.
When the lower jaw is torn apart and its fracture is not accompanied by a wound: examine whether its fracture extends only outside and is not broken into two parts and bent towards the inside: in this case, the diagnosis is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, you should insert your left index finger into the weak jaw: similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert your right index finger: and push with it the bump of the fracture towards the outside with ease using your other hand from the inner part of the bone correctly, and with it even out the same.
If the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you apply traction from both sides, according to rectitude: until possible alignment can be achieved.
If, however, already occurs the movement or dislocation of the teeth: then tie them with a gold thread, silver, or silk. Then place a piece of wax over the fractured jaw. Then place upon it (the wound) a double cloth, and place upon the cloth a large well-made awl or a piece of shoe leather equal in length to the mandible.
Then bind it above (the wound), according to how the binding is prepared for you, and its application suits it until it does not get destroyed; and command the sick man to rest quietly; and place soft foods as sorbets for his consumption.
If however you estimate that something is changing in its shape by some means; then rush, and dissolve it on the third day. Then straighten what has been changed from it (the wound), and apply a plaster made from flour milled into powder with egg white or with wheat bran, after you have removed the dead flesh; and place upon the plaster a soft woolen cloth.
While that plaster remains attached to it (the wound), and the position of the bone does not change, leave it alone without dissolving it until it heals; or bind a fracture. This fracture is often bound for three weeks.
If however a hot abscess occurs in the meantime, then administer what I have said many times for its relief until the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, think about it. If however a piece of bone or cartilage is already separated, then be careful in this; remove those pieces of cartilage with what suits you in the removal of them from the instruments.
If however the opening of the wound is narrowed, then expand it with a leech according to the quantity necessary for you.
Then when you remove the cartilage and nothing remains of it, or if the opening of the wound is wide; and if not, place upon it from plasters that suit for that, and let it heal until it heals.
On the restoration of the Fork (crutch), when it breaks.
Most often the crutch (fork) breaks from the anterior part near the shoulder, and its fracture occurs in one of three modes.
Or it breaks and is separated into two, apart from which may occur splintering (splinters): it is easier to restore such a fracture.
Or, it occurs so that the splinters are in the bone: it is more difficult to restore such a fracture.
Or, it occurs so that there is an open wound along with the fracture.
And the operation in this case, when there is no open wound (ulcer), is as follows: Have two assistants present, one of whom holds the splintered crutch (fork) and the other extends the neck to the opposite side.
Then make an even fracture with your fingers until the shape is correct, so that there should be no projection or depression.
If you require more extension, then it is necessary that you place beneath the sick person's pillow a sphere (ball) made of cloth or wool: its size should be according to your need; and extend and elevate the crutch, and compress the ball with your hand until the fracture is evened out, as required.
If you cannot draw out the end of the crutch to the exterior (outside), because it has reached deep inside: then the sick person should lie on his back on his neck: and place under his shoulder a pillow in size, and press the assistant's arm towards the lower part, until the bone of the crutch that is deep inside is elevated upwards; at which point, straighten the fracture and make it even with your fingers.
If you feel a splinter from the crutch and it moves: then it is necessary to find (locate) it on top of that, and remove the splinter easily.
If it is retained in the bone, then apply your instruments for cutting with one of the incision instruments you prepared for this purpose, after placing under the Furcula instrument which serves as a lever; and this instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It resembles a snail shell without a concavity.
And let its width be according to what you need for it from the size of the bone and its part. But its length is also as possible for you during the operation.
It should have two ends, as you see; one end should be wide, and the other narrow.
If the wound that you divided when extracting the splinter of bone is wide and warm, then cauterize it with hot iron; then gather two lips of the wound together with suture.
And if the division is small or there is a fear of warm abscess; then fill the wound with cloths and dressing according to the size of the wound cut.
If there occurs a warm abscess, then immerse cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on top of it.
However, the setting or fixation of bone without a wound and without incision is to place plaster made from milled flour with egg white on it. Place soft wool over it. Then place a sphere under the tip of it if you need it. Then take a large blood-letting instrument which is held by the Arabs, whose width should be about one palm or a little more. Then place a folded dressing over the wool and plaster. Then take an awl from fine wood whose width is three fingers and of similar length. Then roll her up in a cloth. Then place the cloth with the star (aster) in the place of alchemilla which falls over the fracture and the place. Then place alchemilla over the fracture as it is rolled, and roll it on his neck, and under the healthy part of his head (titillico sano) and under the diseased part of his head (titillico infirmo): and bring it over all parts, so that you see that the ligature holds the fracture firmly: and this is what is not hidden from you, and everything, so that the star does not remove the fractured bone. And for this reason, it is necessary to observe the diseased part every day. How often is the ligament softened and you see that the star has already been removed? Then correct it and tighten the ligament.
Then place the pillow of the sick person under his back, and place a small feather pillow for his head at night, so that when he lifts his head to sleep, help is brought from the other side. The fracture of the collarbone should therefore be lifted through the elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind the arm to his neck and do not loosen the bandage unless it occurs due to an accidental occurrence from itching or eruption, until twelve days have passed.
Then renew the plaster if you see his face towards it. And add something to the ligature and let it go until it is healed and has coagulated.
The fracture of the collarbone is ligated and strengthened to a large extent for forty days, and sometimes it happens in fewer than this number of people.
Chapter on the healing of the fracture of the spade.
A spade rarely breaks, and it only breaks at its wide end; the edges do not break from it.
When therefore a place is broken from it and broken in the middle of it, and it is not recognized except by touch, then according to what it is in figure, prepare for its fracture. And reduce it to its natural form by all means of intellect that is possible for you.
Then place on the spot powder of millstone with egg white and soft wool, and put above it a small piece from double cloth. Then place on top of it a broad awl from subtle wood according to the quantity of the spatula, or slightly larger.
If however under the awl there is a hollow in any part of the spatula, then fill that hollow with soft wool, until the awl descends evenly.
Then bind above it with alum long thread, with appropriate tightness and firmness of the awl, until it is not removed from its place.
And consider the binding every day. Whenever therefore the binding becomes soft, tighten it, and if the awl is moved from its place, let it lie weak on its healthy side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days, or in thirty days.
When therefore this number is completed, then loosen the binding: and you shall be secure. For it is from bones whose fracture is not feared nor their solution.
If however a fragment of bone protrudes and pierces under the skin, then cut through it, and remove it. And do what was said in the fracture of a collarbone from cauterization by hot irons, if anything happens from it.
Chapter on the restoration of the chest fracture.
The chest is sometimes broken in the middle, and it happens rarely. The extremities of it are most frequently broken and crushed from its accidents.
When its middle part, which inclines towards the lower parts, is broken and a violent pain occurs along with difficulty in breathing and coughing; and perhaps it vomits blood, and a hollow appears in the fractured bone, and it does not heal over, the restoration of it is that the sick one lies on his back on his own back: and place between his fingers a poultice.
Then press his shoulders and bring the ribs together from both sides or flanks with hands: and file in equality of its fracture, according to every possible way it can be achieved and converges, until the figure of the bone returns, according to what is necessary.
Then place on him an embrocation and a plaster, and place above it a splint made of thin wood from willow or boxwood, or similar materials, after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then file it on a bandage over the broken bone so that it is not moved: and go with the binding following the roundness to the back several times, and bind it with a suitable stitch.
Then consider the binding in every hour, and whenever it becomes soft, bind it: and if necessity arises for its solution at the itch or corrosion that occurs in the place, or pain, or abscess; then hurry, and solve it, and remove the embrocation, and correct what has happened in the manner of treatment of it.
Then bring back the embrocation if you see that it faces [the fracture]: and connect a stitch to it until it heals.
Chapter on Restoration of Ribs, when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in large places following the back and from their extremities from the front part. And it does not occur to them [the surgical instrument] abrasion, except because they [the parts being operated on] are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this [a hidden thing] is not concealed from the sense during examination with fingers.
And its restoration is made in such a way that it aligns the fracture with fingers according to the possible method, until it matches the required shape. Then apply poultices, and bind the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
If the fracture is of the ribs sloping towards the inside: then a painful weakness occurs, and puncturing, just like puncturing for pleurisy; because the bone pierces the pleura, and also it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood frequently; and this is a difficult cure.
And the ancients have been skillful in this with many devices; and among them are those who say that you should place foods for the sick which generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the stomach becomes inflamed, expands, and pushes the fracture towards the outside.
We, however, abhor causing a cause for making a hot abscess unless it occurs. If it has already occurred, then add it [a hot abscess] to it [the wound].
And some of them said: Place a poultice on the place, then squeeze it with force, and it is more like reasoning. Nevertheless, it is feared that a poultice will attract superfluous humors to the place, because of its weakened condition.
And some of them said: The place must be covered with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil; and poultices should be placed between the ribs until it is filled; so that the binding is equal when you wrap it around according to its roundness.
Then the sick one is to be treated for pleurisy with food and medicine.
If the illness presses severely upon the sick one and he cannot bear it, and we cut or puncture the skin with a lance, fearing for the patient: then it is necessary that we split the place open, and expose the broken rib. Then we shall place upon it an instrument which serves to set the siphac, whose memory has been mentioned before: and we shall make an incision in the bone with ease, and then we shall make an incision in it.
Then we shall bring together two lips of the wound, if it is large with suture: and treat it with plasters until it heals.
If an abscess hot happens meanwhile, then hurry and pour pulverized sulphur in rose oil, and apply it to the place: and treat the sick one with what is suitable for an abscess.
Moreover, it shall be laid upon the side on which he lies until it heals.
Chapter on the restoration of a fracture of the spine and neck.
Fractures of the neck bones sometimes occur and seldom is there rubbing against them; similarly with the vertebrae of the back. If this happens to someone and he wishes to know if it will heal or not, then consider. If you see his hands already softened, stunned, and dead; and he cannot move them, nor extend nor contract them; and when you compress them with your fingers and pierce them with a needle, he does not feel it, nor feels pain in them: then you will know that it is not healing, and it is mortal in many conditions.
If he moves them and feels compression with fingers and pricking: then you will know that the neckbone is safe, and that the injured one will heal with treatment.
If it happens in the spine similar to that, and you wish to know whether it will heal or not: then consider his feet; then if you see that they are softened, and what has happened to them is like what has happened to the hands: furthermore, when he lies on his back, flatulence and discharge occur without his will; and when he lies on his stomach, discharge occurs without his will; and when he wishes to defecate, he cannot: then you will know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not labor in his treatment.
If nothing of the kind happens to him, then it is less severe.
And his treatment that happens due to this is, you should apply warm poultice of apotemes: thus, you place on the spine a rubbed oil of rose alone; or with goat's wool soaked.
Place on that several times a day, until the warm poultice is calm; then place on one spot from the comforting, drying, and tightening plasters, and bind it with a bandage; and instruct the injured to rest quietly and peacefully. He should not sleep on the side where he finds pain until it is healed.
If it happens during the grinding of a bone (sathaiatum) that something separates out from it, then it is necessary for you to sever it above the skin and remove that. Then gather together two lips of the wound (if it is large), with suture. Then care for (the wound) itself with some flesh (incarnatio), from ointments, until it heals.
If, however, the last bone of the shin (alhausos) breaks and it is the end of the heel: then it is necessary for you to insert your left thumb into the anus and equalize the broken bone with your right hand, as much as possible, according to the second adjustment.
Then place it (the bone) on top of it and remove it: and care for the wound with the treatment that preceded, until it heals.
Chapter on Repairing an Ankle.
Chapter XI.
Bones of the ankle (Ancha) rarely break. If the bones of the ankle break, then their fracture is not anything but a comminution at their extremities; and they are split lengthwise and bend towards the inside; and it occurs in a weak pain in that place, and puncture; and the leg that breaks becomes numb.
And the repair of it (the ankle) is to extend your hand over it, until you stand over the fracture, in its figure.
If the fracture is only at its extremities, then equalize that fracture, according to what you are prepared for by the adjustment, until it becomes similar to its natural figure.
If the fracture is along its length or already bends towards the inside: then make the weak person lie on his stomach (infirmum super uentrem), until the repair of that fracture is prepared for you. When you have equalized it (the bone), place an ointment on top of it; then place a splint made of wood or hide on top of it; and tie the bandage over it where you do not fear changing the fracture nor removing the splint.
And make the concavity of those [objects] equal to what fills it, until it is seized by a ligature according to equality; and command the sick person to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.
If, however, a boil occurs that is hot: then stop extending it and its healing, until the hot boil settles; and place on top of what is sitting, as it was before, then return to its healing; and tie it as necessary.
If, however, pus occurs in a bone, or it breaks, extract it.
Chapter on the restoration of an ulna fracture (Adiutorium).
The Adiutorium is that which is between the elbow and the head of the spatula [radius].
If, therefore, it breaks, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One method is: that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness in the following shape.
And tie two ligaments at each of the ends.
Then lift up from its place, and let the sick person sit on a seat. Then cast his broken arm upon a log, until it reaches the notch of the same log where the fracture of the stick is attached.
Then suspend something heavy above him, so that his attendant can stretch him downwards. Then the physician sets the fracture with his hands until it comes back together as needed.
Another method is for the sick person to lie on his neck, and hang his hand from his own collar with a ligament. Then command two attendants, one of them to hold that which is above the fracture with his hands: and let the other hold below him, and each extend himself to his own side.
If you wish the extension to be stronger, then tie a ligament under the fracture and another one above it: and let each of the two attendants stretch himself to his own sides.
If the fracture is near the end of the humerus (upper arm bone), then a ligament should be placed under the notch and another one below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then a ligament should be placed on that spot and over the elbow itself.
Then set the fracture easily without strain until it is aligned as needed and well positioned: then bind it, if there is no hot abscess.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs, then release the binding for seven days. Place a soft linen cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil on him until the abscess subsides: then bind it; the method of binding is to place a plaster over the fracture.
Then place the inflammation (or wound) on a new cloth over the plaster. Then bring the arm to the support itself and place one's open hand on one's shoulder.
Place the cloth and bind the arm to the support so that the arm remains in place like a star: if nothing prevents you from it or anything changes due to the broken bone.
If you are afraid that something may change due to the broken bone, then use a star (treadle): and there is one to place over the fracture which is wider and stronger than the others. Place the width of each star equal to a finger: and the length of the stars should be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from all sides.
Then bind over the stars with a bandage as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it should be that your bandage is tighter around the fracture site. And as much as the fracture extends, the bandage becomes looser.
If you see the position of the stars and bandage as we have said, at the time when you are restoring the limb immediately, then do it: and if you fear a hot abscess, then leave off the bandage and the stars until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the ligament for three days so that itchiness, swelling or food does not reach the limb because of the excessive tightness of the bandage. Therefore, correct this entire matter as we have said.
If you are confident that nothing will happen from it: then do not loosen the ligament unless after three days or more.
The sick person should sleep on his back and place his hand on his stomach: and put woolen felt under the support equally.
Consider at every hour of the night or day, that the figure of a broken member is not loosened, nor does the ligament become softened. Correct it therefore entirely by your power.
Place food for the sick according to the order that we have given, so that it is a subtle food first, until the bone begins to tighten; then it is necessary that you increase the amount of his food.
For the custom of assistance and of the leg is that it should be tightened for forty days; then therefore it is necessary that it should be loosened, and a bath should be administered, and it should be treated with ointments which correct it.
If the fracture is foul, scrape it; then do not loosen the ligament and remove the pins until fifty days have passed, and up to two months.
Chapter on the restoration of an arm fracture.
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the two ulnae.
One of them is small; and it is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is that which is placed below the smaller one from the lower part.
Therefore, perhaps only the larger ulna breaks, or perhaps both break at the same time.
When the smaller ulna above is broken, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower ulna is broken, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse if both bones break at the same time.
If the bone that breaks is the smaller ulna above, then it is suitable for the doctor at its restoration that he put on a slighter extension with ease, until it equals itself.
But if the larger ulna is broken, then it is necessary that he put a strong traction very much.
It is necessary that the figure of the hand be placed near its restoration, and its extended extension over the pulley. The thumb of the hand should be higher than all the fingers: and the inferior joint of all the fingers, or the rest, should be lower: and if the weak one is sitting, he should be square on himself, and the pulley should be before him, or directly in front of him, at a height so that the weak one does not labor too much.
Then let the assistant extend the arm from its lower part, with his hand, or with a ligament. And another assistant shall extend likewise above.
Then the physician equalizes the bone until he reduces it to the best possible shape.
If there are spicules in the bone fracture, then try to reduce all the fragments into their places with your strength.
If it appears that there is a separate piece of cartilage separated and piercing the skin, and you have no hope of restoring it: then puncture it and remove it according to the method we mentioned earlier.
If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have already written a separate chapter on this, so take care of it from there.
If a hot abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then soak a cloth with wax made from rose oil, white beeswax, and have it be of medium thickness between thick and fine: and tie the cloth over it with a thin thread until when the abscess settles: then remove the wax, and apply the prepared plaster made from milled flour with egg white. Then place the screws, and let the one placed over the fracture be a little wider and stronger.
And know that the number of screws for the arm is six in multiple positions: whether the fracture is in one splint or two splints at once.
Then place your ligature over the stronger and more forceful part of the fracture, and a little further with the ligature towards the upper or lower parts of it; or place a softer ligature on its side, according to what was previously remembered in the beginning of the chapter.
And let the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture be soft, damp, and not hard, rough. And let the thread used to tie be of moderate thickness between delicate and coarse, as we have said.
Consider the limb and ligament after days. If something happens which requires rectification such as itching in the limb, then it is necessary that you warm the member with embrocates and hot water until the itch subsides, and leave the member unbound until it subsides, then repeat the binding.
If the ligature has already been softened and the bone removed, and similar things have happened, then correct it all with your power, and consider again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to the excessive binding, then it is necessary to soften it a little and leave it for some days until it reaches nourishment again, then bind it.
But if none of the things we mentioned happen to the weak, then it is not necessary to loosen it unless after twenty days or about that.
Then suspend the weak hand to its neck. Let his neck be straight and keep it in place with your power against excessive movements. Make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture heals in thirty days or in thirty-two days; it may heal in twenty-eight days. All of this is according to the dispositions of the temperaments and the dispositions of virtue.
On the restoration of hand fractures.
Know that the fracture of the hand and the fingers seldom occurs with scissors or ligatures. It does not happen to him except by repeated rubbing.
When the fracture of the foot occurs, either by blunt force or repeated rubbing: then it is necessary that the sick person be seated in a square position and that a seat be placed opposite him at an equal distance. Then place his hand on it extended.
Then the assistant should spread out the broken bones and the physician should align them until they join well with a good union.
Then it is necessary to place an ointment and a plaster if no hot abscess occurs. Then place a splint on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
If the fracture is in the lower part of the foot around the heel, then make a similar sphere from cloth and command the sick person to bend his foot on it with the broken part facing upwards. Then tie it with a long strip of cloth.
And let the splint be made of soft leather and apply it to the skin of the foot. Tie it as necessary.
If the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary to place a splint on top and another underneath the foot. Keep the hand open and straight. Then tie a bandage around as if closing the hand and extend it between the fingers with a ligature.
If a fracture occurs in any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, align it as necessary. Then tie it with the palm of the hand and if there are any swelling, place a straight splint under it to lift the fracture and keep it still.
If the fracture is in the middle finger, ring finger, little finger or thumb, then align it and tie it with the neighboring healthy finger that follows it; or all of them together following the continuity; and this is better. Place a small peg over it [the wound], as we said on the thumb.
And when making your restoration and after the proper arrangement of the suture, place hot application on it [the wound]: apply as required whenever something happens from that part, according to its recurring account.
Chapter on the restoration of a fracture of the hip (Hip Fracture).
The thighbone (Femur) is broken often and made apparent to the sensation, because it turns towards the inner and posterior parts.
And its restoration is done by tightening a ligament above the fracture and another ligament below the fracture. The patient lies with his face downward (prone position).
Then, let every ligament be extended to its own part equally: and this, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone. If the fracture is on one side or the other, then extend the ligaments as necessary on that side.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then let the ligament be towards the neck part, so that the extension falls upward: and let another ligament be below the fracture. If the fracture is in a limb or extremity, then place the ligaments accordingly for the proper support and alignment.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then let the ligament be towards the knee so that the extension falls downward. If the fracture is in an arm or other extremity, place the ligaments accordingly for the proper support and alignment.
Then the physician adjusts the bone with both hands until it is returned to its natural shape: and let the bone be united by a good union (healing).
Then it is necessary that you place a plaster and a binding if there is no abscess in the limb. If an abscess occurs there: then leave it for some days until the abscess settles and becomes warm; then return to your treatment.
The binding should be in this way (as described before). It is necessary that you wrap a hard egg over the fracture, that is, bind it: and double it twice, or thrice: and there remains an excess from it. Then wrap the leg until you reach the calcaneus at its root.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee and come to the lower parts: and the ends of the thread should come from the upper side of both parts. Then roll over the leg and the hip what remains from the other.
Then place stars on the hip in the location of the fracture itself: and place one star on the bone of the leg.
Then fill the voids between the leg and the hip with soft cloths so that it is equal to a binding.
Then begin with a strong binding from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four windings. And as you extend more with the ligament from the location of the fracture, let your binding be smaller, softer, and looser.
Then pay attention to both ends of the thread which you inserted between the hip and the leg. Tie three stars with both ends. Then go with both ends of the thread to the lower parts until you reach the ankle. And tie also the ends of the stars with both hands so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
Then leave the binding on for as long as it remains, so that it does not happen to the member that it rots, or abscesses, or swells, and similar things. What if something happens from there. Therefore, when you solve it, correct what happened there entirely, as we have said many times.
If however there is a piece of bone from the broken bone that protrudes: then it is necessary to equalize it, if it is possible for you. If not, find on it and remove it; and take care of the one who followed, until it heals.
When this hip fracture is tightened, even if bolts are added as we said in the assistance and arm.
However, in the restoration of such a broken one, lame-walking does not happen to the weak. If it is restored alone, except that another leg is applied to it, then it is necessary for the one who has it, to always limp.
Know that the hip is tightened within 50 days or less, or more, or too little is added, or too little is removed; all of this is according to the diversity of temperaments and other dispositions.
[Section] On the restoration of a knee-cap fracture.
Know that the knee-cap rarely breaks, but is frequently worn down.
But if it does break, then only a crack or hole in its parts occurs. And this is with a wound, and without a wound. It stands on the whole with sensation.
The restoration of this is as follows: it is made equal to what was broken from its parts with fingers until it is gathered and joined together as possible through matching, convenience, and craftsmanship.
Then apply a plaster made of wheat flour or milled flour with egg white; and place on top a round bolt, if necessary; then tighten it above the wound suitable to that.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have mentioned in other fractures; such as hot abscess and similar to this; so that you oppose every incident with what suits it until healed.
[Section] On the restoration of a leg fracture.
You should know that the leg is composed of two bones, one of which is large and it is called the Leg; and the other is slender, and it is called the Shinbone.
It happens to both [the leg bones] that fractures occur as they do in the two bones of the arm; and because of this, their restoration is equal and the operation is one. (It refers to the same process for treating fractures in both leg bones as in the two bones of the arm.)
If both bones [of the leg] are broken at once, then the leg is deformed in all directions. (If both leg bones break simultaneously, the leg becomes deformed in all directions.)
If the slender bone [of the leg] is broken, then the leg is bent towards the front part. (If the shinbone breaks, the leg bends towards the front part.)
If the large bone [of the leg] is broken, you will find it below; and they are of those which do not escape your notice. (If the larger leg bone breaks, it can be found lower down and is not hard to locate.)
Then administer stretching, equalizing, and ligature of the star-like joints equally. (Stretch, align and securely tie the joints in an equal manner.)
However, if the fracture of the leg is a foul one having many seathagies (small splinters), then it should be stretched less and the reduction [of the bones] should be made more gently. (If the fracture in the leg has many small splinters, stretching should be done less forcefully and the reduction process should be carried out more gently.)
And in the leg there is something similar to an arm operation; and it is when you equalize the joints, and complete your whole procedure, then take two strips of pine wood which are used in the construction of solariums placed beneath tables; and they are made from the flat part of the palm; and choose those which have a small thickness and are not too thin; and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee down to the foot. (In the procedure for treating the leg, there is something similar to what is done in the arm operation, namely when you align the joints and complete the entire procedure, then take two strips made from the flat part of a palm leaf from pine wood used in the construction of solariums beneath tables; choose those that are not too thick or thin, and their length should be equivalent to the length of the leg from the knee down to the foot.)
Then cover each piece of cloth with two foldings along its length. Place one part from one side and the other part from the other side. They should extend from the knee down to the lower part of the foot.
Then tie two bands at three places, namely from the two ends and the middle. As ligature is forbidden, the leg becomes weak and falls to the right or left side, maintaining a good position (or posture).
And now the crib is made of wood according to the length of the leg and it shall be placed under the leg to keep it still.
It is very important that you do this when there is a fracture and the wound is in its correct place.
Then consider the leg every day and treat it with utmost care from swelling, inflammation, or any other problems. If anything of those (problems) happens, then apply the remedy as needed until it is healed, if God wills.
On the fracture of the bones in the foot and fingers.
The calcaneus bone rarely gets a complete fracture.
The bones of the foot sometimes get a fracture and it rarely happens to the fingers; they do not get fractured unless there is severe trauma in multiple positions.
If a fracture of the bones in the foot occurs and you see the bone rise above itself, then lay the weak foot on a prepared ground as if walking.
Then stand still and place your foot on the elevated part made by those bones; then press or step on it. Press it evenly, until it returns to its original position.
Then apply a poultice and linen cloth over it; place a small board under the arch of the foot with two flat heads.
Then bind it with a suitable ligature after you have opened it with linen cloths, and with whatever else is needed.
When three or four days pass, then loosen the ligature. For you will find the bones equal if they are broken or dislocated. Therefore, the operation is as you see it.
If any fingers are broken, then restore them, and align them as I told you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place the awl on your finger according to the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider than that; then place the board beneath the foot as I told you, and bind it with a suitable ligature.
If what is broken consists of two, or three, or more bones, then place the awl above each finger according to its size, rolled in linen cloth; and bind the board beneath the foot; and let it stand on one side of the lower part of the foot outside the body, so that it holds well by retaining.
It is good that you remember not to forget all that I told you concerning the other fractures which I mentioned; and apply each case with what is required for it.
Chapter on the female neck wound, and the clavicle, and the penis bone of a man.
When the woman's neck is broken, then make her sit in a square position. Then incline her to the back of the same slightly, and hold her from behind.
Then let the midwife fill the womb of hers with cloth, until it is filled: and let there be in the womb from that as a sphere.
Then strike the woman, and slowly raise her back up. For that cloth goes out until it is before the door of the womb as a sphere, and the broken bone comes back.
Then place the child on her back. Whenever she wants to mix, let her easily remove the cloth, then let her mix: and bring it back according to the manner by which you first inserted it: then return to her own child first.
Let that be done for seven days, or approximately, because the bone itself heals.
And if you want, take the bladder of an egg, and tie a reed cannula on its opening, and insert the entire bladder into her womb. Then blow through the cannula with force, until the bladder inflates inside the womb, because the fracture comes back.
Then let it be filled with cloth, and stay for some days, as we have said, until it heals.
And when the bone of the cheek of man or woman is broken, then administer for its healing, and the same remedy as we have said in the bone of Ancha.
And do not hide the right side in those near fractures, which occur little, especially if there is something of study or use.
And understand my book much, because the fracture itself indicates to you in many dispositions the way of healing for yourself and the tightening of yourself: understand therefore.
In the rod (phallus) of a man when it is broken, take the neck of a goose: and insert the rod into it. Then place on top of him a covering from cloth, and wrap it, and let it be for three days, or approximately those, and it will heal if God wills.
On the restoration of a bone fracture when there is a wound.
It is appropriate for him to whom happens a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone or shoulder blade or similar, to run and summon the phlebotomist immediately; if they confirm to you the conditions of phlebotomy, as we have mentioned.
If the wound bleeds blood, then it is necessary that you run to its amputation, thus pouring powder on top of it which has been ground; if there is no one else present to you.
Then begin the restoration of the fracture on that same day; and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess hot occurs, then postpone the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. And do not approach him on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harm to occur to him.
If the broken bone is protruding through the skin, then it is necessary to attempt to reduce it, and equalize it with your hands with ease and minimal extension.
If the extension is not prepared for it, and its equalization with your hands; then reduce it with this instrument. And the instrument is made of iron, whose length is the size of seven or eight fingers; and its width is according to the size of the wound. And therefore it is necessary for the physician to take from them three or four according to the size that he needs for this in every kind of treatment of fractures.
And let it be round; and let there be a small thickness in it, so that it does not double during the pressure applied to it during the hour of the operation; and let it have sharp edges, with a margin on its ends. And let the top part of it be as thick as the middle of it down to the bottom.
This is its form.
It is necessary in this operation that its end should be placed sharp and rounded above the projecting bone's edge; and push it with a single blow, until the bone returns and becomes even with some approximation.
Try to equalize the ends of the fracture on both sides.
If the fracture's end is subtle and does not take the tool well, then it is necessary to cut that bone's edge until the tool has control over it.
But if you cannot reduce them with it as we said, then cut that bone with the chisels we mentioned or saw through it with a single saw in any way possible for you.
Then scrape off what remains in the bone from roughness and small surfaces.
When the bone is reduced and finds a weak spot after its reduction causing violent pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Make it (the incision) thus. For you confer great help on the weak when you complete the restoration that you do for the bone.
Then immerse a cloth in stinking wine, black. And properly so if it is summer (or in a hot season). And do not place above the wound any linen or anything that contains oil; to prevent rotting and corruption in it (the wound).
Then administer asterisks at the time of completion of your bone restoration. And let the detected wound heal; thus, cut with forceps the hole in the inflammations according to the size of the wound.
And be careful not to compress the wound with the fracture. For often foolish doctors have done this; and they have caused death upon the weak or rotting, or ulcers (gangrene), that is, purulent discharge. And let your ligature be soft, gentle, and diverse from other ligatures for fractures.
If the wound is bad or large and you fear certain unfavorable events as we have mentioned, and find pain suspended at its place: then it is not proper to apply stars (bandages) on top of it. And make them infiltrations from strong cloth at the place of the stars (bandages), and tie it with them.
When after one or two days you see the wound begin to produce pus: then remove from above it the cloth which you placed on it with wine. Then apply linen cloth and ointments with which we are accustomed to treat wounds; such as tetrapharmacon (four-ingredient ointment) and similar ones.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the ligature. Consider the wound every day at morning and evening, until it becomes solid and heals.
It is necessary to prepare the limb so that pus runs from it easily towards the lower parts.
If many days pass and the wound does not become solid nor the pus is expelled from it: then you will know that there are small bone pieces in that place. Therefore, you should examine the wound with a probe. How many of those small bone pieces are separated, remove them and extract them. And those which are not separated and penetrate the limb, and cause pain, try to cut them and remove them in any way possible for you.
If a blister or abscess, that is, an ulcer or other corruption and putrefaction occurs at the wound: then it is necessary to oppose each one of them with what is appropriate for its treatment, as has been mentioned in its chapter.
And concerning the matter where my speech should stand, and to whom you must present your mind when a bone breaks, and protrudes over a limb, such as the hip bone or elbow, and similar large bones, it is that you should not presume its attraction, for often death occurs from it. Indeed, leave it alone until it putrefies.
Perhaps it will fall by itself within twenty or thirty days.
Then care for the wound if it seems to you: and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter on the treatment of a knot in the wound from a fracture.
Often this knot occurs in the healing process of a fracture. Primarily those that are near the joints: it becomes foul from such a shape of the limb. And perhaps it prevents the limb from its own natural operation.
Therefore, if the knot is recent, administer medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloes, olibanum, myrrh, gum tragacanth, acacia and similar ones.
Thus, to receive some or all of these, and mix them with astringent wine, egg white, vinegar, and apply them on the knot with a plaster, and secure it well with a good stitch.
And release the stitch, do not loosen it for many days. Then unloosen it, and tie another one until the knot is removed.
Or secure it with a lead plate tightly. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from the limbs.
If the knot has already turned to stone and is tightly bound and urgently demands removal, then bind over it from the upper part of it, and cut off the excessive protrusion: or grind it with certain rasps until it is removed: and care for it until it heals.
Regarding treatment when a member is restored and remains subtle after that, not according to its own nature.
When a bone fracture is restored and remains subtle and weak, it is not done except for many reasons. One of the reasons is excessive dissection of the ligament and its ligation not as required: or because of the excess of tightening of the ligaments, preventing nutrition to reach the member: or because of an excessive amount of unnecessary embrocation at the wrong time: or because of a lack of blood in the sick person's body and its weakness.
The treatment for this is to feed the sick person and make his body soft, until blood multiplies in him. And administer a bath. And pour joy and happiness over him.
Then place pitch on the member: to draw the pitch to itself a great amount of nutrition. And continuously anoint it with embrocation and warm water, until the nutrition returns, and it regains its natural shape.
Regarding treatment when bone fractures are restored twisted.
When a member that has already been restored after healing becomes twisted or the bone protrudes, or knots, and it deforms the shape of the member: yet the member is not prevented from its natural function: then it is not appropriate to listen to the opinion of one who thinks that the member should be broken again.
And there have been many foolish doctors and restorers who did this in our land.
This operation is indeed blameworthy very much, leading to death or a great fear that it may be fatal.
But if the limping and knots are recent: then it is necessary to anoint with warm water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as the leaves of the elderberry tree and its root, and marshmallow, and similar ones. And let there be made an ointment like the softening plaster, as skillfully prepared as dyachilon.
Take the mucilage from the root of the marshmallow plant, grind it with chicken fat or sesame oil; apply it as an ointment.
Take figs, pound them with pigeon droppings and similar substances that are known for reducing hardening [or consolidation].
And at times a knot is loosened with persistent, ancient, and gentle friction, which is done with moist hands. Move the affected limb to all parts in every hour.
If a twist has already occurred and become strong and turned into a stone, and the need for treatment with iron has arisen: then it is necessary that it be cut above, the continuation of the bone be loosened, and what is superfluous from the knot or the bone is cut with sharp incision instruments: and ease should be administered to it with diligence and care.
Chapter on Dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any joints from their place. Why it should be kept still and become swollen in shape. And causes severe pains to occur on the sick person and violent injuries.
When there is a dislocation, then it is necessary to hasten to its restoration; one should not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the location will be lost and possibly the reduction of the dislocation.
Therefore, it should not be moved or extended during the hour of its location. Because it often causes spasms and painful injuries.
However, when this happens, then one must hasten to the bloodletting of the sick person. Then let it be released, until the abscess subsides.
Then the member is to be anointed with warm water and oil. Then it shall be reduced gently.
And all members shall be treated by him whose memory comes to the place.
I have already arranged chapters on dislocations, even as it was in fractures from the top of the body down to the lower part.
Chapter on the care of dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two Jaws scarcely dislocate seldomly.
The dislocation [of the jaw] occurs according to two modes. Either they are moved away from their places by slight removal and made smooth somewhat. Or they are dislocated with complete dislocation until they become smooth to the chest, until the saliva of the weak runs out and it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and the tongue is wrapped with speech.
When the dislocation [of the jaw] is slight, then it returns by itself in many positions with little difficulty.
If the dislocation [of the jaw] is complete and integral, then it must be quickly reduced and not delayed excessively; and there should be someone to hold the head of the weak person; and the doctor should insert his thumb into the root of the dislocated jaw on one side if the dislocation is from that side. Or insert both thumbs at once if the dislocation [of the jaw] is on both sides. And the remaining fingers of his hands should be outside, which he holds evenly.
And command the weak person to clean his jaws and purify them for eating in every part. The doctor holds the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
If the reduction [of the jaw] is difficult, especially if both jaws are at once: then administer steam with hot water and oil until the reduction of both becomes easy; do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we said before.
When they return and are evened out, and the mouth of the weak person is closed and they are not made smooth: then place them on top of them fluffy wool pieces from a cloth; and with rose oil and beeswax.
Then it is tied easily with soft sutures.
And let the sick man's sleep be on his back: and let his head stand between two cushions, so that he does not move it to right and left: nor let him try or be forced to chew something: instead, let his food be soft, until when the pains are removed, and his jaw is bandaged: then, let him eat what he wants, and let it be given to him easily.
Let him not work on his mouth's surgery during eating and drinking, and speaking, until his jaw is bandaged and healed.
If the reduction of the two jaws becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their places: then, many times fevers and constant sores occur; and perhaps the sick man's stomach dissolves, and perhaps he vomits pure choler.
When therefore you see that: then you know, that it is a loss, and many times he who has this happens to him dies within ten days.
Chapter on the reduction of dislocation of the collarbone, and the extremity of the shoulder.
The collarbone is not dislocated from the inside side because of its continuity with the chest. And it is dislocated at times to the outside, and this can be felt.
And the restoration of it is that the sick one lies on his back, and extends his arms. Then the wound is closed with your fist, as it returns to its place.
Then lay an ointment on it and powder, and press it.
But the extremities that follow the elbow should not be separated from it, except rarely. If it is dislocated on some day: then it is necessary that it be reduced and made equal according to what I have said, and what is prepared for you.
Then lay an ointment on it and powder, and bind it. And command the sick one to adhere to calmness and rest until he is healed.
And with this same treatment, the arm extremity is reduced when it is separated from its place as well.
Chapter on the Reduction of Dislocation of the Shoulder.
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways.
One of these is that it dislocates to the part of the armpit towards the lower side. The second is that it dislocates to the chest area. And perhaps it may dislocate to the upper part of the shoulder: and this happens rarely.
It is not dislocated behind, because of the spine. It is not dislocated in front, because of nerves.
And indeed it most frequently dislocates and goes towards the lower side turned into the armpit; especially in those who have less flesh. Because it goes out quickly in them, and enters quickly.
In those whose flesh is numerous, there is, on the contrary, that which goes out with difficulty, and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some people a blow or fall, and the shoulder is dislocated and it is thought because of this that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, one should experiment that, until you are certain of its condition, and then proceed in the treatment of it.
A dislocation is known when it is turned towards the lower part and towards the tip of the little finger: and distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy shoulder. For you find among them a manifest difference, and you find in the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the tip of the little finger, when touched, the head of the shoulder seems to be an egg: and a weak person cannot bring his hand to his ear nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upward: then you find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
The reduction of this kind of dislocation is easy when it is recent, or if the child is weak.
And the reduction of it is that you lift the hand of the assistant to a higher place. Then put your thumbs below its tip, and lift the joint with strength to a higher place to its own place: and the assistant lifts his hand, and extends it upward. Then he puts it downward, for indeed he quickly returns.
But if it does not return through what has been said, and from the beginning when the dislocation happened there are many days: then it is necessary that the weak person be bathed in warm water, and a poultice administered which softens and soothes, as if they decoct roots of althea, and fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and it is administered.
The sick man lies on his back: and let there be placed beneath his navel a sphere and wool which is equal between softness and tightness.
The physician places his heel upon the sphere, and raises the head of the arm with force, and draws the hand of the sick to below.
And if you wish, do this in this way: and it is that the present man who is taller than the sick man should stand on the side, and insert his arm under the navel of the sick man; and raise the navel upwards, until the sick man is suspended in the air. Another servant pulls the hand of the sick man to below his belly. If the sick man is lightweight: then it is necessary that he is suspended with something else, in order to weigh him down; for dislocation immediately returns.
And it can also be done in another way: and it is that a long piece of wood is placed on the ground, whose head is round shaped like a mortar handle; but not too large or too small. Then place beneath the sick man when the heads of the logs are placed on his head; and the sick man should stand along the length of the log.
Then the hand is extended to below from the other side, and the body is extended from the other side with force; for dislocation returns to its place quickly.
If the reduction is difficult by all that we have said, then use this care: and it is to take a log whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness the quantity of two fingers; and round head, so that it can be inserted deeply into the opening of the navel, in this shape.
Then, cover the round head with soft cloths, so as not to hurt the weak wood.
Place it under the sensitive area of the weak, so that the hand or arm can be extended over the wood to its lower parts. Then tie the wood and the arm and the end of the hand.
Then place the arm over the step on the ladder, and extend the hand to its lower parts, and let the rest of the body hang suspended from the other side. The joint then enters immediately.
When the entry is completed as much as possible, then it is necessary to place a ball of equal size made from wool under the sensitive area. Then apply a plaster prepared from milled flour with beeswax and egg white over the whole shoulder as it is customarily done.
Then bind under the sensitive area a suitable bandage. Roll the bandage over the plaster above it. Connect the hand to the neck of the same person and let it not move for seven days.
It is necessary to place a sparse food until the limb recovers strength; for it heals more quickly in this way.
Then, after seven or five days, stretch it out and let it be washed with movement. If it becomes hard and is not softened, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated frequently due to moisture that occurs there or due to some other cause, then it is necessary to administer a cautery with three holes as mentioned in the chapter on cauteries.
If this is done completely and the bandage is loosened after seven days, and the joint does not become firm, and the plaster and bandage are applied to it several times without becoming hard, and it falls and cannot be raised to a higher position: then you know that the nerves that go to the head of the shoulder have been cut or stretched or softened. And you know that the joint will never heal in its place.
Dislocation which occurs towards the breast and nipple, or reduction to the rear, is made by pushing and extending with hands until it returns; then, additional compression and care should be administered until it heals.
If there is heaviness in the limb after healing and sluggishness of motion, then the afflicted should use baths many times until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Treatment for shoulder dislocation.
Know that the joining of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty, and it also returns with difficulty; this dislocation occurs in all directions, but especially in front or to the rear.
And the dislocation of this joint is not hidden from you: because it falls under your sight and touch, according to whatever shape it may be dislocated. And when you join a dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, it is made clear to you manifestly. Indeed, the joint should be hollowed out, and the arm cannot double, nor can the humerus touch it.
It is necessary to rush and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a hot abscess occurs.
For if a hot abscess occurs, the reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps it does not heal at all, especially when it is to the rear. Indeed, every kind of dislocation is worse and more painful; and death often accompanies it many times.
And the restoration of it when it is one that can be reduced, is to extend the hand with two hands; and the arm should be stretched out, and the physician's hands should be above and below the shoulder, and he himself pushes the joint with his fingers or the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
If it is a dislocation towards the front: then he shall return it so that he divides his hand with the dislocated hand until he strikes with the root of his palm the elbow which is dislocated.
If the dislocation does not obey in reduction, then administer a strong and powerful traction; and it is to extend the arm by two servants; and they shall hold it also, so that it may not be moved during the traction.
Then the arm is turned to all sides after it slipped over his hand, covered with a double cloth or a broad bandage.
And when the physician touches with his hand the joint, he shall bind it with oil; so that it may be one of those things which aid in lubricity at the joint with ease. Then push the joint with a strong impulse until it returns.
After its reduction, it is necessary that a plaster be placed upon it, which contains styptics and drying with egg white; and it shall be tied with an appropriate ligature. And the arm of the sick person shall be suspended from the neck for some days.
Then it is loosened. If the joint is strengthened in its place, then loosen the bandage from it and release it.
And if you see that the joint is not bound well, then repeat the plaster, and bandage, and leave it for some days until it becomes bound. Then loosen it.
If there is pain after the reduction of the joint and it has motion: then administer humectation in the bath, and fine friction, and compression until it lines up, or place upon the joint, that is, fat of the ram's wool. Then bind it and leave it on it for a day and night. Then remove it and insert it into the bath. When it sweats, then rub the joined part with moderate friction. Then, three times on the same place with a heated iron, and at each introduction of the bath until it becomes soft.
And if you wish, place upon it cow dung, moistened and heated with butter, and press down on it.
Do this several times. It becomes soft and returns to its original condition.
Section on the treatment of dislocations by Albucasis.
Almahassem's hand is often dislocated, that is, the join between arm and hand.
The reduction of this dislocation is easy. Contrariwise, other joints. However, it is necessary that speed should be present in the reduction of this dislocation within the hour when it occurs, before the place is allowed to become swollen; or else a warm abscess may occur in that place.
The reduction of this dislocation is as follows: Place Almahassem's weak hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand; and let the physician place his palm on the prominence of the joint, and push it until it returns.
However, it should be considered if the palm has already retreated into the wrist of the hand; then let the weak side place its back of the hand on the table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then let the position of his hand be internally on the table, that is, the inner part of the hand should be placed on the table, so that the physician can fall on the prominence of the joint.
If it therefore returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then press it with a dressing on the swelling abscess; and leave it alone, without repeating the procedure.
If it does not endure [the reduction], nor can you make another attempt upon it, after the days have passed, yet the connection remains according to its twistiness; and nothing harms the weak except what is softened by the hand, and nothing can be tightened: then you will know that the nerves have been cut or rubbed.
There is no skill in it except to tighten it with a cautionery near its loss. And perhaps that does not benefit it at all.
When therefore Almahassem does not return, then place upon him an ointment as we have said. Then it is tightened and allowed for five days; afterwards it is loosened and allowed, and the hand is exercised.
If its motion is deprived and something of gravity happens to it: then soften it with warm water and rubbing several times until it becomes soft.
[Chapter on the Treatment of Finger Dislocations.]
When a finger is dislocated in any direction or the finger is dislocated to the back of the palm or its ventrum: then extend the finger, and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then hold the head of the finger and suspend it turned to the side to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it, and extend it until it becomes straight on that day itself.
When therefore it is night, tie it according to the said account; and do not cease to loosen it during the day; and exercise it with movement; and tie it at night.
Do that for several days until it is tightened.
And likewise do the same if it is dislocated to the palm of the hand; and tie it to that part itself, and perform your first operation on it until it heals.
And similarly do with it when it is dislocated to other parts.
On the treatment of spondylolisthesis of the spine.
When it happens to someone that the vertebra of the back or neck is completely dislocated, or many vertebrae are removed from their places: then there is no cure in it, because death approaches the weak.
And a sign of this is that the weakness of the patient goes out involuntarily and it cannot be held; and often some of his limbs become soft or two legs of his, or two arms, or one of them; or a vertebra is removed from its place.
For it is often removed (dislocated), which often happens for its removal in four parts.
Therefore, what is dislocated towards the rear, is called a humpback.
The cure of this (humpback) is that you consider whether it happens from childhood; then there is no cure in it and there is no healing at all.
But in that which happens by accident, or by blow, or similar things, the ancients have already spoken of the methods of treatment at length in a long speech. It does not often return with recovery.
I myself have already abbreviated from that which does not leave much hope for recovery due to my proximity to the intention of the subject; and in my explanation, I have presented it, and formed its instrument differently from how they presented it and explained it.
Therefore, I say that in a humpback which happens from the front part, there is no cure and no healing from it.
And similarly, in one which happens on both sides as well.
And it is not cured from them, except for that which happens on the back properly, as I said; and there is a way to stretch out the weak person face down on an equal flat surface nearly up against a wall; and a wet rug is spread under him so as not to injure his chest.
Then place a straight stick fixed in the fire on the ground, at the end of the foot, about its head: and another stick about its feet at the other end of the foot: and let the servant hold the stick, and it not be fixed in the fire. And let another servant hold the other.
Then cover the head of the sick one and tie a soft bandage firmly around his neck, and extend the end of the bandage to the stick that is at his head and bind it there.
Then tie another bandage above his ankles and above his knees, and at the joints of his limbs. Then gather all the bindings together and tie them to the other stick that is at his feet.
Then each servant should extend the bandage to the part of the stick and the two sticks shall not be moved from their places where they are fixed, but they shall not be fastened, as we said.
And the physician should place his hands on the hip bone with force until it returns or he places a board over it. Then he connects his feet to the board until it returns.
If it does not return by this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And make a hole in the wall near the sick one, into which the end of the board is to enter. Then place the middle of the board on the hip bone. And the physician should place his feet on the other end. And tie it tightly until the hip bone is dislocated and returns to its place.
Then, if you wish, work with a roller that is turned by hand: and it is so that you press into the ground near the head of the sick one at the end of the foot two sticks, whose length is an arm: and at the head of him at the end of the foot two sticks.
And let the length be one palm between every stick; and already a hole has been made in every place where the tourniquet runs; and let all sticks be firmly fixed on the ground, so that they do not move at all.
And insert a round stick; and there is a tourniquet in which the ligament is revolved in two holes of two sticks.
And at its end there is a hole, in which the stick is fastened, whose length is one palm plus the part that is revolved; and similarly on two other sticks.
Then tighten the ligaments which you tied on the chest of the sick man at the tourniquet that is near his head; and the ligaments which you tied on his legs at the tourniquet that is near his feet.
Then stand by every tourniquet an assistant who will twist his hand with a linen cloth, with which the tourniquet is revolved; and the doctor presses the sponge, as we have said.
Here is the form of the tourniquet that follows.
Then, when the sponge returns and the place is pressed again, then it is necessary that you put on an asringent plaster with egg white. Then apply a woolen material (stuffing). After that, place on top of the plaster a star-shaped piece of wood, whose width is three fingers or approximately so. And its length should be such that it covers the hump and the healthy part of the sponge.
Then bind it with the ligament as we have said. And the sick man should be given subtle food until he is cured.
If something remains as a hump in the place at the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe, with the use of the board that I have mentioned for a long time. And now the plate of lead is administered (to the patient).
Whenever an eminence happens at the last vertebra of the back; and it is thought to be a dislocation, and that bone which projects (is present). Therefore, it is not fitting for this medicine to be assumed presumptuously; perhaps it will cause death.
Chapter on the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Know that the articulation of the ankle and the articulation of the shoulder do not occur except by dislocation; nor does what happens to the other joints occur in them from a slight displacement or concavity.
And indeed, the articulation of the ankle is dislocated according to four parts. Because it is dislocated towards the front and towards the back.
It is mainly dislocated towards the inner parts; it is scarcely dislocated towards the front and the back.
The treatment for dislocation of this [bone] towards the inner parts is as follows: because when you join a weak leg to a sound one, it is longer; and the knee of the weak one protrudes more than that of the healthy one, and the weak cannot double its foot at the groin; and there is a place behind the groin that has been pierced with a hot iron due to this, because the head of the hip has reached there.
The sign of [bone] dislocation towards the outer parts is that its symptoms are opposite to these symptoms [mentioned earlier].
The sign of [bone] dislocation towards the front is that it stretches a healthy leg to its full extent; however, it does not double the limb without pain in the knee; and if he tries to walk on it, he cannot do so towards the front; and his urine is retained, and his groin is pierced with an iron, and during walking, there is kicking of it against the heel.
The sign of [bone] dislocation towards the back is that it does not stretch out the knee nor can it double it before doubling the groin; and its leg is even shorter than the other; and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place [of the dislocation].
The reduction of this dislocation is as follows: one should consider then, if the dislocation is old, which has become fixed in the patient. Then, if you administer reduction of it and it remains in its position; then there is no treatment at all in this case. Therefore, one should not make a hasty presumption about him.
In the case of a recent dislocation, which belongs to one of four dislocation types; then, you should hasten to this, that you apply pressure and stretch it both towards the inner parts and towards the outer parts, and move it left and right; perhaps it will return and require no further treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary to prepare a strong assistant and extend his leg from the lower part; either with his own hands, or with a strap that can be tied above the knee: and another assistant shall extend his hand upward, so that he may introduce his hands beneath the armpits. Then tie a gentle strap over the root of the hip and hold the end of another strap.
And let its extension be either from the front of the groin to the neck part, or from behind to the back part.
And let their extension be equal in all parts, until the weak one is raised from the ground with his body and remains hanging.
For this kind of extension is the common shape of the four kinds.
If therefore the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all kinds to do what I will say regarding its treatment.
In the reduction of its own kind, when the dislocation is toward the interior parts, it is necessary for the weak one to lie on his healthy side. Then place a strap over the root of the hip, where it is between the head of the hip and the place that is below the groin. Then extend the strap upward from the groin to a higher part of the body, to the neck part.
Then another strong assistant shall take his arms and reduce the large place of the weak hip, and extend it with a vigorous extension. Now it returns to its place.
And this kind is easier than the other kinds of treatment, by which this member is reduced.
If it is excused above you and does not obey you for the introduction with this kind of treatment altogether; then it is necessary to tie together both the weak feet with a strong strap, gentle, over both heels and both knees: and let the length of each one be four fingers in breadth: and let the weak leg be extended more than the other by two digits.
Then the sick person is suspended over the head of a beam, which should be in the house; and let the length of it from the ground be equal to two arms.
Then order a strong youth to brace the head and thighs; another youth supports the sick person with him; and another youth pushes, bracing the thighs with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly with speed.
In its reduction, when there is a dislocation towards the outside, it is necessary that the sick person lies on a platform, as we have said in one who has a hump. And bind the ligament on his foot, tightly for the sick person, and on his chest.
Then two beams are placed, one at his feet, and another at his head. Then place an additional beam in the middle of the platform, firmly fixed; on which are rolled wet cloths, so as not to hurt the sick person; and let there be a beam between his thighs, so that he is not drawn towards the lower parts during extension.
Then all the assistants should go to their places, and the doctor equalizes the reduction with his hand.
If therefore it yields to reversal, it will be good.
And if not, place it on the platform and press it equally, as we have said in one who has a hump. Nevertheless, the sick person should lie on his healthy side.
And when dislocation is towards the front, then it should be extended quickly the leg of the sick person; and this has the same story on the platform; and the doctor puts his right hand's palm on the thigh of the sick person. Then bend him with one hand, and with this bending put him extended towards the lower parts to the knee-part.
If dislocation is towards the back: then it is not necessary that the sick person should be extended towards the lower parts and raised up from the ground; rather it is necessary that he should be placed on a hard surface, as it is also necessary if his ankle is dislocated towards the outside, according to what we have said about lying him on two surfaces: and it should be on his face and the extended ligaments: according to what we have recently said.
It is necessary that a compression be administered with a board even over the joint to which it extends, when reduction is completed as required.
And the sign of its reduction will not be hidden to you: and it is, that you extend two legs of the weak: and when you see them equal, and the weak man stretches his leg, and expands it without dislocation: then you will know that the limb has returned as required: then join two hips, and apply plaster, and bind with lint, that is, wheel: thus, so that it does not move sideways to any part: and the weak man remains quiet for three days or four.
Then loosen the binding, and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in position, then you will know that the dislocation is now fixed: release therefore the weak man for walking.
And if you see something softening: then return, and apply plaster to it, and bind it according to your first binding: and leave it for three days as well.
Then loosen that and make it slow in walking on both sides for some days until it recovers well.
Chapter on Dislocations of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated to the outside, to the inside, and downwards, that is, backwards.
And it is not dislocated forwards.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the weak man to apply his leg to his hip. If it does not cling with the hip: then you will know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all ways of dislocation is that you make the weak man sit upright, so that he can extend his leg if possible over it, and let his back touch his face: and put his foot between your feet.
Then attach (it) to the leg with your hands, and straighten them on top of the leg. Apply with the palm of your hand two sides of the leg with force. Let another servant extend the foot until the leg returns to its place.
And a sign of return is that the thigh and shin adhere gently, not laboriously.
Then apply plasters to it, and make the thigh and shin adhere. Then bind them together with ointment for three or four days. Then loosen (them).
Let the sick person not walk for some days until he is healed.
If the reduction of it (leg) is refused to you, then administer a strong extension with cords, whose treatment for dislocation of the ankle has been described earlier, until it returns.
Chapter on the cure of the dislocation of the heel.
The heel is sometimes moved slightly out of place and at other times it is dislocated completely. And its dislocation happens either towards the inside or outside.
A sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen and protruding towards the direction to which it has been dislocated.
But the cure for its removal is easy reduction, and it is as follows: (it) should be extended with ease by hands and aligned until it returns to its place.
When it is completely dislocated, in its treatment it is necessary to make the sick person sit straight and a strong servant hold him from behind in the middle of his back.
Then hold the foot with your right hand from above it and with your left hand from below the foot at the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with two fingers (on) the left side.
Extend (your hand) with the left, and push the chest with your foot turned to the right leg without effort.
Do that twice, as we have told you.
Then push the chest with your foot to the leg on the third time and you draw (out) the splinter.
If it comes back in the first or second time according to this method and you see the foot equalized, that is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, because it will come out again.
If its reduction with what we have told you is forbidden to you: then make the sick person lie on his back on the ground and place a firm wooden peg firmly fixed in the ground so that he falls between his thighs; and now you have rolled him over onto it with a cloth, so that he does not hurt the sick person.
Then the servant takes his thigh; afterwards, another servant extends his leg or with his hands, or with a strap that binds around its neck. Then all the servants extend themselves in opposition to his extension; and the peg remains standing between the thighs of the sick person holding him so that his body is not drawn downward by the extension.
Then the doctor equalizes the displacement with his hands, and another servant holds the healthy leg downwards. For a dislocation comes back quickly.
When the dislocation returns and the recovery is declared to you, then put plaster and wax, and bind it tightly with bandages, and bind the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary that you be careful or afraid of the nerves that are above the heel at the back, so that the bandage is not too tight and hurts them.
Then let him go for two or three days. If the ligament is softened, tie it up; then dissolve it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the sick person from walking for forty days. If he attempts to walk before that time, there is no certainty that it will not be dislocated again and spoiled; nor will he receive cure after that.
If it happens to him that there is a hot abscess: then it is necessary that you administer to his sedation what we previously described for treatment elsewhere, and apply embrocation until it is removed.
Chapter on the dislocation of fingers and cure.
It is necessary that it be equated which is dislocated with little extension without effort; and indeed, this is not difficult but easy.
If the dislocation is in some nodes of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that the sick person make his foot sit on a level place with the ground or on a table; and he stands as if walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot upon that which protrudes from those joints. Then press it with your foot with force until it returns and you see it already equated, and the protrusion does not appear in its place.
Then put a board under his foot's belly which takes the whole foot, with two heads. Then tie it up with a bandage for three days. Then dissolve it and let him rest from walking for many days until it is bound and secured against relapse.
Chapter on the types of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When something happens to it and you attempt its cure and restoration, death often occurs; therefore, one should not presume over its cure unless he is experienced in the art of long use, merciful, pious, slow, not bold, nor presumptuous: and that he uses only remedies that calm hot abscesses, and leaves the sick person to divine judgment. If thou seest not, or hopest for salvation from destruction with mildness of disease, and where something appears of hope. Strive therefore for the reduction of it at once at the beginning of the matter, before a hot abscess occurs.
If the limb therefore returns as we desire, then administer a regime which restrains the abscess; and take care of the wound with that which agrees with it from dry ointments.
If there is a dislocation together with a fracture, and separated sores occur on the bone, then strive for the removal of them, and do as we said in simple diseases in their places.
And beware according to your strength, and keep yourself from entering into the way of fear; according to what my discourse preceded for you.
For that is better for thee at thy Creator, and more lasting for thy glory, and more safe for thy body among them in thy time.
