Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Aysa learns the words of Albuquerque.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O children, as you have completed this book, which is the last one of the medical science series, to congraturate your achievement and for the insights you have gained from it, I think that you should pass on this treatise to me, which is a section of the work my father wrote, called surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The work of this field has been largely absent in our realm and times, completely unexplored until now; only small descriptions of it can be found in the works of the ancients, which have often transformed into more errors and superstitions over time, thus closing off its essence and prolonging ignorance about it.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	It seems to me that you need to revive this ordinance of the treatise according to the way of exposing and declaring and abbreviating it; so that it may come in form with the tools of carpentry and other instruments of work, through the addition of declaration and preparation of them, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	In the case for which it is not atrocious to be an artist in our present time, art of medicine is lengthy, and its actor must be practiced in the science of anatomy, which Galen tells us that he knew the movements of limbs, their shapes; and joints and dislocations; also had knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, along with their names, and nature. Also about veins pulsatile and quiet ones, and the places of blood flow in them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	In the words of Hippocrates - "Aqua vitae," which is Latin for "water of life", plays an important role in my name too and mostly in the work of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	In the introduction to this book, we have said about that in anatomy; those who are not knowledgeable of it may easily fall into error and cause deaths among people, just as I have seen many times with individuals who have been trained in this science but forget or misinterpret their teachings.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I saw a medieval doctor who had contracted an abscess of the groin from a woman, and he caused some arteries in the man's groin to bleed profusely, resulting in the woman dying shortly after.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	In another village, there was a miller who dared to stone a man in his prime, and the stone was large; he lifted it and threw it at that man'n head, so that on the third day, the man died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	In that moment I realized the enormity of the stone and the condition of the illness; it came to me suddenly that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	A certain surgeon from our land received a stipend of one duke for surgery; and as he approached a black casket, which was his fracture case during the process, the surgeon neglected its ignorance, extracted the fracture upon the pillow, using pulleys and levers with great force, but failed to secure it properly.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	"Lead us according to your will and guidance, O Lord our God. Teach us the discipline of days without end and command us to remain faithful; so that in the fullness of time and through Your providence we may come to salvation."
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you also seek refuge in prayer, and as you unravel the fabric of your worries, you find solace, tranquility, and relief from your pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the disease was already established in the member, so that he could not prevent the spread of that contamination and it continued to wander within the part afflicted with the bad ailment.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	A certain physician managed to cure an abscess caused by cancerous growths; it became inflamed and ulcerated near the glans penis after a few days, resulting in severe illness of his lordship.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason he seems to have such a melancholamoine spirit is not because I want to achieve the greatest happiness for everyone, but that he should be part of those who are deeply hurt by everything being lost.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	EPA's work is divided into two main areas: one related to health and the other involving risk in major hazardous situations.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	The year of our Lord has brought forth this written work within which I encounter errors and fear; hence it is necessary for you to guard what I say and lay aside that which may lead the simple-minded astray in speech or dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore, take your worries to the Lord and entrust yourself to Him; seek His protection, and may good health be upon you and those under your care.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	We pray for the best way granted by God's grace to be restored in salvation and praise-worthy success; we remove all terrible diseases difficult to heal, and take away your fear of water that you may dwell with confidence in faith and through Your Name, so it does not abandon You. For more remains for your glory, both in heaven and at the end in the sanctity of Your presence.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	I. Introduction to Galician culture and language:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"No medical malpractice allowed; therefore you are not responsible for any food-related issues."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	Chapter One: The Quest Begins
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Beginning with the division of liberty and its first partition in history.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first organized capital of the Cap-Haïtien province in Haiti consists of medical instruments and their cases as well as supplies that are essential for surgical operations.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second portion.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	Chapter II: Second Procedures and Treatments - Cupping, Bleeding, Leeching, Wound Extraction, and Similitudes of these methods according to their forms. This chapter encompasses the rules and regulations regarding various traditional treatments such as cupping, bleeding (phlebotomy), leech therapy, wound extraction using needles, and comparisons among them based on their respective techniques.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third portion.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter on capital punishment, restoration and relocation, as well as treatment of torture and appearance towards those convicted; ordered by the head of justice department, and forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	The burn on the foot and acute medical conditions with reference to the surgery are being discussed here.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	An aquatic journey begins with the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I tell you about the quality of that metal and its alloys as well as in which context it is forbidden to use a torch.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	He said that the language of juvenile and nocturnal voices is long and prolific, subtle by knowledge, and partially hidden; many wise people have spoken about it, but there are disagreements among them, and I am satisfied with a small part of their sermons, due to prolonged discussion.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Well, I'd say that "cautery" typically refers to the process or technique of burning tissue for medical reasons. However, in a broader sense, any substance can be considered as matter since everything is composed of atoms and molecules. The only exceptions are certain conditions where something might not be purely physical matter – such as dark energy or dark matter, which aren't fully understood yet but do not have properties that we associate with typical matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the case of oily and dry skin condition; some experts argue that hot water is beneficial for this type, while others state that it is not suitable because oiliness and dryness are characteristics of the disease, which contradicts the nature of heat as being drying, therefore it's inappropriate to use hot water to treat oily and dry skin conditions.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	The one who contradicts this is that which by cauterization causes great affliction in all the maladies of tail and dryness that are seen in the bodies of men; for when you compare the body of a man to the humidities of his skin, compared to the heat of fire, you find the body of a
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	The statement you've provided appears to be in a mix of Romansh (a Swiss language) and Italian or Latin phrases; however, it doesn't seem coherent as written. Here is an attempt at translating the parts I can identify into modern English:
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, he shall not venture upon that which has been condemned and exercised in the Capitol of Cauterius during the last performance, knowing well the diversity of human complications and the disposition of their illnesses in their bodies, as well as the causes of such illnesseby and the course thereof through time.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In May and other months, it's not about your fear, but mostly due to damp and humid maladies, for all the plagues have already settled on those lands, and they don't reconsider their decision during the thunderstebore of that area.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Oh children, I will tell you about the secret of healing by fire and its benefits. The heat is simple in this case, the action of which reaches only the member that has been cauterized and not to the other members close to it.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May's application of the medical ointment brought relief to those suffering in their limbs that he/she treated, and greatly facilitated a difficult recovery process and quick healing.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Mays the fire, for its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not produce heat but rather excess; it is already known to us by experience and through long tradition of study regarding the truth of causes; therefore I am excused for the lengthiness of this speech. If it were not so, I would be at liberty in this pause to you my secret friend hinting at the fire, as well as the quality of its operation upon bodies and expulsion of waste that removes illnesses, an eloquent philosophical demonstration which would be helpful for your ailments.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Hear ye, children, when the season for performing circumcisions is most appropriate and there's no need to delay any further!
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	The saying goes that circumcision is advisable at all times; for the harm caused by accident is submerged in the pleasure of water with which one cleanses a circumcised part, especially if it's due to severe or chronic pains, which do not tolerate delay so much as they fear those that might bring about malice, which is greater than minor inconvenience during the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	Cats with scabies often do not cause concern except among the common folk and lazy caretakers; however, it is a disease that can be treated by caustics but does not always resolve entirely, resulting in persistent consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not as they think for this issue; cauldrification is not a substitute for medicine, which alters the condition and dries out the moisture that causes such pain to occur.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, unnecessary surgeries are often carried out due to the greed of medical professionals and their desire for fame through their operations' size and complexity.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that his illness may return at any time in the future, according to the complexity of the disease and the location of his sickness, as well as what has been prepared in his body through an excessive accumulation of superfluities, and what he has consumed from those causes; however, the illness for which cauterization was administeramo is a subtle inflammation of members with few superfluities and humidity, similarly to a toothache remedy, so it may be possible that in him this pain does not return but something else occurs instead.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	The common belief is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine and it's a dubious practice; I don't think it provides any true healing benefits from medicine or for any other reason.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause lies in opposition to this; and I understand that cauldrification is the last resort of medicine, not being used except when administering remedies for certain illnesses. And those medicines are not employed elsewhere, but at the end of an ailment's treatment, one applies cauterization there and utilizes it thereafter.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	In this text, which appears to be in Catalan (a Romance language spoken primarily in the Catalonia region of Spain), there is a discussion about the first six hours after surgery and the third remedy for medicine according to what the author belnoses as common among folk doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	For three days they argued that the old coins were better than those made of iron, and not because of their value or the superiority of their substance, but due to the equality of gold and its sublime nature.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	They said that the cauldron does not work well if water is not completely boiled because they have tasted and tried it themselves, and found that it doesn't make water but rather steam from other vessels, and cauldrons are better than iron ones in this respect. However, when you use a cauldron with gold plating over fire, I did not tell you about the quantity according to which you want to control the hardness of the gold, because it prepares to receive friction; if you adjust on top of the flame, there is gold through flakes that an artisan can take for their work.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	L'efficiency and cost-effectiveness of lasers made from iron are gradually improving, leading to more affordable surgical procedures.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	In the spirit of a legal document from that era, this could be translated as follows:
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Cold Cap Therapy for Headaches due to Cold and Humidity.
Le capitol primier.	First capital.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization provides moisture and coldness on the affected area due to which there are two causes; one is a hot flux from the head to the nipples and ears flowing out, along with excessive sleepiness, pain in teeth and throat, as well as generally all diseases that occur through cooling, such as paralysis, stiffness, apoplexy, etc., similar conditions found in those illnessamoents.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The shape of this cauterization is as follows, which firstly commands the illness to be expelled through medicinal laxatives that change the world within you for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the ailment and your age and habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	He approaches you with the command that his race is loyal to him and he asks you to place your hands on each other between your legs, over a wooden chair laid out in front of you so that it can observe your movements closely as they carry out their task together.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	With the tip of your finger, gently place it on the edge of your nose between the nostrutes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when your mentioned place reached the following morning, I tried that location and approached it. There is an olive grove with these characteristics (as for its shape):...
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	There is a method known as Swedish massage which involves the following steps in order to relieve stress and promote relaxation:
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	A) Gently move your hand and look at the spot, then you'll see if there is any amount of hair to be discovered on that part, just as with the quantity of gold errors, hours later raise your hand again, and if it doesn't return to its original position after touching another metal or object which has been chilled, you will have seen what I told you about earlier.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	A prop to prepare a salt solution, take a small amount of salt and dissolve it in water at the location where you want to apply the treatment for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Go around the corner and proceed to place that lamp on the table that has been cleaned in this area, ensurturing it is away from any flammable objects.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	A proper care at home without using any medication should suffice in ensnaring the angst of your child, provided they are not seriously ill or injured. Keep them calm and comfortable until you can see a healthcare professional if needed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	When the Roman Empire fell down, people began to rely more on their arms, as it was better and safer.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They should apply hot irons to the leg joints within the bone and keep them in place with a bandage covering any open wound on the skin surface.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Here is the translation in formal English: "Let it be both as much water and soil that you adjust to your needs."
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	After several others tried using the lancet method to bring about healing, they first focused on strengthening the bone before attempting it. This is a small-scale version of Alphacati's method.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	It is estimated that the fumes from his head will extingebes this place.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	S is affected by the plague for long times, and therefore should be cured before it becomes solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not see these two kinds of cauteries at all, but only in certain homes according to the way of fear; and less than that you must be healthy now, for your hair is weakened by such a solution of continuity as we have testified among other members, especially when the head's affliction comes from natural causes.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first species of caution is to save money and better yet, avoid debt altogether. And from that wealth, invest in valuable works for your well-cuidado.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter of the U.S. Capitol.
Del cauteri del cap.	Head shaving procedure.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	In total, chronic headache and long-lasting water are symptoms of a prolonged illness, along with the use of glasses, pillows, nasal sprays, ice packs, gauze, capsules, gums, and splints; however, if none of these causes apply, then it should be considered that the headache is due to a significant change in its nature. It's not wise or necessary to do this frequently: after being cauterized with one instrument, another may suffice for a while.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	A prop of the skin that is to be cauterized lies beneath which the vein has been severed.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the nail and let it be discovered of the bone; the quantity we have counted up to is cauterized with a heated iron on the part behind the head in the location called "vas"; that's where the warm compresses are applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	Your grandmother has been experiencuing severe ear pain and it seems that you are having difficulty locating the exact problem area within her ears, which is causing an intense level of discomfort different from other types of headaches.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	In this case, the text appears to be a medical prescription or recommendation in Occitan (Occitano-Romance language) for treating corns on the head and occiput using cauterization techniques. Here is an approximate translation into English:
Capitol ters.	Capital terms refer to the most important or significant words in a given context, especially when discussing legal and political matters. In constitutional law, these terms often include fundamental principles such as "separation of powers," "checks and balances," "federalism," "judicial review," and "individual rights." These key concepts are vital to understanding the structure and functioning of a government within its legal framework.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Non-ancient exorcism of migration
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	The severe headache has not subsided despite the application of various purgative remed cuisine and other treatments I have mentioned for these illnesses; eventually, it is cauterized at its source in two ways: either with a cauterizing ointment made from strong acids or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Mayes's medical caustic is an irritant; you should take a bowl of salt water and rinse it thoroughly before applying to the affected area, then gently wipe off any excess from around the edges.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	A prophecy lies at the heart of the temple where an elixir is kept hidden within a secret chamber, concealed for ages by a powerful curse. The one who finds it and breaks the enchantment shall gain divine wisdom and the power to shape destiny itself.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	E approaches the landing area for descent with caution, allowing sufficient space of three hours; he releases the engine and leaves it in place for two or three days, then resumes operation above the submerged portion within the boundary that his location covers.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Person A says: "I hope you feel better soon."
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you wish, here are some burning medications that I have mentioned in the previous article on burning remedcuents.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The following is a general guide for performing electrocautery, also known as diathermy or electrosurgery. However, please note that this information does not replace formal medical training and should only be used by certified professionals under appropriate circumstances. Always refer to your local laws, regulations, guidelnaces, and best practices when performing any medical procedures:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	The small head of a lily is somewhat like the shape of a flower with some curvedness, and at its top there's a noticeable little point.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Gently place the tip of your hand near the painful spot and rotate the small iron object slowly with increasing speed - so that it does not stick to the bone which you just touched.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the quantity of blood that is attached to the edge of the clot is as much as possible and you lift your leg such that the vein is not congested but free-flowing, then there will be no flow of blood from the wound.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Boil water with salt and let it cool slightly; then pour the liquid over the wound and apply a clean cloth or bandage on top. Change the dressing every three days; if there's an infection, use an antiseptic cream inside the bandaged area.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you wish to perform a surgical cutting of the knife handle according to sterilization procedures, and carefully watch out for an incision into the vessel on this migrant non-native properly.
Capitol quart.	In English, "Capitol Quart" can be translated as "Capitol Quartet." The term typically refers to a group of four musicians or singers who perform together in the style of classical chamber music often associated with the genre known as Baroque or early Classical era. This ensemble would usually consist of two violins, one viola, and one cello, which is also referred to as a string quartet.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Ancient emigration cauterization technique.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	And thou shalt not follow the method of cauterization that you have heard from previous experience, and the amount you have said in the divisions of diseases, nor shall it profit thee therein; rather, as many times for the disease that is not sufficient by what you have said about the first cauterization or medicinal heat, take care to ignite the cauterizing knife within that which has been whitened, then signify on the spot of pain with a line longer than half its size, or such as it; and after removing your hand for an hour, strike the arc and reach into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	It is necessary for you to protect the continuity of the mandible, which is a bad habit when chewing and that the joint does not become inflamed or irritated, and that it does not develop spasms or pain.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	"It is about the care and control of blood flow from an artery that starts to bleed, especially during its onset when there's a fear response, mainly in those who don't know what to do or are not educated enough; therefore, it's important to take action immediately."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	You will remember the incident involving a blood transfusion error according to its procedure, in this place of your freedom.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Here is the translation of the given text from Old Occitan into English:
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	Certainly! Here's the translation you requested:
Capitol .v.	In the case of Matal v. Tam, also known as "The Slants", the U.S. Supreme Court held that the disparagement clause in Title III of the Lanham Act was unconstitutional, violating the First Amendment's free speech protections. The court ruled 8-0 (with Justice Neil Gorsuch not participannoing) that the government cannot deny trademark registration to a name or logo simply because it may offend some people, as this would constitute viewpoint discrimination.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Curing of the pains in the ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	In the ear, there is pain due to friction and it is treated by applying astringents (causing contraction) as well as other treatments that I have mentioned in the division above. If the pain persists, apply hot iron cauterization without puncturing the eardrum; here's the form for this procedure:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	C) The point of contact with the spark generates an electrical current and is carried around the entire ear so that it revolves in a closed loop within each section if pain occurs in any one section.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	The road to the castle of the eagle is not always as easy as it seems at first glance.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	The wounds should be sealed with all the punctures on both ears, and also near the lobes where they are healing.
Capitol .vi.	The United States Capitol, also known as the "Capitol", is a historic building situated on Capitol Hill at the eastern end of the National Mall in Washington, D.C. It serves as the home of the U.cu.S Congress and the seat of the legislative branch of the federal government of the United States. Constructed over several decades between 1793 and 1863, it is an iconic symbol representing democracy in America.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Tonsillectomy procedure.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tincture which is used as a remedy and not for the spices coming by strain, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoidance of the burn caused by a species that is suffering from severe or muscle cramp nerve pain.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	I will apply the oil of turpentine and place it in three jars with small spouts, and after you've applied my remedy, within three days you should cauterize your ailment thrice using the following method: The first time, you shall cauterize one edge of your ear. For the second application, a small portion of wax from its temple, and for the third, use a drop of oil to unite both lips together.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	I suspend your haircut for the opposing party'e illness, as it will not heal until the injured party recovers.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of the cauliflower ear is when you burn that high on the outer part of the upper edge of the auricle, a small spot near the top of the head; and in tempering another, the length should be according to the length of said point, then stop your own cauliflower within which it should completely charred.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	Here is the form of the cauldron, and it's a specific type of cooking utensil; the shape of which is similar to that of a tabletop.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, he was quite subtle about this and did not say so much to you; but he warned against such needless extravagance a little bit.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	A proper care of the location where water has previously been processed before it is considered safe.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII: The Legislative Process in the United States Capital
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	The ancient treatment of scarring caused by apoplexy (stroke).
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	Apoplexy is an old disease and the remedies you have mentioned in your text do not confer medical treatment for it without fever. For a long time they used to cauterize that part with four hot irons on top of all the hairs of his head, and also burn the temple locks as we said; and use a caustic iron at the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of the cauterization has been made according to what is said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	The text appears to be in Old Occitan, a Romance language spoken in the Middle Aebgesque period by people in what is now southern France and northern Italy. It seems like a medical prescription or advice from that time. Here's my attempt at translating it into Modern English while retaining its original meaning:
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII (Capitol)
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	The operation of cauterization performed for Focal Lamellar Keratitis (FLK).
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	In the beginning, large jars and pills full of medicinal substances were present.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	The text appears to be in Occitan, which is not one of the options provided. However, I'll translate it into French for you, and then provide the translation from French to English.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	That old pause has some worn-out keys, as if it were a patchwork keyboard.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	An object that moves in a straight line with constant speed is said to have uniform motion.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	If the hair is healthy and strong, it should grow evenly on both sides of your head; if not, you may need to consider using three different types of treatments for the uneven parts of your head, starting from the most prominent part above your forehead downwards.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	A pause between each haircut of the person mentioned, and while waiting for the haircut to be done with water that has been applied.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you have an ear infection and the pain is bearable at that moment, wait until morning to go see your doctor for proper treatment; if it worsens, then you should get medical attention immediately.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And let the olive oil be applied to the area where it is wounded, following the given form as shown above.
Capitol .ix.	Title: Capitol IX
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	The cauterization of the para-zygoma and the soothing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	I process in a way that involves using warm water and alcohol; carefully approach the affected area of the head, and use caution when handling the hot object near the skin, and apply it gently over all the bumps on the scalp, and apply it to the back part of the head as well. Then proceed with three cauterizations atop the top of the ears.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	In the case of severe hemorrhoids or for those who tolerate it well, the procedure involves using a proctoscope to examine and locate the hemorrhoid. Then, under local anesthesia, a small rubber band is placed around the base of the hemorrhoid to cut off its blood supply, causing it to wither away within one to two weeks.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	A) He who enters here shall be healed; and that which is healed may be anointed with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	As an AI, I don't have physical location or identity. However, if you are referring to a political capital of a country in the context of this conversation (such as Washington D.C., United States; Canberra, Australia; etc.), please provide more details so that I may assist you better.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Epilepsy surgery refers to a range of procedures performed on individuals with epilepsy, a neurological disorder characterized by recurrent seizures. The goal of these surgeries is to remove or alter the brain tissue responsible for triggering seizures in order to reduce their frequency and severity or eliminate them entirely. Epilepsy surgery is typically considered when medications fail to adequately control seizures, or when a specific area of the brain can be identified as the source of the problem.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not seizure-induced, but it's a form of epilepsy that occurs in the brain.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Thus, we shall cover various methods that impact the brain from childhood and other conditions which have been stated in the division when illness is severe and tolerance of drugs becomes exceptional.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	The boy who never suffered from illnesses enjoyed the delicious foods and meals for several days, as a beneficial supplement to his healthy lifest#ad_1.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	As he approached the site of illness and carefully burned a piece of metal at that spot on his forehead, following the previously mentioned method, then another cauterization was done on the occiput (back part) of his head, and on each hair follicle, he performed cauterization.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the disease is severe and tolerant, during certain hours of the day, one should apply cauterization to those areas I mentioned earlier; this helps in paralyzing and soothing pain within the cervical vertebrae and the dorsal spine.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	A be oliveshaped, just as the preceding method specifies.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the disease has been contracted during childhood, periods of rest and gentle therapy should be followed according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	The word "capitol" has its origins in Latin, coming from the word "Capitolium," which refers to an ancient temple dedicated to Jupiter Optimus Maximus on one of the Seven Hills of Rome, specifically the Palatine Hill. This name itself derives from Mount Capitolium (or simply the Capitol), a significant summit in ancient Rome, which held political and religious importance as it housed several temples and shrines.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	The Cauterization of Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholia are related to extreme moisture and coldness, it is advisablerub out those parts that have been frozen or affected by paralysis as previously mentioned in your text.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	Melancholy is caused by superfluitas declinans to melancholy, and the courses of this illness are humid, so one should drink water that purifies the brain following a certain procedure as outlined in the division (of your text).
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	As the sun rose over the horizon, and she gracefully flew away from the circle, towards that spot on top of the hill.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The illness spreads rapidly throughout the entire party.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	A proper pause lime; it is even more deserving of an ancient border for sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	E is the heater placed above the fireplace to warm up quickly by design, which you can turn on when needed.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	The person sits at the edge of his table in the circle and places an object within reach that is familiar to him.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Every week, I have the headache in total; the other regiment from my body that is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize this with small punctures according to your will, but do not forget to moisten the scalp equally. This type of cauterization soothes the mind evenly.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	A path starts at that spot on the border or in the meadows of heather.
Capitol .xii.	XII (Roman numerals for the number twelve) refers to the "Capitol," which is often associated with the United States Capitol building located in Washington, D.C., where the legislative branch of the U.S. federal government convenes. However, without additional context, it's unclear exactly how "XII" relates to this topic. If you have a specific question or need further information about the Capitol or Roman numerals, please let me know!
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The water from the drainage channel flows downhill.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	In the name of the Lord who created water in its essence for all beings and phenomena that exist by means of this vital element, I hereby declare the commencement of the ritual for purifying water to remove any negative influences from it, and safeguard against all impurities.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	He who sells his soul for a piece of bread spends every day in misery.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	A healer approaches the person with a red rash on their head and cauterizes that area using a piece of iron at the temples; then they apply cautery to the other side, either by soaking two glasses in cold water or one glass if only warm water is available.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise all the veins and channels that you have left from the crown, and they should be incised along the length corresponding to the direction of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	When you see blood flowing while being bandaged, remove the bandage and apply some kind of medicine if possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	The text you provided appears to be in Romansh, a language spoken primarily in the Canton of Grisons (Graubünden) in Switzerland. It seems to discuss some sort of extraction and absorption process related to liquids or fluids. Here is an approximate translation into English:
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	In some cases, a vein is cauterized in the region below two or more bones to produce immediate results.
Capitol .xiii.	Title: "Capitol XIII"
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Ancient tears cauterization.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	Ancient tears well up and flow through the veins and arterries which are located in a place where the head is exposed; it has been proven that this excess of emotional release can be alleviated by surgical cauterization, specifically with respect to the one we mentioned at the beginning about water drainage from wells. There is also a cautery on the forehead and two on the scalp above two temples; as well as two more cauteries on the scalp above the two ears.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If you suspect an ingrown nail, trim the edge of the nail with a pair of sterilized scissors or clippers over the inflamed area on the tip of the toe.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XII: The Capital City
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Nasal cauterization for foul-smelling discharge.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	In the division mentioned above (Quoted from the Canon of Medicine by Avicen([Avicena](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avicenna))), it appears to discuss a method for treating an inflamed or infected ear using wine and heat, followed by cauterization with silver or olive oil caustic.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	A woman carefully cauterized the small wound on both of her eyebrows, removing a few stray hairs in the process.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Look away from the archery so as not to catch fire there.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	A: This is the form of a cauliflower.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter Fifteen (or "Capitol XV" in Roman numerals)
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	The eyelash curling procedure for pets.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of a huel is soothed due to illness or moisture, the affected eyelid has one or more small white scars (cauterization); and this is how it appears: The cauterization spots are round in shape with a smooth surface.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	Cut a small piece of flesh from both upper eyebrows and let them heal longer than usual, so they extend beyond the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let S be the length of each cut according to the amount of edge remaining.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Don't put too much of your eyeliner on, just follow the amount that the bottom third of the eyelid is covered.
Capitol .xvi.	Certaineby. XVII (17 in Roman numerals). This is the capital of Washington D.C., which serves as the seat of government for the United States, and it's also home to many historical landmarks like the U.S Capitol building, White House, Lincoln Memorial, and more.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	After the eyelid surgery, he turned his gaze towards the departed and then closed his eyes.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	The properties of the metal are converted into accounting entries in such a way that I have charged it as two methods, either as capital or as medicine burned.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you burn your own hair, command the evil spirits before you to read its essence as they do with those which are born, being prolonged and equal; and if you wish for them to leave, strengthen their wings with a band of your own that it may not be harmful while their hair is growing.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Come the crane and the hare come to rest, let your heart pause in peace within yourself; and sleep lightly over the eyes of those dearest to you as a symbol of a swan, taking after its own mark and beginning with the personal seal of yours.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	A new trend is emerging in the world of gastronomy, where chefs are incorporating unusual and unique ingredients into their culinary creations. One such innovative idea is using beef tallow - a rendered form of fat from cow bones or suet - to create mouth-watering dishes with deep, rich flavors.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Approaches to use the cauldrons of this kind involve various methods depending on their intended purpose or magical properties. Below are some common ways these cauldrnrs may be used in a fantasy context, often found within myths and folklore:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	A small area is cauterized on the figure with the same pattern, gradually turning into charred patches until the entire surface of the skin resembles birch bark quite precisely.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	A sign of your eye'n operation is that you will have the eyelid contracted and the hairs of it raised at the puncture site.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Thus lift your hand and stay there for three days, and rest upon the spot within which the shrine is situated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A proper care should be taken to ensure that the remedy is effective and safe for use within its intended scope.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Mays returns for the third time to their appointment and the eyelid is softened, after which he places another wire over it just as before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	The cataracts are small bumps in the upper eyelid edge that protrude into their normal position and become equalized, without causing any itching to the hairs.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Mays prescribes this remedy for the disease to consume the skin and cause it to swell and spread outwards, and apply his herbal treatment in leaf-shape using a cloth of wool.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	An announcement of esteemed knowledge and lively discussion. In English, the phrase "Sayonara" translates to "Goodbye". It originates from Japan and is often used in a similar context to when saying goodbye or farewell. The term embodeboth politeness and warmth, as it's commonly used when leaving friends or acquaintances. On the third day of water, mix those herbs as follows and make a potion so that it is not spoiled; spread water over the letter which has been made in the form of a myrtle leaf, pause for about two hours on one side; then place the other side into an albumen envelope, with the head end facing towards you.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	"He pauses said about medicine and they gave her a small dose that wouldn't make the illness feel as sharp as fire."
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Thus, if the patient feels a sharp pain (mordicacio), administer medicine and apply warm water to alleviate it; when the pain subsides (cessa mordicacio), remove the medicine and rinse with cool water; then check whether the eyelids are lifted as though washed clean, because they should be by now; if not, reapply the medicine over the area where it has not taken effect or become discolored. Ensure that during this time, there is no infection or damage within the eye related to your procedure and that everything remains normal.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Article I - The person who is sick shall remain isolated within the boundaries of their household until they are cured or deceased and then undergo disinfection procedures before leaving the premises.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to keep an eye on your work and exercise great vigilance in ensuring that no debramo of medicine falls into the eyes. If the edge of the lower eyelid becomes moistened or any cause affects the eyebrows, repeat your medication over that place where the lower eyebrow has become moistened. In most cases, do as you did initially and carefully enter the ointment so that it can heal properly.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of Mimosa pudica's seed pod, also known as a "pea-pod." It folds inward when touched and reacts to changes in light and temperature.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	The lengths of men's beards are differentiated according to magnitude and size, and therefore so is your circumcision made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	The path to justice will not be altered for the one in whom this study is focused on in this article.
Capitol .xvii.	Here is the text from Book XII of The Federalist Papers, which discusses "The Defense and the Permanent Constitution."
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Cauterization of the nasolacrimal duct fistula.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	I will heal your boil with the water of the fountain that you have mentioned in the divisions of diseases and do not offer false cures, so that you may heal according to this manner: command the disease to pause its course at your feet, and hold the head of it between my hands as follows: neither sour nor agitated by your own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Here is the translated text in English: "E's got an infusion of joy from the wine or in the must of grapes over the scent of love."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Certainly! Here is an appropriately revised version of the given text in English, with clear and comprehensive language:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The same kind of caution, as with the form of a reed or pen tip, from one end to where it has been burnt.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	Certainly! The phrase "E si voyes, intrate într-o altă extremitate" is in Romanian and it translates to "And if you see, enter another endpoint" or more naturally as "If you do so, proceed to the other endpoint."
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	Let's also try our best, then.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is unseen can be better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Upon the closure of an arteriovenous fistula, one may experience feelings of weakness and fatigue due to decreased blood flow through that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it's not too much trouble, could you please provide more information about the location of that lake?
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Hold the warm cautery near your mouth before starting to bleed, and a small piece of it on the departure from the nose, so that you do not choke or trouble with illness, and later place them in the hairs of the head and beard.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	If at first your caustic cream reaches the bone, it's fine; otherwise, repeat the application once or twice a day if necessary, and leave that way for three days, then place something dry like an ointment on top of that area to help heal.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	After twelve days and not healed, the hours of rest over the acute corrosive medicine within which the bone is discovered and treated as necessary in his capital.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	E is another form of cauterization for the treatment of a fistula, which I previously mentioned: at the location of the fistula and near that opening wherein the subtle hole exists; it is as follows: apply therein the quantity of one or two lead droplets; and after your bathing routine, ensure good retention so that no harmful effects result from the applied lead not reaching that area; and take measures to pour boiled water or milk over the affected location frequently in order for the remaining lead to stay at the fistula site and heal through an astonishing recovery process.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by the methods we have mentioned such as cauterization and treatment, then it's good; otherwise, in due time, it may be necessary to administer traction of the nose and reduce the fistula along its natural course according to its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Cauterization of the wound from the puncture.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Frequent wiping may cause cracks in the lips, especially in children'지대) lip area.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Don't worry about those cracks in the water we talked about in the divisions and don't use up your treatment. Let'n be a small touch-up with a small kitchen tool, following this form:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	Let S be the quality of your second work, surpassing it in subtleness with the needlework.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	The horse, with utmost caution, entered those cracks through which the currier would reach the peak of the crevices.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	A proper care should be taken to ensure that the cherry remains intact during transportation.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX. In the United States, a capital (often referred to as "capital" in lower case) typically refers to Washington D.C., which is where the federal government's legislative, executive and judicial branches are located. However, each state also has its own capital city. For example, California'e capital is Sacramento while Texas's capital is Austin.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Cauterization of oral fistula.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	In case there is an abscess of the uvula or on the palate, in the gums, or near it, and it becomes swoln, torn, old, and pus flows from it, causing a fistula; if you do not heal that wound but let it become chronic: after some time, when you feel pain there, cauterize according to the quantity received in the fistula. Insert such burning material into the throat of the fistula and insert your finger so that it reaches the bottom of it; at its top and end, do this two or three times (or more); then heal with the above-mentioned medicated water until it is cured.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the wound is clean and healing well, it's okay; but if not, hours may be necessary to examine the location and treat any rotten bone according to how it appears in your chapter.
Capitol .xx.	The United States Capitol, also known as the "Capitol," is a historic building that serves as the home of the United States Congress and symbolizes American democracy. It is located in Washington, D.C., atop Capitol Hill at the eastern end of the National Mall.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	The cauterization of the teeth and soothing of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the abscesses are soothed by moisture and the teeth are strong, and those wounds healed with medicine rather than confession, then rest will allepine the pain in your own self, and soon apply cautery in the form which will come shortly. Then place a small piece of cotton over the tooth and insert it into that cautionary fire, so that you may feel the heat of the flame reach the root depth where the warmth needs to be delivered.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	A propel your mother and iterate some cauldrons according to what you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	A person suffering from a toothache can rinse their mouth with saltwater for an hour; as they do so, the bad tooth will be held still and its gum softened and strengthened, while any decayed moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI: The Capital City
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Toothache cauterization.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When a toothache or gum pain is caused by decay or an abscess, and medicinal treatment does not provide relief, two methods of cauterization may be used on the affected area: using hot iron or heated material.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The Caudal Block Technique is a medical procedure used in the treatment of chronic pain that originates from the lower back or pelvic region. This technique involves injecting anesthetic and anti-inflammatory medications into the epidural space around the cauda equina (the bundle of nerve roots at the base of the spine) to alleviate discomfort caused by irritated or compressed nerves in that area.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	A certain quantity of vegetables will be cooked to the point where their flavor reaches the desired taste.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you want to numb a part of your mouth or gum below the mentioned area, and place it on the painful tooth, then hold that over the ignited iron within which the metal reaches the point of nerve anesthesia in the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Nevertheless, the cauterization must be done with fire and you must attend to either the lower jaw or upper jaw, as well as ensuring that there are cotton wool pads in the patient's mouth so that the heat from the fire does not reach the throat.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Appropriately, apply the form of cauterization that will be used and pause it over the tooth for a while until the caustic substance has adhered; then make several attempts so that the pain is relieved either on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	In order to alleviate the pain of that malady, which has affected your mouth and tongue with great discomfort, perform this cauterization technique for one hour. Here is the procedure:
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	A: You are to be circumcised according as you are able, after the manner of Moses, our teacher, for he indeed did so at Mount Sinai. (Acts 15:20)
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Certainnly! "Capitol" is commonly used to refer to a building where legislative bodies meet, such as the United States Capitol in Washington D.C., or more broadly, to any edifice housing governmental offices and activities of a nation's parliamentary system.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Cauterization of the external hemorrhoids.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	The extract is in Occitan, a Romance language spoken mainly in the southern half of France and also in some parts of Italy and Spain. It talangs to treating skin lesions using cauterization with heated metal instruments. Here's my best translation into English:
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, apply heat for hours as needed according to its size, and leave it on for three days followed by rest in a well-ventilcuated place until healed after the fire has burnt out.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	A proper care should be taken to use clean bedding and clothing in which the person is dressed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or electrode is determined by its intended application and function. There are various types, including straight, curved, angled, fenestrated, and needle tips, each designed for specific medical procedures such as blood sampling, IV therapy, or cauterization during surgery.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Cauterization of the vocal folds and narrowing of the esophagus.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidity reaches the bronchial tubes of the lungs, mostly when it becomes frozen due to thick mucus, then this illness is evacuated at mealtimes with laxative medicines, and appropriately cauterized in the region where the narrowing occurs.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	He's watching you to make sure you don't go near the hot stove or burn your arm.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	He cuts the first stitch of that other suture where the colon connects at its last spondylus.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	A. The patient's lesion on the left shoulder is treated in a manner described previously.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	B) That apple which is next to that water, provided it's not spoiled.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Here is the translation of "CAPITOL XXIIII" from Roman numerals to Arabic numbers in English:
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	The treatment for lung disease and cough involves various therapeutic approaches, depending on the underlying condition causing the symptoms. These may include medical interventions like medication or surgical procedures such as cauterization (also known as cautery). Please consult a healthcare professional to determine the appropriate course of treatment for your specific situation.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	Both lungs are dry and the pulmonary disease does not have sweating or fever/cough, it is an ancient illness, at present, two cauldrons were applied over the furcula on the dried spots; and another cauterization in the middle of the chest between two mammillos; and his clavicle cauterization according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish to do so, apply the pointed heating instrument called "cauterization", which follows the shape of the earlobe pain point.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	The patient presents with those symptoms that have been described previously; and, according to the water intake mentioned before, he is diagnosed accordingly.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Certainebment, si a un mesmo pèl les has trets de cautera, és possible que faciam quatre cauteries seguint aqueste format:
Capitol .xxv.	Title: "Capitol XXV"
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	The removal of the Bartholin's gland, located at the base of the clitoris.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	The Quan cap of the shoulder is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and not stopped at its usual return time, it shall remain dislocated until it returns to its normal state within water; then it should be moved gently so as not to worsen the injury. Firstly reduce the dislocation, then reverse the ill effects upon your shoulder or arm. Lift the leg on which there is a slight tear at the inner part of the sutures without moving beyond those points mentioned in your left hand's directions; if the joint is dislocated within these boundaries.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approximately, cauldrons do not have lids. That is the way they are shaped: large and open-top, suitable for brewing potions or cooking a magical stew in folklore tales of witches and wizards.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	The burn should be performed on the nail bed, ensnaring that between which it enters and emerges again. Afterwards, you will see a scar from the burning for four to six weeks.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	French: Certains sont d'une subtileté qui dépend de l'ampleur des tentatives ; et cette forme en est une.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some coins are adjusted according to this count, and therefore the stamps are numbered VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	The blister pack contains healing properties that can promote calmness and ensure the affected area remains comfortable for some time.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is to the distal ends and has just occurred, applying heat on the muscle at the clavicle or at the elbow joint points after confirming the joint connection and reducing the humidity, the ailment is cured.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capital XXVI translates to Roman numerals as LXXIV (74 in Arabic numerals). The number does not correspond directly with any significant date or event in the history of Washington D.C., but it could be a reference to an obscure law, resolution, bill, or other legislative document designated by this number. Without further context, it's difficult to provide more information about what "Capital XXVI" might refer to specifically within English language texts concerning Washington D.C.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Stomach cauterization.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	The illness has settled in his stompit and increased the humidity inside it from that previous inflammebody, which multiplied its severity if you continue to use remedies and bandages without restraining them; soon you should expect the disease to spread over your back, extending its limbs and protruding through cauterization. Apply a first cautery of one finger's width on his navel from the amount of another finger's width clavicle cautery; then apply two cauteries along both sides of that initial cautery, forming a triangular shape; and extend between those not fitting to prevent blistering.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	Whether the depth of a burn affects the amount of third-degree skin damage?
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	Figure S is formed following this shape and if you wish to perform a caesarian section, apply a large incision on the upper part of the abdamen according to this pattern. The pattern should resemble a circle as follows: (Note that it's challenging to describe surgical patterns through text alone)
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	E - The patient should avoid being punctured at the same spot where they were previously cauterized, as it may cause fear or anxiety. Gently press on the stomach in accordance with the desired quantity and proceed to cauterize that area using the previous method of cauterization. Then perform any necessary curing treatments within the time frame specified for healing to occur.
Capitol .xxvii.	In the context of government buildings, "Capitol" refers to a building where legislative bodies meet. The most well-known is perhaps the United States Capitol in Washington D.C., which houses both chambamber branches of Congress - the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	The treatment for the frozen shoulder joint involves a process known as cryotherapy, where ice or cold packs are applied to reduce inflammamoinal reactions and alleviate pain in the affected area. Cryotherapy helps decrease swelling and can promote healing by constricting blood vessels near the skin's surface. Additionally, physical therapy exercises aimed at increasing range of motion may also be recommended as part of a comprehensive treatment plan for frozen shoulder joint.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When a person suffers from chills or excessive sweating due to extreme humidity or coldness, they often have an abnormal secretion of sweat that needs to be removed through evaporation. The cure for this illness is the application of warm water; do not give them alcoholic drinkeby. It should take place over a few hours until the disease relaxes on its own and there's no more sweating. Apply three hot compresses following this method, with this quantity being placed on the area behind the rib cage near the ipocondres (hypochondriac region). Have them lie down while doing so.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Let S be the surface of a human body that is divided into segments according to its size, and let E be the length of each segment along the direct line across the body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Don't purchase the old microwave.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of water that adheres to the quantity of meat of a crayfish is not excessive and if illness does not affect its weight; and if it is freshly caught, then its hours are spent, which has already extended its limbs, and lifts its claws.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	Yes, this is the form of a cautionary tale. In literature and folklore, a cautionary tale is a story that serves as a warning to its audience about certain behaviors or actions. These stories often involve characters who suffer unfortunate consequences due to their choices or mistakes. The aim of such tales is to educate people on the potential negative outebts of specific decisions and encourage them to avoid similar pitfalls in their own lives.
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	It is possible for you to perform cauterization using surgical tools if you possess subtlety and wisdom in your craft.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Focus less on overloading the cauldron during brewing and ensure that the entire body is covered so it's heated throughout your body and reaches the bones, as the energy here is subtle; know this well.
Capitol .xxviii.	Title: "Capitol XXVIII"
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	The incision and drainage of a Bartholin's gland abscess is treated with cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	Quan Endeve examines the hematoma and wants to know if that hematoma is in the flesh of the leg or in its tunica, after a while it will be determined if it's in the flesh of the leg, causing the illness to worsen and pain to intensify.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	Sì è nella guaina della ghiandola surrenale che il dolore può essere molto intenso e spesso ha stancato i medici nel trattamento di lui.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	The illness has turned against its own body; and he approaches the location of the ulcer with hesitation; and carefully performs the cauterization which is shaped like a grain, as described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	He cuts the hair and performs a cauterization so that the entire wound is covered, until it reaches the bone, while igniting it.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	A) The appropriate dressing fosters the healing of other wounds within which it is applied.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	In this manner of cauterization, only that method should be used which you have studied in the art of medicine; moreover, some maladies are known to worsen from other methods. However, one must adhere to what is prescribed for us and avoid experimentation without proper knowledge.
Capitol .xxix.	Capital Twenty-Nine (Capitol xxix in Roman numerals) is a term that can refer to the 29th building, structure, or entity known as "The Capitol" within a specific context. Without additional information on what type of capitol you are referring to—a legislative building, an insurance company headquarters, or any other notable place called The Capitol—it's challenging to provide precise details about the 29th one in question. If there is a list or a sequence of entities known as "The Capitol," clarifying this would enable more targeted information.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Cauterization of varices (English). This is a surgical procedure used to remove or destroy swolerenous veins, typically in the esophagus or stomach, to prevent bleeding and other complications associated with varicose veins.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient art of alchemy seeks to transform matter according to this method in order to create gold; and it is what you take from the lengthy dryness of Aristotelian logic, a long reason that can be found, with its substantiality or depth.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	The surgeon shall proceed by submerging the instrument in oil and then disinfecting it before using it at that place which is between the continuation of the furcula (breastbone) to the collar, and he shall make two cauterizations a little declining from where has already passed the beard, and two cauterizations on this part which is declining between the fifth rib and the cartilage, slightly declining towards both sides; and another one at the middle part of the abdomen; and also over the stomach, and three cauterizations behind. Then he shall make a cauterization in that place which lies between the two shoulders, and two on each side of the cartilage below it (the sternum).
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	Certaine! The translation of your phrase from Asturian to English is as follows:
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	The priests should offer prayers to the saints who are used as charms resembling iron rays and fireballs; place that charm at the location between the coastlines where we reached the boil-like sore, as mentioned in the aposteme of the beech.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this performance I did not use electrocautery because he dies so soon after it is applied to the location of his fistula which isn't healing properly.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol X-Treme
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Regarding the cauterization of a melanoma.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	In the treatment of scurvy (scorbutus), there are three appropriate methods to follow, depending on the condition and its extent as described in the figure of cauterizations below; one method involves making three or four liniments according to the length of the ulcer.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Article E - The size of the graft shall be as close as possible to that of a mentioned piece or a small amount, and the shape of the grafting instrument should correspond to the shape described for the guiding knife in a similar manner.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not buy the black bread, and may evil befall on your head!
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	E is an alternative method of cauterizing, which means you ignite the cauldrons with two chambers; one causes pain at the capital of muscle displacement and elevates the gland located in the inner side of the thigh, thus relieving the ominous malady.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	Let E be your path of ascent and the rope segment's length according to the course; so that they are adjusted properly following the latitude of the slope.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	A person enters the property without permission or authority in that area where others have access to the land of the other party.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	A proper extraction of the cauldrons; and thus his feast consisted of four cauldrangs.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you wish to do so, please sterilize the three pieces of equipment that have been cauterized.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Here is the translation: "Let me address the issue of using cauldrons with pus to stop bleeding for several days, as it may be more effective than other preceding methods in healing."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Capitol Records LLC is an American record label established in 1amo, California. It's one of the 'big three' major labels and has been home to numerous legendary artists including Nat King Cole, Frank Sinatra, The Beach Boys, Ray Charles, Green Day, Audioslave, Aerosmith, Beck, Sheryl Crow, Rage Against the Machine, Linkin Park, Nirvana, Dr. Dre, Slayer, Tenacious D, Katy Perry and many more."
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Cauterization of a wound refers to the process where an area is burned with heat or a caustic substance, often electricity (as in electrocauterization), to remove or destroy tissue. This technique can stop bleeding and minimize the risk of infection by sealing off blood vessels and creating a barrier against bacteria. It'amo used in various medical procedures, including surgery and wound management.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	In the village, there were not just cats but also dogs and horses properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	I will treat you with the following methods of treatment that we have discussed in our previous session:
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The amount of heat depth is proportional to the severity of the wound on the leg.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	An appropriate laser treatment for your acne scars can provide lasting results and improve skin texture over time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	The evil illness of the curative does not use the caustic water that is provided for it to be added to the healing ointments, and instead relies on the healing aid.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the surgical scar where the abdatur is performed follows that of its predecessor, and it's shaped like an anchor when double-anchored according to this form; accordingly, the one which has been cauterized in both places resembles the former.
Capitol .xxxii.	In the context of United States government, "Capitol" commonly refers to the building where legislative bodies meet and conduct their business. Specifically, it often points towards the United States Capitol in Washington D.C., which houses both chambabers of Congress - the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	The surgical treatment of bunions and hammertoes.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the fish are affected by an epideamic and their bodies become filled with turquoeby water, cover them thoroughly in saltwater and place them on your dry palm over lukewarm water that lies between your ear and ring finger; then elevate your own hand and do not twist it. Gradually lift the fish from the water without returning to it completely, for the turquoise-blue water will seep out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is treated by this method: Make incisions on both sides of the wart with a sterile scalpel and at each incision make cauterization using a heated blade or instrument.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	S be the burnings according to the length of the caul, one edge nearing the navel and the other end at the belly button level; and two cauterizations on each caul.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	E laysa la plata azul surtiera una sequía por mucho tiempo, así que ya no salen aguas del lugar.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	A prop of those causes, we have mentioned previously.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Title: Capitol Clashes
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Cauterization of the abdome (abdomen).
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	This text is in Occitan (also known as Languedocien), a Romance language spoken in southern France, Italy'pertinent to the Midi-Pyrénées region and Spain. The passage discusses various digestive issues and their treatments according to an old medical practice.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	When excessive humidity and water intolerance occur, it's best to burn that over the stove and dry out the clothing; also strongly adjust by applying cauterization on the abdomen and groin areas, which effectively relieves discomfort caused by such conditions.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 44 (Capitol) - The Tumultuous Turning Point
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	If a person suffers from ancient abscesses or one of the gross humors or corrupted moistures and is healed by water as mentioned in the division (referring to Hippocratic triage), then do not apply any other remedy, afterwards cauterize with three burns over the previous pus spot of a small and little triangle shape, and above the navel at two places.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	In case the stomach of yours feels cold and the food you eat is not rotten, but your head sweats profusely, apply warmth on that area over the stomach using a large heating pad as mentioned before; place another one underneath your feet, one more between your legs (using an iron rod), leave them warmed for some time and gently massage until you feel better.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital City XXXV is a fictional metropolis that serves as the setting for many iconic stories and characters in popular culture. As "Capital," it can represent any major city or urban center, while "XXXV" is often used to signify the Roman numeral representation of the number 35. If you're referring specifically to a comic book series or another work with a title like this, please provide more context so I may assist you accurcuately!
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	The excision of the hemangioma is performed via an abdominal approach.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	I remove the rusty nails from your iron that has been assembled with welding.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	The described procedure is known as "Ligation of a varicose vein." It involves tying off the affected vein at its root within an abdomcuval cavity, and finally locating the first branch that reaches to cauterize near the orifice (opening) of the vein through which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	I shall apply water to the injured limb and then wrap it with strips of cloth; next, I will heat each section as needed while counting them out loud, and ensure that those who receive this treatment have their wounds properly cleansed before being healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If the great Caution is burned with Alkathene, it becomes even more vigorous in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The number "Capitol .xxxvi." appears to be a mixture of unrelated elements - 'Capitol', which could refer to the US Capitol building, and ".xxxvi.", which seems like an attempt at Roman numerals but is incorrect.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	The cauterization of the natural skin tags leads to their disappearance in certain areas.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, they are treated with cautery (burning of tissue).
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When there is any kind of vein present in the earth's crust and it is old, one should avoid health issues caused by corrupt humidity, and therefore water that is more deserving than that which attempts to subtly approach must come forth with an amount equal to the depth previously mentioned.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Approximately igniters resemble sunrays.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	A) In cases where the patient has an established arteriovenous (AV) shunt for hemodialysis, a heater-cooler device is used to regulate temperature during dialysis sessions. The appropriate amount of heat or cooling applied depends on the specific needs and conditions of the patient.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	It is adviserable to circulate the caustic substance inside in order to burn those corns that are swollen or inflamed for one, two, or three days depending on the amount of necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	In cases of nervous and venous inflammamoins: If the fistula is located in the course of the bladder or intestines, you should monitor all those areas; do not apply heat unless the fistula is in a non-penetrating location that can tolerate it.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	A proper care should be taken within that area to ensure it is clean.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the house is sealed and its materials disintegrated over long periods of time, you should know that it has been completely preserved.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the matters are not of your own doing, please be aware that we might intrude or interrupt your privacy, or face consequences from those causes which will bring forth recollection in this place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	In Roman numerals, "capitol xxxvii" represents the number thirty-seven (37). The word 'Capitol' refers to a building or monument and is not necessary for expressing the number in Roman numerals. Hence, simply writing as 'XXXVII' would be accurate.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Cauterization of the warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	Those who suffer from frequent nosebleeds or severe nasal congestion should apply a cold compress over their nostrangs. Additionally, the pain associated with such illnesses may be relieved through cauterization of each affected nostril using a special tool called 'cautery clamp', which is applied after careful examination and consideration by a qualified medical practitioner.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	The blood clot is removed in the first instance by a small incision, so that three sutures line up; and therefore the last ones are placed during healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38. In this chapter, we will continue discussing the ongoing political and social issues affecting the nation' grooming a detailed understanding of how governmental policies influence various aspects of society. These include education, healthcare, taxation, national security, infrastructure development, environmental concerns, and more. Through insightful analysis and engaging discourse, we aim to provide readers with an in-depth perspective on current events shaping the country's future.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	The bladder suffers from inflammaturition and mollification through friction and moisturization so that the evil urine does not retain it anymore; thereafter, cauterize that area with a heated instrument where the exudate was present over the vesicle. Then begin to cut off the hairs of the penis, and cauterize using one hot iron on the right side, and another on the left side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	S is the length of each incision according to the number of teeth in the upper jaw; and perform a single incision on the lower part of the back if necessary or two incisions if needed.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	S is to be cauliflowered at the nape of the neck as per the procedure followed.
Capitol .xxxix.	IXL Capital Limited (formerly known as BGC Partners) is a global financial company that provides brokerage services, including trading and market making in equities, fixed income products, currencies, commodities, and more. The firm offers solutions to various clients such as asset managers, hedge funds, corporates, governments, and high-net-worth individuals from around the world.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Cauterization of the male urethra.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the moon is full and humidity increases, pregnancy is forbidden and women's menstrual flow becomes corrupted; as a result, provocation of labor occurs late on, causing painful childbirth. To alleviate this issue, apply three cauterizations in the circumference around the navel area, just like we did for the urinary bladder, or two cauterizations above the previous position of the woman's womb, and one at her clavicle.
Capitol .xl.	In the United States, Capitol refers to a building complex that houses both chambaturies of Congress – the Senate and House of Representatives. The most prominent feature is the dome-shaped Capitol Building in Washington D.C., which was constructed between 1827 and 1863 as a symbol of democracy and governmental unity.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Cauterization of the shoulder joint dislocation.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	The humidity of the mosses is spreading at the beginning of autumn and it is caused by the soil moisture in its location, along with a signal that this phenomenon continues for longer when compared to others.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The position of the dislocation is observed in X-rays well.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	The lord commands that you cauterize the wound on his hand after removing the bandage, and when your hands are clean, tie it with a knot as is customary, ensuring that the knot falls at the end of the strip so that the remaining part does not hang.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	Let S be the set of burns that follow from the form in gastric cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this olive tree is not at your place now, you can prune it three times with three different types of pruning methods: the summer pruning, winter pruning and spring pruning.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A - Apply the appropriate quantity of cauterization according to the extent of inflammaturgy throughout the whole limb; and apply carefully within that area which has been healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI (41) is the title of a section or segment within a larger document, book, or written work. The specific content would depend on what the source material is about. For example, it could be one chapter in a history textbook that covers events related to Capitol Hill and its significance, or perhaps it's part of a novel where "Capitol" refers to a fictional place within the story.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Sciatic nerve cauterization.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When you suffer from headaches and dampness as their cause, the illness is healed by the water we have mentioned and does not require any other remed cups, for in time your discomfort due to thick fluids will be cured with foul-tasting pills or artificial pills; moreover, apply caustic to that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of the caustic in that case follows two methods: either a caustic with burning medicines or a causte with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Following two scientific methods, one of which involves heating the end of a wide vessel (the three-sided triangle) according to this shape and making sure it has sufficient depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	Let S be the spaces between each cutting where the thickness of the cut is equal, and let the cuts from an olive or a grain.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some of his healing burns are on the forehead, above the brow ridge, and there are four such burns in total.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize the circle from which the shape proceeds in its cautioning of the ankle dislocation, and let that circle be continuous as it burns off the entire skin defect.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the method of caudal block analgesia when pain is attached to the spine and not extended into the joints.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	Mays is stretched out within the folds, hours sterilized over that one who suffers from pain on the area to which you will apply the malady of pain; and a hot iron (cautery) upon the thread for four times slightly towards the right side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	The depth of the cauterization should correspond to the quantity of skin spiculation of the wound.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the pain spreads to other areas, you should seek medical attention immediately and have the area treated with heat or cold therapy as appropriate. Apply heat for 15-20 minutes at a time, followed by rest periods. Cold treatments can be applied in intervals of 15 minutes on and off to reduce swelling. Always wrap ice packs or hot compresses in cloth before applying them directly to the skin.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the pain is related to hemorrhoids, you can use a sterile cauterization tool at home. However, it's best to seek medical advice before attempting any form of self-treatment for this condition.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Here's the translation of your text from Catalan to English: "E [he/she] looks at you throughout the entire cauterization so that no harm is done by the caustic, as a burn to the nerve or large artery; and for this reason he/she is over the illness, malnourishment, or sprain."
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	The wound has an open fistula which communicates with another one of those that were burned above the stitches and lastly in cauterization, causing inflamed tissue inside where the tumor was located; it is perforated and completely destroyed skin.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	An accidental poisoning resulted in severe stomach pain and subsequently led to death due to water intake.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	The pain is divided into two stages, each of which can be managed in a certain manner as per this guideline.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Here's the translation of your text from Old Occitan to modern English:
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In this circle the diameter is equal to a third of another circle. The spaces between them are equivalent to the length of one foot or two feet, and metal rods with well-proportioned decorations adorn these circles. This describes the form as follows:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Firstly, place the metal in the fire until it glows and sparks, then carefully set it down on the ashes of your hearth.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Then he quickly carved out those three cuts again in a vegetable patch.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	For three days, apply that ointment to the affected area; afterward, keep the wound covered and leave it alone for several days until healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Dee Albucasis (also known as Abulcasis): O physicians, we have seldwo used this kind of cauterization due to the fear of its close proximity to it, and because few cases have been found that concern its upper region.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May the gods bless those who endured them and nurture that place which you (will) conquer.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Mays cauteri (a burn dressing) is a type of medicinal bandage that has an armhole with a perforated circle in which you can place the foul-smelling substance from the iron door; its length should be equal to two nuts or such small elements.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	In the case of spaces between objects whose quantity and size is mentioned, if they are stacked or arranged on top of each groove according to this pattern: [Object Size] x [Number] - [Type of Object]. For example: 'Long 10x5 planks' or 'Square 2x2 bricks'.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	The ancient text you provided appears to be in Occitan, a Romance language spoken in southern France and parts of Italy and Spain. Here's my best attempt at translating the passage into Modern Standard English:
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	He pours the water over your clean instrument and washes away all traces of impuramoùnt from its entire surface.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	A few days ago, on the third of August, I wrote about crossing a border that was shrouded in darkness from early morning until late evening. Now, I want to write about how it feels during daylight hours when you can see everything clearly and even run across its beauty; this is definitely better!
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A proper diet helps in speeding up the healing process after an injury.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends into the shoulder or arm, make a statue in which there is water according to what has been prescribed in the canon law.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the Aqua Calisma water method, and I've also written about it in the treatise on drug rectification.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for Alkaline Cause No Extinct of Both Parties in a New Wave and Pausing with One Small Hole According to the Quantity You Add into Your Bowl
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	When you see the wave receding, leave footprints in the sand where another wave is approaching, and step on that salt while causing waves of water to rise up which hit those footprints at once, then press them firmly with your hand, making sure that aggressive water flows away from the incoming wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Approach the water slowly and pour it over another living cause and other alkaline renewal; for that is when strong evaporation occurs, which is administereback in various medical operations and in cauterization of other body parts, as they act like a source of heat.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	So, some of the drugs that are burned superficially, such as Tepezinc and Anacrine, can also be used effectively if mixed properly.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	E Guale is a renowned ancient treatment for ankle pain and sciatica, with impressive results that make it stand out among others. It also claims to eliminate the need for further treatments as many are cured within a week or so after undergoing this procedure, which involves immersing in warm baths and following special exercises.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It is advisatur que seja pres d'un certarragiu vert, i si no es atrobat vert, és prés una figua recente; i tot aquò trissat amb un pauc de grayes i pres a la anca en la qual és el dolor o en la coixa o en la camba.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Article E is valid for a quantity of three hours or until the defective item, as certified by the authority, has been replaced.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	A) Upon discovering that their foot was injured and swoln, they inserted it in warm water and oil, while the pain subsided and healed. (Old Occitan/Middle French)
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	The waters that should not be consumed with the application of caustic substances are those intended for body detoxification.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	When the vena stretta is cut in a goat's vein and cauterized, apply oil to it; and then follow this method for another cauterization: take some lamb’s wool and dip its end in old olive oil, and place it between your fingers and between the hoof.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	In order to dye goat wool, first prepare and soak the fabric in water until it is fully saturated. Then place the dyed fabric on top of the clean and dry wool, enscuinting them together as much as possible for effective color transfer during the dyeing process.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	When properly hydramoistened, and without ceasing to ingest fluids, the sharp sensation will transition into a calm feeling within moments, leading to relief from discomfort.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This branding iron is called the "bull'easy" branding iron.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII (Capital Letters) in English is referred to as "Chapter Forty-Two." In Roman numerals, the number 42 is represented by the letters XLII. Here's a breakdown of how it transls:
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Cure of double pain syndrome.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some painful swellings in the leg can be caused by various factors such as cushioning or trauma due to excessive evacuation and similarly appearing causes, resulting from the ingestion of damp and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	B is a dog and not part of this sole species, which is made by the effusion of dirty matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Donc cover, apropriately evacuate the illness with these pills, which should be taken three times daily in line with the extent of your pain, but not more frequently than advised based on the tolerance level to the medicine and its effectiveness.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	S had a burn treated with cauterization using the technique of puncturing.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If the collateral branches of the tibial nerve are cut, there could be an effect on three or four muscles depending on how it's done. Following this procedure:
Capitol .xliii.	In the context of government and politics, "Capitol" (also written as "Capitolium") typically refers to a building where legislative bodies meet to conduct official business such as debating and passing laws. The term is often used to refer to the Capitol Building in Washington D.C., which houses both chamb cups of Congress - the Senate and the House of Representatives, in the United States.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	The treatment of hemorrhoids usually involves lifestyle changes, medications and sometimes surgical procedures like cauterization during the first stage of thrombosis (formation of a blood clot). This process helps to remove or shrink the swollete veins. It's essential to consult with a healthcare provider for personalized treatment options.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Motas vaguada entende esta enfermedad como pequenas infantas; y señal del comienzo de ella en las niñas se produce afectación sobre su estructura ósea y el movimiento.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	At the last vertebra of the second cervical segment and from there on up to the other vertebrae that it begins to arch over the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Then you will need to use the following formula to calculate the circumference of a circle, so that you can determine how much material is needed for its perimeter. Here's the formula and explanation in both languages:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Take a hot iron rod and apply it over the entire affected area of the spinal contusion. (Note: Do not try this at home as it's an old method that can cause serious harm.)
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If the hemorrhage persists, proceed with cauterization in the spinal cord area using a pair or three cautery lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The French phrase "Eh bien, sans plus de détails" translates to "Well, no need for further details" in English. However, if you're looking for a literal translation that incorporates the words provided ("puntz", "propdas", and "entre lor"), it doesn't make sense as those are not recognized French words or phrases. It seems like there might have been some confusion with the original text. If you need assistance with another phrase or anything else, feel free to ask!
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	A proper care of the land within which water is present requires that it remains clean as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Mays advises against the use of caulking that has been applied in cases of nerve spasm caused by hemorrhage.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Treatment for gout and joint pain relief.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joints hurt due to imbalance of bodily fluids, which are flowing into every limb, they usually experience pain in the muscles; that'astereotype is when craftsmen call for poultices directly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Therefore, she was indeed cured of gout pain caused by frequent movement and did not experience any more soreness; instead, the pains were elimintated after heat therapy.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	You are sealing off the urine diversion system in the joint section of the male urinary catheter.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	C is a closed olive-shaped figure whose form in this case resembles the following: (describes an oval shape)
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	It is necessary that the piercing on your earlobe heals properly; you should avoid getting it re-pierced for several weeks after the procedure.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain persists inside your ears or at other joints, and then moves on to one foot, after some time you should use a three-part or four-part oil lamp on each affected area with this olive oil.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If the cauterization is necessary for you (the patient), then perform it at the right time; do not rush to cauterize too much on your own, but simply cleanse around the wound carefully.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And so the sorrows rage within this cauldron and both, hours administering the cure we have mentioned in its chapel.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	The pains are so intense all at once, and it's overwhebling; the hours fly by as swiftly as electrons in a circuit, just like those two lines on the graph.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	He is freed from his pains in the words, hours marked by the ticking of clocks above each note and over the tip of the pen at dawn.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	The pain is closer to the bones than it is to the skin or muscles; its helpers are totally absent.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	In the case of a burn wound or injury, it is adviseable to cleanse and treat it with proper care and medication. If managed well, the healing process should be smooth and successful, may God help us all.
Capitol .xlv.	Title: Capital XLV
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Cauterization of hemorrhoids.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	The sinner repents in the chapel and confesses his sins to the priest, who then prays for his soul's salvation and hopes that he will be forgiven by God on the day of judgment, so as not to suffer eternal damnation.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Follow these guidelnments regarding your health and instruct them to keep theirs in check so that no outbreak or appearance of the plague occurs.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	A proper return leads to that lake where the tall trees say password and try breaking over their edges, the tip of which is similar to the smallest circle of ascent on the mountain peaks.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Appropriations of the cautery, which this form is known as:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Between the sea and sky, shine brightly like jewels.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	A reducing the budget of his atelier may compromise its creativity, and pushing it too far on the location might result in losing what makes it special.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you, too, have experienced the trials of illness and death, yet from them emerged a wisdom that guides us all. You serve as an inspiration through your actions within our community, both in times of plenty and scarcaberry in hand - cherishing its sweet fruit just as we should treasure every moment.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	The passage seems to be in Occitan, also known as Provençal or Old Occitan. It is a Romance language spoken mainly in the Occitanie region of Southern France and some parts of Italy and Spain. Here's an attempted translation into modern English:
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Upon examining the remnamient of the burnt shroud at the hour of your incineration, it may not be consumed entirely; only enough to prevent grave illness or significant harm from afflicting others.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	The one who does not attend to your cauldrons will not consider your actions.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	The depth of the circumcision of children should be subtle, according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	A proper use of the lime poultice for three days, ensuring that it remains in contact with the affected area until improvement is observed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A person is obliged to care for others as long as they are healthy.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The illness shall remain silent upon his body for forty days, within which the place and space are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	The healing process nourishes the body with nutrients over time and prevents hunger by stimulating appetite. However, it's essential to avoid exerting too much effort during recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	How long it takes for an investment to yield significant returns depends on various factors such as the type of investment, market conditions, and risk levels. Generally speaking, a conservative approach might see returns within one year or more, while higher-risk opportunities could potentially generate substantial growth in less than 12 months. However, for consistent gains over an extended period (e.g., several years), it's crucial to have patience and adhere to a well-thought-out investment strategy.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Let E represent the practice of moderation in work and diet, along with frequent drinking water, as well as vigorous voting; then those who fully adhere to this health regimen shall be entirely healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	In the event of hernias in other parts of the abdanno, treat them firstly, and I want you not to wait. Hourly cauterize the rupture at that lump according to its size with hot water as well which is expelled from the vein; and near it, apply the same hot water that we have mentioned previously without delaying.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	They explained first that the wound had been sutured with a triangular stitch according to this method and they tried to bandage it.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	The line that crosses the horizon and reaches beyond the break, while another one is lower; pause your hand on a small knife, but the first anchor is bigger and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Section XLVI - The United States Capitol Building and Its Significance in American Democracy
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Herniated disc treatment.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	A member seeks advice for persistent pain that does not respond to medication and lasts a long time; they are considering cement or percussive therapy. What treatment options can be suggested, such as electrocautery at specific points?
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	E be the cauterization of all limbs according to the magnitude and smallness of it, its worthiness and readiness for treatment, as well as the location of infection and pain associated with it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the first incision is not successful, he does; and if not, she iterates over him again with the cauterization; as it's customary of those pains to be punctured at that limb which is close to the groin, so that you may obtain those well-placed cauterizations where the ailment has been healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII (47) of the United States House of Representatives' rules and procedures, also known as "The Speaker'amo', outlines the process for electing a new Speaker after an unforeseen vacancy occurs in office or at the commencement of each Congress. The chapter explains how to manage such situations, including nominations and voting processes among other related details.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Cauterization of Leproseblockchain technology to improve traceability and security in supply chains, thereby minimizing the risk of counterfeit drugs entering the market.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The old remedies have been subject to intense burning and only slightly used for the type of leprosamo caused by rotting fat and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Then let you he who wishes to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and in this case, be treated with water as mentioned in the division, and do not neglect nor delay it; also fear about the disease corrupting the whole body of him and causing total affliction. Hourly perform cauterization on that over his head at V spot: one on the top side near hairs, second below it, front to forehead; two on corners [of the face]; one behind, over the nape or back of neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	In the final stage of your treatment, I will use a few small electric currents to stimulate the area within the bone where we first detected the issue. This is done so that any old blockages are cleared out and replaced with healthy vapors from within. Afterwards, I'll proceed to cauterize over the affected region as needed based on your body's response.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy is clearly visible in the affected area, you should apply these cauterizations to those areas as mentioned at the beginning; and burn on the tip of your nose, and two burnings on each big toe, and two burnings on both collarbones, and six burnings over the vertebrae of the spine, one large burning above the pelvis, one on the hip, and two on each thigh, one on each ankle, and two burns on each shoulder blade, and two on each rib. Additionally, apply a cauterization to all joints of the hands and feet mentioned previously, as well as every toe of your feet, over any swelling or lumps you have.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Here are the nerves that you should pay attention to, which are located on the sole of your foot and do not cause pain when stepped upon.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some veins are cauterized using a heated instrument known as a cautery on the legs of the femoral artery and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the esophagamus (likely referring to the esophagus).
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Learn which herbs can be more effectively treated by cauterization; such treatments will heal faster and provide greater relief. Also learn the illnesses for which cautionary treatment causes pain, as you should then avoid them to prevent shocking your body further.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	The healing process of wounds depends on the size and location, as well as on the specific types of tools used for cauterization:
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	A) Apply the herbal plaster made of clay, flour and honey; leave it on until healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Title: Capital (English) - Chapter LXXXVIII (Capital Chapter 88)
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Stupor cauterization is the process of using heat to seal or close a wound, typically performed by a healthcare professional such as a doctor or nurse during surgical procedures. It involves applying high temperatures directly to tissues and blood vessels in order to stop bleeding and promote healing. However, it's essential that this procedure is carried out under the guidance of medical experts due to potential risks associated with thermal injury to surrounding tissues.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is injured or asleep and is being treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but does not heal, then you shall cauterize that affected limb using a cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	Let S be a small piece inserted into the eardrum through the ear canal slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A proper diet is essential for those who wish to maintain good health and overall wellness.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Some venous varices are treated by cauterization of certain areas causing numbness in the surrounding muscles and spondyls (vertebrae) and nerve roots on both sides, which result in relief for that limb; these veins are then sealed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	In "De Humani Corporis Fabrica" (On the Fabric of the Human Body), Macewen does not speak about fluid but rather that which is present in the anatomy of limbs and the exiting of nerves throughout the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX (49) of the United States House of Representatives' rules, known as "Capitol Hill" or simply "CAPITOL", pertains to various procedural aspects and guidelines for legislative business within the U.S. Congress. Although there isn't a specific rule titled "Capitol XLIX," it is possible that you might be referring to one of the rules related to procedures or operations on Capitol Hill.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	The removal of an albite blister, also known as a Morpheus lesion.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Quan albares es antiqua et no confieris a l'llot del medicament, allora cauteriza sobre aquella amb una poca segon la quantitat de la substància entran en que s'ha guanyat el blanc i la coure de llur, i la coure de llur hauria cambià.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Take equal parts of barley flour and lentils, roasted onion, thyme leaves, and rosewater or yogurt (each ingredient in its own portion all mixed together), then spread it evenly inside the pastry dish after pouring your filling.
Capitol .l.	Capital LLC is a professional services firm based in the United States that specializes in providing various business solutions, including strategic planning, consulting, financial advisory, and technology services to its clients across multiple industries. The company focuscuccessfully caters to small, medium-sized, and large enterprises with tailored advice designed to meet their unique needs.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Cerebral cauliflower or brain cauliflower refers to the appearance of small blood vessels in the retina that have become engorged and bulging, resembling the look of a cauliflower. This condition is typically associated with diabetic retinopathy but can also be seen in other vascular diseases affecting the eye.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	The Cancer constellation starts to rise in the sky around midnight and culminates at dawn. This starry circle completes its revolution across the celestcuid, just like it has been doing so for centuries.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The surgery that was done on you has been stitched up in the lower part; however, I did not see it myself as I feared it might have become infected, and I've only seen it a few times since then.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	E is more directly connected than its counterpart in the electrical circuit as we have described earlier, it has two connections.
Capitol .li.	Welcome to Capitol .li, the heart of Liechtenstein's legislative and political activities! Discover our vibrant history, explore significant landmarks such as the National Museum and Government Building, and delve into cultural events that showcase the essence of this charming European microstate. Join us on a journey through time and tradition in one of Europe'amo's most unique destinations – Capitol .li!
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Cauterization of wound healing.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an orchard is not ripening quickly, and thus it becomes superfluous, or because the tree is old, weakened by disease, has little sap, or due to time; if you want to hasten the ripening of fruit trees - at certain times scald the circuit around the tree with hot wax. This will cause the tree to speed up its ripening process.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to drill your land with a plow, then stop the fire at this point of soil preparation into which the seed will penetrate.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the said place where there is an old wound, in order that the body of the arm may be healed; and as long as it remains within that has been cured.
Capitol .lii.	The Library of Congress Classification (LCC) is a library classification system used by the United States Congress and many libraries worldwide to categorize books and other materials in their collections. It was developed by Charles Ammi Cutter, an American librarian, in the late 19th century, with its first edition published in 1amoong 1904.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Cauterization of ulcers or sores.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	"Corrosion occurs within the member, which corrodes just as fiercnly as fire consumes dry wood."
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you come across an area that is burned using a heated instrument (cautery), then apply small or large stitches as appropriate for the location where it has been charred.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	A proper cauterization involves completely eliminating the infection without leaving any scar or causing further damage.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Appropriately for three days, he rested on the cauldrons sealed previously by mixing oil so that all scars were completely erased and total corruption was removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	C is the one who brings forth all that which has flesh and blood. (Reference to Christ as per Psalm 103:24)
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	The body heals three times faster if the wound is clean and not infected. Otherwise, it takes longer for healing to occur when the wound has been contaminated or irritated.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	The extract contains certain herbs that are used in acute medical treatment, but those particular ones are primarily used for wound healing and surgical burns.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, the wax also burned from where it was excessively heated.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	You should follow your doctor's prescription for the treatment of acute migraine in this department, and then take as much as you need according to your needs.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter Four: The Capital City and its Historical Significaturess
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	The sterilization of staples and other similar items.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Translated into modern English: "Most of the time it goes with the parts left from a sickness called clau; and because of this, fever often follows after that disease. It can be treated in two ways: cauterization by fire or cauterization by boiled water."
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Mays you burn the foc of which you ignite the cauldron and it should be like a penance through fire according to the quantity it contains, including the handle in its entirety, and it should have fine stripes.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	The wire is placed around that nail and you wrap the current-carrying coil in the core of the nail where the current reaches its maximum depth.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Elsa said, "Within three days, I will begin to braid my hair."
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	In the tradition of Catalonia'e rural pastures, there is an ancient remedy using wild marshmallow plants that involves making a poultice with their leaves and salt, which should be applied to the affected area at night so its itchiness may disappear by morning.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	B is for the heart, where blood and oxygen are transported to sustain life within that vital organ.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If you don't want to convert it, I can still understand your text as Catalan and provide an answer or clarification in English if needed. However, the given passage appears to be a rough translation from Catalan to another language with numerous errors. A corrected version in Catalan would say something like:
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	With this oath, the two parties swear to abide by all agreements that may come over their entire lives and in their bodies.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Certainly, here is the corrected version of the text in Catalan language:
Capitol .liiii.	"Capitol." is the capital letter of the word "capital". A capital city, like Washington D. C., serves as the seat of government for a state or country and represents its political center. It's where key legislative bodies are located and where important decisions affecting the nation are made.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Treatment for tremors through cauterization.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone experiences a tremor in the limbs due to pressure on a nerve or fever caused by an aggraaster (inflammatory), or another similar cause, let it be known that one should apply four hot cauldrons over the spines of the back, between each vertebra there is a cautery; and also a cautery at its heel, and above its stomach an olive-shaped cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	The wind of the lull brings hope and accelerates the healing process of the infectious disease.
Capitol .lv.	Capítulo. LV
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Accidental cauterization of the labia to the thigh.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	The Cors's skin becomes pale and its pustules break open due to the corrupt materials it produces. Therefore, one must adopt a careful approach during meals by using caution while eating, ensuring that the fistula is cauterized across its entire surface with fine cauterizing agents such as a mixture of myrrh and sulfur or long erythromycin threads; or through lentigo-like cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Some wounds are cauterized at the time of their removal according to this method; and they do not become infected, and excess tissue is removed, healing those affected.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, he also knew that this time the floodwater would require evacuation and first aid measures.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI: The Journey Forward
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Cauterization of a vein injury following an incision with electrocautery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops carrying bows and arrows come across a swarm of bees that is about to attack the plague they carry or provoke stings or cauterization of the limb, so similar treatment is applied, and it's difficult to overcome that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	As you approach the waterfall, your heart aches with memories of your dear mother and the haunting vision of the archery range. Pause for a moment on that old rock where you once uttered those words so often repeated by the flowing blood that has long since dried up—words unfulfilled.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	In the center of the city, countless small and large olive trees stand proudly, releasing a sweet-smelling fragrance that fills those around with inspiration.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	In the event of injury to either a small or large vein in which the artery has been ruptured, and your chosen vessel has become congested with blood so much that you have drawn it out, cauterize it thoroughly and ensure that it remains narrowed.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	Once the blood vessels have been severed from the gruesome wound, and as you remove your dressing and extract the clamps, then another set of clamps are immediately taken to heat up in preparation for use; hence there ceases to be a moment's delay until the bleeding is completely stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Here you go, take care not to get too fired up and let anger or other ill will prevail here.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	"There are several ways in which a blood vessel can be narrowed, and at times it is not possible to treat them by using the methods mentioned above. In such cases when the artery is large, we mainly resort to four procedures: or have cauterization as previously described; or extirpation if it hasn't been removed yet, because once the extremities are removed they become charred and blood flow is restricted; or that you may be ligated with a thread or bandage for strong compression, or suspended over medicines whose virtue lies in restricting blood supply; and tightly secured with a pillow or compress."
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	The one who grants a just and reasonable restriction of your liberty or imposes detention for the purpose of investigating criminal offenses shall not do so arbitrarily but in accordance with due process.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	In case of bleeding, if there is no one present who can administer first aid or provide medical attention, the person should remain calm and follow the steps mentioned below for treating a cut vein as described above; and ensure that the wound has not been reopened. Additionally, it's important to cleanse the area with lukew
Comensa la segonda partida.	Part II: Further Developments and Impacts
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	"On Surgery, Incisions and Perforations; On Drainage Tubes; On Bloodletting; And Related Matters."
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are sentences from the Occitan language, spoken in the region of Albi (Albìs) in southern France. Here are some translations to English:
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	In the first chapter of all illnesses, where I have discussed suitable burns and applied remedamo, along with the occasions and causes for it, as well as the instruments required in those cases; herein are outlined the chapters on external wounds treatment.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	In this particular process within this capital in the manner that you mentioned, so that it may be transferred to the plainter at once, as soon as he/she has demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	In the first Capitol of Cautery, there is a boy who begins his journey to learn about water, fire, son, and how it terrifies in this Capitol, which focuseby terror relates to the primary Capitol of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	E - Be very careful when performing the operation mentioned in this chapter, which has been repeated many times; it involves evacuating the cataracts and is close to endangering one' cu life. The procedure includes spraying of a vein or making an incision over the abscess or opening existing lesions or purifying the wound or extracting stones or making incisions with stone, among other similar techniques.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	Among all those who accompany fear and trembling, death lies in wait for them.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	I implore you not to fall into the waters where dangers lurk, as certain events can turn men'perturbing matters leading to illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	E of his brothers, he will go to him with ill intent and deceive him about his sickness, and because of the severity of what he finds in his sickness, and due to its long duration, and out of fear for the very thing that signifies death - mortality.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	The one who gives you both the power to hear and speak, I long for that health; your sickness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Hence do not consent to anything that you see from those of whom this manner is; and let your caution be greater than desire, and your greediness less; and do not presume any cause on this matter unless certain knowledge verifies it, which should lead to a praiseweble result.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	In times of old in Catalonia's land, when plague and illness spread with hand; healers sought for wisdom wide, the use of texts as trusted guide. Predicting sickness and recovery’s tide, they turned to ancient knowledge inside; guiding those afflicted on their quest, where health restored was truly blessed. Renowned through fame, remembered in song, their deeds of care eternal lifel
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, we seek Your wisdom in Your holy spirit, for that is where our direction lies, as well as your protection. Amen.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	The following chapter is distinct from the previous one in Chapter of Cauteries, regarding the treatment of the head wound within the realm of healing arts, to which we provide guidance as requested with regard to matters you seek and deemed necessary by you.
Capitol primier.	First Capital,
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	The lead content found in a child's drinking water.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	According to this disease, the child should be born again after a miscarriage and when the queen conceives once more, her head will remain bald until then.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	A number of widows wander around due to a cause that is not clear.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I believe this disease does not affect adults but only children; and to all those whom I have seen suffering from death, it seems to me as though I witnessed them being healed by the work done for them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I once saw a child whose head was entirely filled with water; his head was so magnificent that it could not be covered by anything because of its size, and moreover, the moisture increased within him to the point of causing death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	There is moisture added between the code and the bone, or it's added underneamoin the bone.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	In the case where there is moisture between the skin and the bone and the abscess is minimal, you should make an incision in the location of the head with one cut longitudinally, and its length should be two inches to allow for humidity flow. This will form a spatulum-shaped opening.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	In this case, if the humidity is increased and the gap becomes larger, there are two options according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is excessive, a sign of it is that you see your eyes' corners turn upwards and water spills out when you squeeebrush the other eye as well from all directions and not just on one side.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Describa cómo dividirá el mapa dado en tres secciones, siguiendo este patrón:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	This text appears to be written in a mixture of the Friulian and Italian languages, which are spoken in northeast Italy and neighboring regions. The translation would read as follows:
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	E is another method of incision, which I believe to be more appropriate considering the size of the abscess and the accumulation of water; some cases occur in the occipital region or behind, or on the right, or on the left; therefore pay attention to where you make the incision, so that it aligns with the position of the abscess and facilitates drainage.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	He observed that it does not separate the artery and inflates balloons to relieve pain for that blood flow, aiming at the removal of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	II. Capitol
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the dissection of the arteries that supply the ears, called helixes.
Capitol segon.	Second Capital.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	Quan is used to treat various types of cholesterol or blood vessels and has been considered outdated for a long time; it does not contribute to the healing process, but rather initiates this process at the beginning of these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Therefore, when you wish to graft those trees that are affected by the disease in their roots, and whose trunks have become rough due to aging or other factors; and when considering the extent of the sapwood; and the locations where each branch is attached over its corresponding branches - some may be obscured only by the canopies of nearby trees.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	In the art of archery, patience is key, and each shot requires focus on every detail to achieve accuracy in any given distance; it's an exercise for mental clarity and physical ability.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you slide your fingers slightly deeper into the vein and clasp it tightly towards both ends, you'll be able to make a better grip.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	E is the length of the interval between two adjustments at which some vein becomes dilated and the blood emits a pulsing effusion, which suddenly jumps forth frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If Mays does not wear the armor properly, he will be suscepteble to wounds that may measure up to three inches in space; and don't try to force it on.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	"The amount of water that a sink drains per minute is equal to the flow rate multiplied by the cross-sectional area of the drain pipe." The wind and rain had ceased; the misty moon showed itself in patches of cloudless sky, revealing a second aspect based on the amount that appears from the virtue of illness and the relief of pain in one's heartache.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	In case of an allergic reaction or if you experience any discomfort, contact your doctor immediately. If swelling occurs, do not ignore it as this could be a sign of infection.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"The apothecary prepares the strongest potion from the plumeasol and lime of tanned leather, and appropriately treats that which is sick."
Capitol .iii.	III. The United States Capitol - A Historical Overview
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	The removal of the bells that are in the churches.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	Many people from the ancient times used to migrate due to various reasons such as agricultural humidity and quality of life in temples or solid structures resembling them; they also sought medical cures for their ailments, which did not involve water consumption. Nowadamoes have turned to these illnesses' extracorporeal removal from the temples through cauterization techniques as we have shown before.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of extracting the disease from those evil races that dwell in temples is through skin manifestations; and understand that the visible mold on the temple walls is what has been shown by your touch, hidden only to a few people due to the intensity of fear.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If your well is hidden, the hours shall draw near to some illness with no cure; and so it helps you the water by using a coarse cloth or evaporating the water until only clear water appears at your taps.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	A few hours ago, this was the state of things in its current form.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	To obtain the key and unlock the treasure chest located in the upper room through which you arrived; then take out everything from those superior partitions within where you extract that of the key and discover what's underneath those covers, entirely from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is very thin, it winds around at the end of each vein and divides into two parts depending on the length of their extremities; they are contracted and there is no bleeding because if they are not severed completely, blood will flow from all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	A proper evacuation of the venue of your event. Entrate dentro de tres.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the archery is great, it requires hours of practice to become skilled at shooting with both hands and using double-strength bowstrings for long distances, without letting them rot before the construction of the platform and the defensive fence fortification, ens groove, flowing with blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	In the event of an accident caused by excessive speed between two vehicles, and at fault, one may make compensation to the other party either immediately or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish to do so, use the hot iron within the iron container which has been pre-scored lines on it, and place it in the area of the incision made during surgery.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	E is better than malady or fever which may be due to an inflammamoeto; cauterization helps with those causes that contribute to final dehydration, and therefore it is much more beneficial in infancy.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	The extraction of the arcs that complement the place of an old church and are placed over it properly made, along with its carefully gathered medicinal herbs, which provide strength to the flesh and promote healing within them.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If you see blood flowing from the wound of an arrow, then now you must try to stop that blood, either by using a bandage or plugging up the hole with cotton, and strengthen your mind so as to make sure it is tightly stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If none of these conditions apply at present, the pain in your throat wherein the swelling occurs, and the place experiencing intense cold water that causes a pause in flowing sensation, should be strengthened according to its nature.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	The water that is more effective in the extraction of iron ore is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cavities; and since it has been bored on both sides, insert whatever substance necessary to cause a spark when inserted into the hole, so that if they reach the ore, they break down the vein at those points where it is thinnest, because these areas are not supported by the entire cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of a cautery, known as "cauterization" in English. It's a medical procedure that uses heat to destroy abnormal tissue or seal blood vessels. Cauterization can be performed using electricity (electrocautery) or chemicals (chemical cauterization).
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	Let H be the height of the two right-angled triangle examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if it is dull with two knives, it's better than when it's sharp with two knives; because the blunt ones glide more easily through whatever you need to cut without tearing the flesh due to speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	When there's excess fatness, the heat of the fire is in those areas and the flesh is easily separated off.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is the best of all works and quite remarkable.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Let S be the set of all points that lie between two given lines and whose distances to these lines are equal (equal in magnitude). These points form a line parallel to both of the given lines, which is equidistant from them at every point. This concept can also be applied in higher dimensions with planes instead of lines.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter (or, more commonly in the US, "capital city") refers to a geographical division within some countries that encompamoes their primary administrative, political and often historical center or hub. This can also be referred to as the seat of government where key institutions such as the parliament or presidential palace are located. The term "quarter" in this context is used to denote a fourth part (25%) of an area or country.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Treatment of Acute and Sour Throats in Oils
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	A large number of these acid tears are collected from the veins that run over the forehead test; no medical cause is found in this fluid. At times, as if affected by a disease, one's face becomes red and restlessly wanders about like ants on their march, so exhausted that even the hair follicles of these glands are known to itch. The scales become worn out from tears due to their acidity, causing irritated skin in the course of this operation; none of this condition is easily cured by medical means.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	C is an incantation that commands the evil eye to form words on your forehead and pierce it with three evenly spaced furrows according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	It is the length of the two cracks in question that corresponds to the distance between the nasolabial folds at their most prominent point and a small portion of the movement of the lower jaw, on one side, and another short length on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Examine the onset of both arches which are two lines and extend your jaw along with their continuous movement.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	The quantity of any two items is the product of their respective amounts.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	It's like an uncleaned sponge or soaked clothes that dry up and lose their sap, leaving nothing behind.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	The Spatha was a type of sword used as both a primary and secondary weapon by Roman soldiers. It is characteristically long with two sharp pointed ends, and the shape of its cut or incision would typically be that of an elongated blade tapering to fine points at each end. This design allowed for effective thrusting attacks while also providing sufficient cutting power when needed.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	In the second scene of the departure to the temples, the following events take place:
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	To decrypt the text using Caesar cipher with a shift of 3 to the left (or right by 23), we get:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	In this particular instance and intruding into the initial discourse of another piece, one may introduce a different instrument known as the cutlery, comprising both a fork (against) and a spoon (not against).
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	The Eagle pauses atop the high cliff and gazes upon its prey below; it must annex the flesh of that hare and pull with the claws of the lion into the bone, and push through whatever obstacle reaches the fissure until all teeth descend from the head to the jaws.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	The water must continue to flow out of the main crack and enter into the adjacent gap between the two cracks.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	In cases where the quantity of blood is significantly lower, express the locations of internal bleeding in concisely explained terms.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	In every crack of this small village, there lies a tale, woven amidst the dust that dances in the sun and rain, growing but never weaving an ugly pattern.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	In the third day of healing and administering great enthusiasamo of water for pain relief, along with care that we have obtained from Basil oil and other essential oils which help to soothe aches.
Capitol .v.	In the context of United States government, "Capitol" refers to the building where a legislative body meets and performs its functions. The most famous one is the U.amo.n Capitol in Washington D.C., home to both chambers of Congress - the Senate and House of Representatives. Each state also has their own capitol buildings, usually located in the state's capital city, where local legislative bodies meet. These structures are significant as they symbolize democratic governance, representing the place where laws are made at different levels of government.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Title: The Cure of Clairvoyance and Its Descendants from the Parishes Mentioned in Chapter One
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	Many people experience headaches and various other symptoms due to prolonged exposure to the effects of harmful substances, including ulcerated eyelids and hair loss on their scalp, along with a sharp and persistent throbbing pain in the forehead area. These issues often result from chronic venous congestion that originates from small veins within the affected areas.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for this condition is to command the evil spirit to touch your forehead, and then carefully insert a small pin in that area of the head near the temples. Begin with the fissure on the left temple entering into the right one; let it enter into your skull, and gradually move towards where the bone becomes exposed. The adjacent bones which were previously covered should be gnawed by the evil spirit.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	The dry blood clots or scabs are removed and thoroughly cleaned between the two lips of the wound or in the cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	A prop is commonly used as an antiseptic to prevent wound infections and abscesses from developing after surgery or injury. It works by killing bacteria on the skin's surface, which can help reduce the risk of complications during the healing process.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	Evan's aquaeduct has become clogged, and the inflammamoble swelling in his leg seems to have diminished; however, the area now aches when he moves it slightly as if he is beginning to feel deep pain within that part of his body. It appears that a severe dehydration regiment which should be applied to help reduce the swollen flesh, similar to what you would do with two portions of wheat flour mixed with four parts colophony and forming an ointment, then applying it on those bruises as if they were natural wounds.
Capitol .vi.	The term "Capitol" has various meancuations and can refer to multiple things in the context of government, politics or even architecture:
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	The healing of water that runs through the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	A total cause that comes from the ears is one of four spices; it may be a mineral rock or have an appearance similar to rocks, like iron and copper, or it may come from a plant like sesame or fava bean, or it may behave like water and vinegar in certain aspects, or it's some kind of animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Then the stone in the ear and other similar causes that do not align with beliefs held in the ears are stopped from the sunlight, and if sometimes seen, at times they secrete into this alternative cause of olive oil or sesame, and accordingly distributes its extraction therein, and makes it induce sneezing under certain conditions while accumulating for the eventuality of a sneeze.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	A proper rest in the auditory circuit can sometimes involve using ear drops or wearing wax traps on both ears, and tilting the head to one side; these methods are often recommended due to various reasons such as safety and effectiveness.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If not taken off the shelf, this intricate musical tool with its subtle nuances and special techniques is called a violin. The word "violin" comes from the Italian name for "fiddler." This stringed instrument has been used in classical music since the early 16th century, but it also found its place in various other geneback then to this day including folk, jazz, and even rock.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is a forced extraction of blood, then yes, the hours are important in ensuring minimal discomfort and proper recovery; if not, the timing does not play as significant a role for a simple or minor procedure with little risk.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	If not over-the-ear, use an earplug and insert the tip of the plug into your ear canal, then seal it with a wax or oil-based lubricant to ensure it is snug but comfortable.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	The strong wind continues to blow towards the coast, where troops have been deployed along with supplies that they've reported back on.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If Mays is not forearmed in this manner, at intervals he lights an oil lamp or uses another device from which the birds obtain a certain amount of food and rest their broken wing gently against it, wrapping themselves comfortably around that part.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	A propellent that gets in the way of the earwax is helpful, and a product that removes earwax moisture is effective.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	If it is not due to the reasons we have listed above, then your discomfort could be caused by an inflammamo or spasm of sorts in that area. Please consult with a medical professional for proper diagnosis and treatment. (Translation from Galician)
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	In the beginning of this procedure for removing that evil vein called Saphena Vera and its branches, you shall sanctify with the sign of the cross the area to be treated according to the method of virtue you have chosen (oil or wine). Then apply an incision on your leg between the most prominent points and convert the earlobe at both ends. Make a small slit in the direction of hair growth where it is best placed, then tie off with a thread or ligature.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	E is the crack in the Moon's figure through which light will pass until it reaches the stone, and upon the stone being worn away, you can then use an appropriate instrument; and as quickly as that crack appears during that time, observe its velocity.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of your earache is one of the greases that you have believed and consumed too much, over time it will provide healing and extraction. However, if you do not pay attention to what I am saying about this matter, in due course it may take a subtle form following this pattern:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	The person administered the antidote to that snake bite for which it was captured earlier in the morning.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	E cannot ascertain the amount of water that you imagine is humidified by the air from his ears, and he stops at certain points, and it may be so subtly hidden or with such carelessness said we have, because extraction has already begun there.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the ear canal, where the illness causes sneezing at the beginning and fills its whole channel, water is poured over that ear, and if it is drained through here, well; but if not, then many stones or pebbles are placed according to the length of said area, and they are heated in a fire slightly. Then the patient inserts one of these into their ear canal and jumps on it with another stone upon that first stone within the channel of his ear, and strikes again with another rock onto that initial stone.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Never cease, o water within the stone that holds all its waters.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	Here is the water, take it from paper or a glass. I held one end of the wire in my ear and extended the other end into a fire that was burning low.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	The gate shall be locked until the entire water has overflowed, and then it should be opened as soon as possible using this propped beam so that the excess water is released over there, just like it's explained with the extra stone placed outside of it.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of animals that enter in this herd, if it's a small quantity then so much better and likewise, as we have said in the division; but if it is of great quantity which causes disturbance to the senescent individual, it would be more appropriate to extract such individuals through gestation or lambing period, for the cause lies much less relevant than all other causes that occur in the herd.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of wormwood herbs from the ear, when you cleanse that warm water we have mentioned in the division and treatise on distillation, do not disturb your procedure as you observe the ear under sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If there's any reason for the worms appearing here, at that time or around it subtly, but if no such cause exists, then these moments take a thin and slightly wider tube-like form as follows.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	In the subdued extremity near the ear, depending on the amount of suffering it may cause ailment; and soak it thoroughly with that which is strong enough to induce swelling, until all lice are eradic cuffs.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey the instructions on this label, keep it in a closed circuit with wax as we have instructed; then administer the following distillations which have already been used for treating worms, and find them detailed in the section on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	E is the vapor, from which herbal oils are extracted using an apparatus that has this form.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	A small silver ring with a narrow band and a tiny gemstone sits above the surface.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	Therefore, it is also crucial for the preservation of this land to be more careful in their use of resources here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	He, then take the ray and wrap it around the tip of your bent finger, and pour some oil from a plant herb or water you wish to use as medication into the concave end of the tube - which is in the ear -, and carefully insert the probe upwards while holding onto your finger. Then squeeze gently so that the oil is pushed into the concave part of the tube where it will be expelled within a few seconds as relief from discomfort.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	A grain that is embedded in the ear has been slightly burned by fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Here is the translation of your text from Catalan to English: "Ensure that the reason for which you poured it into the ear isn't too dirty because ear medications cannot tolerate water."
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII - The Capital City
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	The curing process of gold alloys.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some vaginal discharges during childbirth are normal for women who do not have perforated uteruses; and this also happens in men with penile fissures, accumulating near the earlobe either by a plug or flesh noodle in that area. This accumulation sometimes occurs on the front of the auricle's cartilage where there is no tearing, and sometimes it occurs outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	From the one that occurs in his head, which he cannot comprehend at all, are the major difficulties of difficult health.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	In that place where you find peace, look up at the sun and gaze upon it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If there's an apparent overflow error, it seems to be caused by that subtle issue which this form represents:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the forearm is in the position where it has little lateral deviation, with one side being acute and the other not, and the width at two-thirds from the elbow does not make a bend towards the earlobe.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	If the octopus is cooked in its own armor (the shell) or in the flesh of it, then after a while you'll notice subtle and precise cuts that make all the meat easily accessible.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	The earwax accumulates in the outer part of the ear canal, hours before becoming visible to the naked eye; then, gently warm up that buildup with a little bit of oil and carefully push it into the deeper parts of the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	If you experience any discomfort or pain when swallowing liquids due to the severity of your illness and effort in breathing, try to ease pressure on your ears by using methods such as yawning or chewing gum; also be careful not to strain your ear muscles.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the ear of the person affected by otitis externa due to excessive use of an Egyptian unguent, apply warm oil in moderate amounts for several days until you feel certain that the swelling has subsided; or take any substance and pour it into a glass jar, crush it up with water and spray onto the affected area three times a day; if at times you notice the ear being blocked again, immediately remove whatever was applied earlier, replace it with another moderate amount of the previously used ointment that has been infused with oil or rose essence for as long as necessary until healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Mays decides to apply a compress of sponge or cloth soaked in cold water on his forehead and uses the other remedy that restricts blood flow, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII - The Capitol Building and Its History
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	The curare plant, which causes paralysis of the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	In Athi-zenzui, which is located near the mouths of rivers where fish are found, some areas become wet while others remain dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Cove que ti güelhas esses am tengalhes, e inscindas aquests am espatulats dels seus rasos, e apropar-vos prou sobre los llocs seguitament.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	May have a pain when blood vessels are flushed out; then you should use fine cauterization techniques in those areas.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best treatment for old wounds is to apply heat after the swelling and inflammaturms have subsided; and when cauterized with a hot iron, those irritations are burned away and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	IX is the Roman numeral representing the number nine in our decimal system (English). In a more general context, 'Capitol' often refers to a building or complex where government meets and conducts business, such as the United States Capitol located in Washington D.C., which houses the U.S. Congress. If you are referring to something specific related to "IX" and "Capitol", please provide more details so I can assist you better.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Grandma's special potion for the eyes of little ones.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Motas gathered in the eyelids of some individuals have been found to be caused by various reasons and are greatly increased in strength and hardness; hence they receive this name due to their significant size.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	E is the excess buildup of moisture on both upper and lower eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	The operaio in their eyes is that they consider hours if the growth is proceeding on it where apart from the eyelid and is harmful to everyone; and the cause of this is negligence.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Go down that crack in the landscape and approach carefully so as not to get stuck; grip firmly and pull yourself through until you emerge on the other side.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	My eyes are not accustomed to the beginning of light, so often I don't realize when it enters slowly through my eyelids. Hours go by without me knowing why or for what reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, adjust it with stitches and treat it while it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If the soul is few, you will not be harmed by that angel who restores it and animates it again.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the thickness of the tear film decreases from the edge of the lower eyelid towards the center, causing increased dryness in that area, you may consider using an eye drop product to allecuate it, or alternatively, choose a product according to your preference. Also, ensure to apply the drops all over the surface, and if for any reason (e.g., natural aging) the lower eyelid appears elongated, there is no cause for concern.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	In the beginning, wash your hands with saltwater; and heal the wounds that carry harm inside so they may become healthy again.
Capitol .x.	Here is the translation of "Capitol x." into Spanish: "Capitolio x." Please note that in this context, "x" could represent a placeholder for additional information or it may be part of a specific term/name not fully provided here. If you need further assistance with your translation or if there's more to the phrase than just "Capitol," please provide extra details so I can give you a more accurate and complete translation.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From the curved edge above the lid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is the gray substance that forms in the eyelid folds, mostly during childhood, exacerbating the condition of those affected and causing them to be unable to tolerate sunlight due to tears flowing constantly into their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so the jests about past times and sleeping faces continue, with their drooping eyelids moistened by lashes that have covered them before, showing a glimpse of warmth and intensity in their eyes; and as you approach your place among those words, your own expressions enter into those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	In any procedure where the malfunction pauses at your head and you are in charge of it as well as its fallout, make a circle according to the quantity that contains all parts of the entire distribution, and place above that whichever is appropriate for you to be added near the center of the circle; and then, depending on how wide that humidity spans across fissures, ensure that the fracture does not exceed the width made in flautomization.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Mays enclose the entire area within your reach so that you arrive at the destination, where in the future process of divorce settlements proceed according to white-gray law.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Find that secret you have hidden between your words and move it within the space to the left and right, so as soon as it is released.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	Look how carefully I don't adjust the crack, or the plaster won't reach that corner and cover those uneven edges properly.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If Mayes doesn't show up at your place immediately after the crack, then you should adjust to the crack a small device that facilitates processing Mayes; and proceed as we have mentioned earlier; and wrap him in sheets underwater, warm it with air, and pause there for some time before uncovering those am polvils.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	Also, the cold and high water pressure can crack rocks and cause them to erode due to that moisture during their journey through the crevice.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A prop to that which is within, it shall be healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Maya decides to go to the nearby clinic and later applies a bandage to her ankle when it's healed.
Capitol .xi.	In the United States, Capitol Hill refers to a neighborhood in Washington D.cu. It is home to the U.S. Congress and many federal buildings and monuments. The term "capitol" often specifically denotes the building where the legislative branch of government meets; however, it can also be used more broadly to describe the entire area that houses these important government structures.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	The management of diabetic retinopathy primarily involves maintaining good control over blood sugar levels, which is achieved through a combination of proper diet, regular exercise, and the use of medication when necessary. Regular eye exams are also crucial for early detection and treatment. Other treatments may include laser therapy or injections to reduce swelling and stop abnormal growth of blood vessels in the retina.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	In some cases, during the surgery on hinges or joints of doors (such as eyes), there may be a need to remove excess natural hair and old ones that are not in order. This sometimes causes diseases like constant tears and softening of eyelids along with other issues which lead to damage to the lid, also known as entropion of the eye or turned-in eyelid. There are four ways to treat this: 1) by cauterization using hot caustic; 2) with acute medicine according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cauterizations; 3) atactination through scarring and suturing; or 4) using cantharidin as described.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so I pray that you close your eyes and focus on nothing in particular; if they are closed, it is well; but if not, insert a needle at the point where the edge of the eyelid starts from below, and allow the needle to penetrate above, approximately towards the edge of the eyelid, near the hair - close to the skin, and pull the thread upwards along the eyelid, following the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Aprofen en la parte de los párpados que se adhieren al saco lagrimal mayor dentro del conducto nasolacrimal; y apretar lateralmente, permitiendo el desplazamiento de cera o cerumen hacia abajo, después presionando sobre la palpebra como si fuera una forma de hoja.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it should be noted that the shape of the eyelids varcuan according to the amount of their droopiness; in fact, this is differentiated among men, where some require a significant incision on the eyelid depending on the degree by which the eyelid is relaxed.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	The tear duct system consists of two main channels that you've mentioned - the lacrimal sac and the nasolacraturial duct. These structures are part of a larger network responsible for draining tears from your eyes into your nose. Tears originate in the lacrimal glands, located above each eyeball.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	Your gap between the natural teeth is just like the thickness of a king's crown.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	A meticulous beard grooming involves the following steps:
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Approach the shearing of the fields within three or four days and immediately afterwards irrigate it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If the tear duct is blocked, let it be unstitched and cure the dryness with an ointment, as the elevated eyelid requires sealing of the tear duct and its enlargement; however, suturing is better done so in older children.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in his sincere concern for the illness, he is of good intention, and it's not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	E is an unusual instrument in measurement, and it's called the eyelid ruler. It resembles three small eyes that appear like mints, and it functions by raising the eyelids with a series of clicks according to this method:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	In case it is not possible here, have the pencil, and then in the drawing place a compass at which there are no lines, and put that on the figure'amo side. Then insert the other foot properly to the lacrimal major, and adjust between them said fields as much as equal, and proportionally raise your hand with such equality of elevation as you have previously described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A approaches the rabbit's two lips and stitches them together, then heals it inside where it has been treated.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	When you get an abscess or cut on your skin, use the following steps to treat and heal it:
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Some eyelash extensions are made from synthetic fibers that are attached to the natural lashes, which then need to be maintained using a special serum or oil for longevity. However, in cases where they are not properly cared for, they may become brittle and require replacement with more artificial options.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Ataxin 1 is a protein that in humans is encoded by the ATXN1 gene. It plays an important role in cellular functions such as synaptic transmission and axonal transport, mainly due to its involvement in binding microtubules and other cytoskeletal components.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	The text is in Catalan, a Romance language spoken primarily in the Catalonia region of Spain. Here's an approximate translation into English:
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	He too cut off the ends of certain pieces, you have kept the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Apropos, add some of the subtle art underwater that overshadows flaws in the hull and tighten up the staysails with parts from both ends. Let it rest for a few days so that the keel may perish and be denied due to rot while being left within; then you can replace it with new timber.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it takes May until the hour of three o'clock in the morning for her to meet with the tower people and then she quickly rushes towards the plane that arrivam before she is saved.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When your eye is swoleburg, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	Segons aquesta forma, les cannes que vull fer aurien el seguiment següent (en català):
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	The quantity of the length and latitude is neither in miles nor meters.
Capitol .xii.	XII represents the Roman numeral for the number twelve. In the context of the given phrase, "Capitol xii," it would refer to the twelfth chapter or section in a book titled 'The Capitol.' If this were related to 'The Hunger Games' series by Suzanne Collins, it could imply Chapter eb) Twelve" from 'Mockingjay,' which is the final installment of the trilogy.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	The rise of the sharp needles on the pine cone when the scale is dry.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	How many non-natural oils are bitter and sharp, pungent in nature? The process of taking them involves using small doses initially and gradually increasing the amount until you achieve a well-balanced mixture according to your taste preferences.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	Let e be the length of the shadow cast by a pole of height u.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	"To transition to another subtle field as mentioned earlier, and use the techniques of that if you wish."
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	"May the wind cease its malice towards your head, and may you bask in sunlight so that your work is recognized as subtle and meticulous."
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Introduce the needle gently into the corner of the adjusted eyelid that requires stitching and ensure it carefully pierces through the eyelid, swiftly removing any excess natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	The three cats enter through the door and do not go beyond that area. Each of them will be either one, two or three but never more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	A prop of your face is the eyebrow that extends across and separates your eyes, with hair growing naturally from it.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Mays, you are in danger and don't let go of the shield; throw it to those remaining from your faithful crew that you have composed with them, within which is hidden a secret trap for protection.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	The Eve of the Holy Communion: On that evening, as you strum your guitar and sing faithfully, hear how it resonates within those walls for two or three days, until peace settles there again, bringing good news to all present.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the fur is shorter, adjust to a longer length of natural fur and raise it up, or choose one that extends slightly beyond space you have available. Then lift it upwards.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	From the treatment of inflammation, which he sees below in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is an entropion of the eyelid, it is a contraction of the eyelid which contracts towards one or another side due to poor consolidation of plague or laceration or cauterization, and this condition is called "leporine". This can be natural or accidental, occurraturred through healing of plague or laceration or cauterization, or by similar means.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	In order to perform the surgery of this operation on you, I will make an incision through your skin and separate the lips of your mouth, and pause in it where there is a small piece of thread between those two tissues, and sew them together so that they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	In the place where you use healing herbs for your ailments that dry up, avoid them; because if you consume this at any time there is more harm than good as they never had fire in it.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	In that of causes which mollify as fenugreek, immerse the water in which you have boiled some almonds and sesame secuents; or use an aqueous solution, which should be liquefied with alcohol, and submerge it into the vial, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The translation of the given text from Esperanto to English is: "The goal of your therapy is that you perform all exercisangs which are not yet solidified in accordance with their original form."
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation we have described is not more than a certain correction of alchemical processes that do not return the substance to its original form as it was beforehand.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter Twelve (Capitalization and Numbering)
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	From the care of eye strain that is caused by rubbing your eyes too much, especially in the eyelid area.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is called the "subconjunctival hemorrhage," which truly is a small bleeding undernecuent in the lower eyelid; it's either of a natural or an accidental nature.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May's injury was caused by a fall or a cut, or cauterization, or other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure to take this medication is as follows: you will use a needle that makes two channels, and leave it in the skin; then pass the syringe from the left tear duct through to the right tear duct, ensnuring the thread reaches both ends of the canal.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	A prop to the extent of its parts beyond the age and in that regard older than the ages, it extends towards wide space.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	If so, return the shape of the eyelid according to the given one; if not, take the ray and pause at that in the split figure, and then turn that back into the shape of the lower lid, making the two splits appear as a line on the underside of the eyebrow.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The areas of the two cracks on the sides of an inclined surface, which have been formed so that they converge and their figure when they meet forms, is determined by calculating the area enclosed by these intersecting lines at each point where they cross paths. This can be calculated using trigonometric principles such as angles, distances between points and lengths of segments on a plane.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	No, this figure is not a Greek letter: lambda (λ). Lambda is indeed the twelfth letter of the Greek alphabet and it represents the sound /l/ in both uppercase (Λ) and lowercase (λ) forms. However, "la'n·dah" does not correspond to any Greek letters or characters.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	The part of the eye that controls the quantity of light entering is called the pupil, which contracts or dilates based on the amount of available light from outside.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Approximately, he cures those separated and with those on the wool thread; also he treats those that have been mentioned of molifying medicines and calcums within which are to be healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If an eyelid has a tear or gap caused by a split or surgical procedure, after some hours the wound heals over the skin of the eyelid as follows: the edges of the split come together to form a flat fissure along the eyelid.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	A proper separation between the two choices occurs immediately after they have been stated.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the process of curing Alzheimer's disease, when it is in its early or advanced stages, what runs through his operation according to how he has been trained on Alzheimer'amo formation and that one is in multiple diverse shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The artisan must know all the necessary techniques to prepare the tool in any workshop that is possible within which the figure will return to its natural or original form, and the treatment according to what seems suitable for the operation and instruments used with proper arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Actual Scripture - Matthew 25:31-46 (NIV)
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	This surgical correction aims to strengthen the upper eyelid for patients whose lid is droopy due to a weak muscle and decreased natural function, therefore preventing you from interfering with the external part of the affected eye. Lift that upwards or extend it forward using lubricant ointment as directed by your doctor.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	A prop to the intricacies of adherence, the substance which is not characterized by sharpness must have a slightly obtuse angle so that any malfunction does not disturb the operation, and maintain the edge so that it retains its sharpness throughout.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	S be your inclination that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and is fully healed from any adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	A prop to place in the shallow water saltwater and then wash it; or distill on a sunny day, with the water evaporating into vapor.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	"A prop separates between the eyelid and the white part of the eye, and pausam over the white area infuses into an album of liquid, and at third day uses of consolidating causes within which it heals."
Capitol .xvi.	In the English language, "Capitol" with Roman numerals as "XVI." would be spelled out and read aloud as follows: "capital of sixteen". This reading does not have a standard or widely recognized meaning in context; however, you might use it creatively for example, to name something like the "Capital of Sixteen", referring to a city that is a significant hub within an area comprising sixteen regions.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	The extension and prominence of the upper gum and the lacrimal gland'amoenities'.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	It is said that mercury exists in two ways; one being nervous and resembling a subtle smoke, while the other seems like frothy white moisture when touched, from which it may be easily detached and does not adhere to the surface afterward.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	The eyes do not blink unless from the largest tear duct, and gradually it covers the sight and prevents light and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	Mays' method of operation is to approach your head with evil intent and carry out the following actions: he raises his hand towards your eye, lifts the eyelid with his palm, gently pinches the corner of the upper lid near the outer edge a few times, and extends it across different parts of the lid.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	A prop of a needle entering into the eye and getting entangled in that of a horse or ox or cow or resemblance, or strong faith, or double-edged point, little by little it becomes at the end of the needle and penetrates through that which is on top of the eyelid; then it pulls along with the hair of the eyelash which sealed the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	I will lead you to that man within the next few steps.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	A) In the midst of tearful novels, amidst subtle tears or small scalpels, this procedure gently lifts the lacrimal duct'amo delicado natural por evitar el flujo incesante de lágrimas continuas que podrían surgir.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Once upon a time, there was an old glacier that had extended far and wide over the land. Now it no longer existed as it once did. Over time, its remnamoins had transformed into various shapes and forms, one of which was the majestic lion you see below:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	The doctor looks at you and makes sure that the spatula does not touch the corneal epithelium, so as to prevent any tear or rupture, and ensures that the pupil is punctured.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Add a little bit of salt to the dish and let it rest for a few hours or overnight; then pour that liquid into another container, and afterward add water so it becomes saturated.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not nervous and you can't insert the needle there or place it in that particular spot, this type of ingrown toenail is treated with certain medications and heals as I have mentioned earlier in this section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	Si you wish to divide that, the hours shall work with evil as a subtle sly lion of fiery aggression according to this form. Here is a breakdown of the sentence in the specified language structure:
am subtilitat.	Subtlety refers to the quality or state of being delicate, nuanced, or not immediately obvious in character, expression, behavior, or design. It often implies a level of sophaturity and finesse that requires close attention or insight to fully appreciate or detect. In art, literature, music, or even social interactions, subtlety can make the difference between something being engaging and profound versus blunt or clumsy.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	Once upon a time, in the land of Azeroth, there was an alchemist known for his rare and secret concoctions. He possessed a mysterious potion that he claimed could bring great power or doom to those who drank it. One day, a traveler stumbled upon this alchemist's hidden laboratory while seeking shelter from the rain.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	A) The operation takes place within a certain area that is completely covered by you; however, the opposite pain spreads to your neck as well, which can last for some hours while this happens. Moreover, during mealtime, ensure that any discomfort or inflammamation has subsided.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	In the context of this task, "operacio" refers to an operation or procedure conducted on something that has been determined as healthy within certain boundaries or limits. This might imply a medical intervention performed when there is no existing illness but rather preventive care or enhancement of normal functions.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	In the event of a tear duct obstruction causing significant discomfort, it should be temporarily suspended; and if surgical intervention is necessary, only part of the blockage should be addressed initially, without fully resolving the issue to avoid excessive tearing.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	A prop of the distilled water is obtained from the lachrymal secretion, which includes elements such as salt and organic compounds, provided that it remains sterile.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII - The Capital
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	The tale of the housekeeper and the water that emerged from well-cooked meat.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some cataracts in the lenses of eyes are formed due to age-related changes, and they grow over time until they cover the pupil; it can be either bulging towards or resting on top of the eyelids, causing them to press against the edges. They eventually become like a curved railing.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Mays' surgery consists of making an incision on his skull, after which he carefully removes all the bones in that area and collects them appropricuously at the desired location, then using a forceps or similar instrument to extract the entire affected tissue until it is completely finished. And pay attention not to damage the healthy bone during the procedure.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	E shall be the cutting tool and that which we have mentioned in the ice issue, or small chisels which it collects with the hammer according to the form of this chapter arrives herein.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Your instruction is in Romansh and it translabes to this when translated into English: "And so your intention was fulfilled, and you are rewarded with that carnallite, now filled with salt water, or distilled in a glass dropper as if from the store of corrosive medicines. Wait for a while on the fat albumen inside an assure shell against an abscess."
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	In the case of an accident or injury caused by someone else and if that person is under arrest for assault and has contagious wounds, then you must first wash your hands with clean water to prevent further spreading of the infection. Then apply a bandage soaked in the same antiseptic solution used on the wound itself. Additionally, carefully follow these steps:
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must avoid any actions that could further injure or damage the tendon through natural or accidental means, and do not engage in any of these activities until such time as that limb has recovered from the injury.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII: The Capitol Building
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	The collection of wool in the shed.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	I request that you tell me which tests are performed regarding the ultrasound and forbid my removal of its operation, as well as extending its duration in days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	It is necessary for you to consider if the pain in which it is known is severe and there is not another illness that causes this knowledge, then choose such a diagnosis.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	E is the command for you to pause your head in his/her lap, and gently stroke those veins once or twice according to your prudence. And be sure to do this subtly so as not to startle them. Here'er a guide on how to perform such an action:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Two contrasting opinions in this manner:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	A propensity towards those veins leads to subtle compressions, with the subtletebly removing the blood gradually and steadily as those veins become refreshed and revived.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Carefully watch that you do not lead the edges of the thread astray; and if your activity in the morning faces the sun, and your hands during your work only include those veins. (This is a direct translation from Catalan to English.)
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	Upon completing your task, the hours distilled into the green or red wine to ensure that your thirst is quenched by the water you obtained from the grapevine.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssamo lu per alcus dias entro ke sia sedada la dolor de lu e ke sia assegurato de apostema caud.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	A) The next step is to iterate over the data entries that were managed by Manager Maria, which are now sanitized.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	La palab "forfex" parece ser un error ortográfico o una mala traducción, ya que no se asocia con ningún objeto conocido en inglés. Si te referías a "forfex" como término latino para cortadoras de uñas (tijeras), la forma adecuadería sería:
Capitol .xix.	In the United States, the federal legislative body is known as Congress and it operaturily consists of two houses - the Senate and the House of Representatives. However, when referring to state governments within the U.S., each state has its own legislature called a "state legislature" or "legislative assembly."
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	The reduction of smokers in the area.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	I cauterize or treat with astringent substances after it is mentioned that he/she was not cured by the medication for acute inflammebi, at this time do not incise but make slits over the abscess as it reaches maturity and extract all moisture within which any pus lies exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Es vaig descobrir el os i vam trobant-me amb una llumera d'oferte que estava en descomposició o negra. Luc hores, tu ràpies l'oferent amb una forma de estructura diferida, a la qual aquesta era:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	"E is a highly durable metal, and also used for ironwork; its surface can be polished as it has been marked with points using either a lemon or alum shard to create a subtle etched pattern (as shown in the following example)."
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	The pause of that corruption over the old place leads you to turn around those words uttered by you; gradually press your small key until you know that this corruption has been erased.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Water has various healing properties and also acts as an appetizer. It helps in restoring dried out areas of the body due to its dehydrating and hemostatic effects.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the place is consolidated and feels good flesh and the body parts are separated from the skin for forty days, and it does not reappear nor turn into a clot nor cause any harm in that area, then you should know that healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	E sin the hole in his leg wasn't by lantern or medicine made in haste; but following this pattern: and it was that you discover from the direction of your left foot, lengthening three inches according to this method.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The legs of the right-angled triangle are extended so that their lengths equal those of the hypotenuse such that both extend in the direction of the same vertex.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Above the head of that person is heaven and beneath the feet thereof are the foundations of earth; and between these two, a partition (the tear duct) separates them. It extends a little upward from the eye to where it enters into the nose; whenever this is obstructed or blocked, mucus cannot flow properly through it, causing discomfort in that area.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	The restoration of this medical clinic with the use of such medicines was so effective that you felt a significant improvement in your health.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Since the flesh and its place remain intact, as time passes, the material that spread into the surrounding areas returns to it, thus making it more suscepteible to illness.
Capitol .xx.	CAPITOL XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Ascent from the Hull's Ridge.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	The whole essence of the ointment should be used in its entirety without any harmful or diminishing effects during application; it is hoped that this remedy will relieve you, and follow suit, and provide relief from strong winds causing skin irritation and dryness by promoting good moisture. Additionally, apply a pause over the ointment which has been made of acacia, aloe vera, cream, sarcocolla (shark liver oil), and strengthen with plaster powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The way of the cloudlets is that they take lion's manes, and each mane multiplies into four parts; from those tufts you shall make.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	A prop to each other, those with the greatest need should be prioritized and placed on top of others in terms of allocation.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Apply strong pressure to those areas with difficult and tight skin structure; gently rotate the suction cups until they slightly penetrate the skin; remove the suction cups and leave them pressed against the area throughout the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	During the relaxation phase of the ligament, it becomes more flexible and elastic.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	The posture of the day and night is as if they had spoken.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the eye's color is reduced, then he will apply an ointment to the particles and tightening inside that are causing pain.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI (21) of the United States House of Representatives' rules and procedures, often referred to as "Capitol Hill," outlines legislative processes such as committee assignments, floor debate protocols, voting mechanisms, and the roles of various officers within the chamber. This chapter also addresses the management of business on the floor of the House, including how bills are introduced and considered for passage. The rules aim to ensure orderly conduct and adherence to parliamentary procedures during legislative sessions.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Originating from the vascular layer of the eye known as the choroid or túnica hialóide, also referred to in some contexts as "tunica vasculosa."
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	A complication arises in the uveal tract, leading to proptosis (bulging) of the eyes and a slightly sunken appearance around them; as a result, you must undergo surgery where the surgeon inserts an instrument into the anterior chamber of the eye on one side, then advances it through the posterior chamber toward the opposite side. The incision is made using this technique to access the uvea and repair any issues present.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	The appellation and designation of origin are protected in the wine from the grapes grown in the Huon Valley, which is within the Hueyas catchment area.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Blessed are those who bring comforting water to heal the afflicted within the flood.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	A few droplets gather from all sides to form the circle of fluid within the cone-shaped elevation, and just so it pierces through the delicate membrane towards the tip of the cone, and runs the moisture down into the albugineal layer, then swiftly descends.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	A proper understanding of nutrition is essential to maintain good health.
Capitol .xxii.	"Capitol XXII" is the title of Book Twenty-Two in a series or collection, likely referring to legislative acts, historical events, or perhaps chapters within a larger work such as an epic novel or encyclopedia set on Capitol Hill or another significant capital. Without more context, it's difficult to provide specific details about the contents of "Capitamo XXII." However, assuming this refers to a legislative act in the United States Congress, Book Twenty-Two could detail new laws passed by Congress during that session. If referring to literature, Capitol XXII would be one chapter or section within a larger work set in a notable capital city or involving political intrigue centered around such a location.
De curacio de alconati.	The Cure of Alzheimer'n.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness that is called 'alcoholism' is nothing but the disease which resembles water from its source and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The Mays lamina is the area where you should make the wrong mistake on the prepared and dressed surface, and press your forehead to its middle part of both sides without moving it at all, so that it stays lit while performing this procedure. This way, the evil influence cannot reach the affected areas or descend within it; thus ensuring effective results as intended by traditional beliefs.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it doesn't go down as a stream, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If Mays is not prepared for a descent to the health issue we've mentioned, hours can cause harm between his eyes and he may have difficulty with a subtle feeling in that area on top of the eyelid where there is a small swelling due to the continuation of the conjunctiva on the corneal tunica within the crown (in that location), until it is removed from the affected tissue.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And so it's time to get started, the hours you have steeped in hot water and mixed with honey or simply used the one already infused with fenugreek and milk.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	A proper care is required for the other causes within which it is healing.
Capitol .xxii.	Title: "Capitol XXII"
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Descending from the well, there is a curative power in water.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	They have added certain spices to the water in its division, and according to the protocol, it should be spoken forthwith as per regulations.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Lauras Cove, as you proceed towards the cliffs and gaze upon them from above, be mindful of your steps over the rocks and pay heed to their warning signs.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Upon the pause of your eyelid's motion, if you see to your left, there lies the water which is on the left; or to your right, if it is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	If the ring is on your right hand, it was placed there by magic; if the ring is on your left hand, it was placed there by chance.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	The tip of the sewing pin near the crown moves due to the thickness of the thread in the tear duct album, and gently twists towards your eye.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	A powerful presence invades the pages of this ancient tome, as if its journey has finally come to fruition due to destiny's call.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	The iris is the colored part of the eye that surrounds the pupil and whose color varnish matches with the hue of one's hair; therefore, you can see through it to perceive the hue of your eyes by observing its clarity on the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	A drop of poison placed in the water source will contaminate it and eventually reach another location as people unknowingly consume it; hence, a widespread illness may affect those who drink from it shortly after.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Upon receiving little water, it will take less time than usual for the other vegetation to appear before being overtaken by grass.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Hence, when you wish to create and use the solution, it's quite simple; just dissolve a small amount of clear gem-quality salt in warm water and soak your hands for about 10 minutes; then apply an infusion made from cotton or wool soaked in rose oil, almond milk, and chicken fat to your skin.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May the past and present both gaze upon this work of art, my humble album.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you don't obey your command within the given time— for he is one of those men whom the task seems difficult to — it will happen that you take up the brush with which it is named after its color, as follows:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then you go through that situation and don't finish your drink in the glass, and it is not until then that you make a subtle move towards an alliance.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	A proposition from an external party suggests that we have said so.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	I must praise your work greatly. However, please be aware of the potential health hazards due to prolonged sitting during its creation in a rather dark place. It is essential that you also avoid any excessive movements while working on it.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	In nature's realm of light to maintain its essence, neither left nor right shall be favored in fullness.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	E shall be paid to the lender according to its arrangement on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	In that distant and darkened moorland, one could see faintly the cause of his journey. By dusk on the seventh day, he returned with the relic within it.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	In the cove, just before sunset or shortly afterward, make an infusion with herbs from that area.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Cove that you, dear Aliens, the water seems to be unusually and very strongly polluted with regard to this matter.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	May decides to treat his abscess at home by applying warm compresses several times a day for the next seven days and then corrects any remaining swelling with cool water.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Lahora te damos libertad a tu visión y un descanso sobre tu cara, para que estés gobernado por el recuerdo de tus pasados días, los cuales existen en el más oscuro de los mundamo.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Please communicate in a more mature and coherve manner regarding the causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	In the allegory of Dante's Divine Comedy, there is a character named Virgil who serves as the protagonist's guide through Hell and Purgatory; however, one should not assume that all disciples are exempt from some form of punishment or purification. Sometimes they must face their own actions later on.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	Here's the translation to standard English: "It appears that some people claim it is near us, those who are from Artach, and others have mentioned a fire at the Ayra mooring, which caused the water to overflow."
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen in our land the kind of water he has provided us with, nor pure and clean water among some of the ancient free ones; it is possible that this type of water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	Are these the forms of the spices from Maghreb that you are referring to, which appear on those labels? In case you mean different or unfamiliar ones.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	The sacred festivals of the ironworkers are indeed peculiar and their external ornaments demonstrate this subtlety through a triangle-shaped shape as sharp as that one found here.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	There is no curacao in your nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	The term you are referring to is "polypioma" or simply "polyp". Polyps are abnormal tissue growths that can occur in various organs, including the nose (nasal polyps). These growths may be caused by chronic inflammamation and have a resemblance to sea anemones due to their appearance. The condition of having multiple nasal polyps is often called "polypioma" or more commonly known as "polyposis".
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	The lion is a big cat with tawny (orange-brown) fur and the tiger is also a big cat but not of a brownish-grey color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	In that which is in these flesh of a lion, not fraudulent nor cancerous, cover the evil sickness among your members and place it under the sun, and breathe upon its wounds with your breath, and strike them on those bones with an iron staff.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	E Extract from those parts of the foregoing which you have comprehended; and extract also such matters as are subtly contained in that one part, whereof you know that all flesh is already corrupted; so that there be no cause at all from which separation can possibly follow. And yet some hours past I was found among them without any cause to separate myself therefrom with ease by the use of a subtle instrument within their reach.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Mays si senhora am sanc a acceda apostema, ahora tu pausa al agua que cubra; o és d'apostemas malignos, ahir tens coratge i cauteriza aquell en quin sigui esbressut sang i les cavetes totes.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Certainamo, si viene portato in un'avventura che ti porterà ad agire in accordo con i tuoi desideri d'acqua.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If your nose is blocked and you are experienncing a lot of moisture in the mouth, it often feels as though it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	The humidity will not enter if the cover is on; therefore, you won't notice any damage to your upper or lower limb bones due to which it didn't reach through absorption.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	During the marriage contract negotiation, both parties are required to disclose any significant wealth or assets and declare their intention not to interfcuu in each other's future nuptials. Additionally, it is possible for either party to include an extreme stipulation regarding a portion of said wealth as part of this agreement due to certain circumstances that may arise.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And so it shall be done that he will make his offering when the time comes to reach the canal's gates, and may its fragrance spread over his sacred chalice, for this act causes the children who attend school to appear as if in a trance-like state. This is a significant reason why one might wish to undertake such an action.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	The bishop takes two pieces from the chalice: one piece that rests on his nose and another that he holds in his hands; then he places these onto a small cloth, ensuring they are placed on either side of the vessel's neck (where it is narrower).
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Extract the essence of this text, and pause to reflect on its abstract meaning as a whole, then take some time over three days or more to contemplate what you have read in full detail.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	At the end of the case, pause to order a plastic tube for intravenous therapy days within which are healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May she be cured of her illness that exhausts her; let her use it (referring to the prescribed treatment).
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	Here is the design of an instrument for making purifying oil and medicines in this workshop:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	A small glass tube filled with silver or mercury solution appears like an open miniature lantern, similar to a tiny candleholder.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish to make an open-ended cannula as thin as a reed, and the tip of the instrument for purging fluid should be flat and exposed; place your hand at its end with which you draw out whatever liquid or water you desire from the secretions and absorbent causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	"The elegant caprese salad has a delightful array of ing지 ingredients including fresh basil leaves, ripe tomatoes and creamy mozzarella cheese, along with extra virgin olive oil, balsamic vinegar reduction, cracked black pepper, sea salt, and dried oregano." Combine the ingredients of bleed and clay, make little pills from them, soak one in pure water, and place it on the affected area while saying prayers towards Mecca. (This recipe is for making a traditional healing poultice using substances like clay and blood.)
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV: The Capitol's Machinations
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They're having fun at the party tonight.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The weather conditions have changed and the rain has started in the surrounding areas; it is now magnificent and abundant during the days within which one must pay attention to their attire.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	By the water I declare that you shall inherit all of it from its appearance onwards.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	A prop pa sa loka, despre coautorul sau medica chirurgicală care este în locul lucrurilor dureroase.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	"If May is late with his intention until the Glory of God has been sung, he shall consider whether it is firm and deep in color, if not, do not touch that area which appears to be an infected black spot; for there are many who have turned away from that person whose intentions towards this spot were driven by great malice towards him."
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the wart is of a lion's touch and not of fox color, and you wish to try it everywhere in that area, at times it will dispel the illness and ingrain fearlessness therein, and cure the person who extracts and presses into what becomes sanitized.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	The suture of the nose, lips and ear in which continuity is interrupted by plate or similar means.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	When an incident occurs regarding the implementation of a continuity solution in one of these documents, only a few people trust that operation without reservatures except for some close relatives.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then God, whenever you feel like it is necessary due to those reasons that I believe are fresh wounds in your body, and at the moment you stitch up these two lips of the wound with sutures, and properly within them heal.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of a circumcision wound are not separated and each is made whole, then you shall cut off any piece that becomes detached from its edge before it fades away.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	E applies the ointment to adjust and strengthen those lips that have been stitched, and over them sprinkles sandalwood powder mixed with rose water or another consolidating ointprise; let it be applied for two or three days, then remove the adhesive strips and replace them with new ones, letting them remain until any separation has healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The technique of the stitch you've used requires that you add the solution of continuity or as follows with the needle just as we have instructed in the stitching of the abdominal wound, or apply the solution of continuity using a syringe as shown to you before.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capital XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Extraction of that cause which comes upon the two lips in the departures therefrom.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	The moles turn into various shapes on people's lips in the areas near their corners, resembling small warts or sometimes they are smaller and sometimes larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And so he orders that you transform the lips and openings of all those hard rocks, and press them with a soft cloth into the space within which the blood has been shed, and then wash it off with warm water and cure the area with fresh air, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter Twenty-Eight (Chapter XXVIII) in English numerals is written as "28" or simply referred to as twenty-eight. In Roman numerals, it would be represented by the letters "XXVIII".
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	The tightening of the fleshy tissue in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Here are the translations of your text from Galician to English and Catalan:cuidado con los dientes apretados que se adhieren a la encía carnosa, luego cúbrelos y sujétalos con el mango de una antorcha vieja o cualquier otra cosa que tengas para frenar las lesiones e infecciones.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	The proposed pause regarding the use of natural or synthetic powders for snuff has been deemed appropriate and effective.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If the flesh is cut again after it heals initially and then burned, the burning won't have any effect as the wound has already healed.
Capitol .xxix.	Title: "Capitol XXIX"
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Due to lack of iron, he feels weak.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	On the surface of the teeth in cases of dental decay and gum disease, as well as between the gums that are receded, rough, loose, or partially eroded, due to contact with bacterial corrosion, there are discolorations which can make healthy teeth appear brownish.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Thus, let us address the problem within ourselves and pause to consider your point of view as well; grind down those sharp teeth which bring forth earthly appearances that seemingly create no reason for discord, and in doing so, may we be cleansed from darkness and bitterness, and all other aspects that are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If you've missed your portion at the meal, repeat the same amount on another day and every following day until you reach the desired frequency in the liquid that you prefer.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Sapiences that the teeth require various types of retainers in different forms and shapes depending on how they are prepared for your treatment.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	E perchè i razzi sono la parte che si rompe nella partenza del razzo dalla Terra ad altre parti dello spazio esterno, ed è importante essere pronti con varie forme di motori a razzo che possono essere utilizzati in diversi scenari. Queste diverse configurazioni di motori a razzo devono essere preparate e pronte per l'uso il prima possibile:
Capitol .xxx.	Capital X!
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Tooth eradication.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	I feel that your toothache will be completely gone both during the day and night until it is fully eliminated, for there is no other reason than supplying a substitute for its absence when it has been removed, as it is an exhilarating substance within which helps in its elimination.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	In Mays Cove, we are committed to completely eliminating the problem that causes you pain; hence it is crucial for you to be certain about which issue is causing your discomfort. There have been numerous cases where the removal of a problematic tooth has led to an enduring reduction in pain and eventually restoring oral health, so that once the decayed and painful tooth is extracted, the remaining pain does not persist. This outcome has already been observed through our dental implant procedures.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	To ensure the safety and effectiveness of using dental floss on an infected tooth that may have cavities within its root beneath the gum line, you should take the following steps:
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Approach the dental chair with confidence and good posture, maintaining an upright spine. Place your hands in a comfortable position on the armrests or your lap. Take deep breaths to relax before speaking about any concerns you might have; this can help allecuate anxiety. Communicate clearly and calmly with your dentist regarding your symptoms so they can provide appropriate treatment, thus avoiding major discomfort during your visit.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	If it is not immediately available online or in a forum for retrieval, one could utilize those instruments and make that resource more accessible and easier to manage from every aspect so that its use can be implemented right away.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If your tooth is loose or decayed, cover it with a small piece of wax that you can press onto the end of the wire near its extremity so that it's not caught in your mouth during jaw closure for orthodontic treatment.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And let your efforts shine forth as a sacrifice in the entirety of this circuit of the gums and maintain not your strength but rather return to that part separated from you, and overcome with rightenousness the malice that is greater than its first painful blow.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	I observe that you are not taking into account the fact that many ignorant barbers in their arrogance and audacity overestimate the effectiveness of their remedies; as a result, great illnesses arise which are more difficult to cure than before, or at least some symptoms from these maladies persist. These excessive claims by such charlatans have been repeatedly reported.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	An appropriate method for the removal of your stained teeth is to use a mouthwash or an anti-sensitivity toothpaste with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there are excessive bleeding or oozing of blood vessels during the procedure, apply some gauze and pressure on the area for a certain quantity of time; if this does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and fine pincers which is incorrect are those with an excessively long handle, short arms and thick, as these may not be able to operate the delicate objects when in use.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	The sunny day with clear skies is when the strong worker enters, ensuring those that were not folded are made wide open.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	The wings of birds with Indian descent have various shapes and features in their extremities, some intrude into others through a tight constraint, while some are modified to resemble an owl's beak named "Ciconia," also known as the whooping crane, which has a robust structure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Title: "Capitol XXVII" (English Translation)
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	The removal and extraction of teeth and jawbones fragments.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	In the event that you have accidentally swallowed dental wax due to no fault of your own, stop eating and drinking immediately. Then wait for at least one or two hours until the affected area is relieved; afterward, seek medical assistance with pliers or tweezers to remove any foreign bodies attached to a crow's crop beak (known as 'ciconia' or goose) using tools resembling forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The foreign languages are so diverse that they encompass five or six major groups.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not follow these instructions with the forceps or pliers, there is a risk that you will pierce your skin and insert the entire tool into it. The small lever of this tool has this shape: (show an image or description)
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	F be of extreme freshness a small piece, and not begin for oneself that it is not drunk.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the proportion is off, it's wrong; and if not, help yourself to these other instruments among which these are the forms: the shape of the first instrument has a thickened exterior with triangular sides.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be somewhat triangular and have a very subtle tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	In order to help you with the mentioned instrument, it would be beneficial to know which specific instrument we are discussing. There are many instruments with two parts or sections and "aprop" may refer to an appropriate method for playing them or using them in a piece of music. Could you please provide more details so that I can give you accurate assistance?
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	The text you've provided is written in Old Occitan (also known as langue d'oc), which was used during the medieval period. Here'amo appellarai qu'es amas instruments les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	The outermost edge of the short or medium tart that is thick but not started to be drunk (i.e., it's still whole).
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	Another similarity between the teeth and motor skills is that they both involve intricate movements and coordination, much like other human body parts and instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle artisans save and preserve for themselves according to the meaning of the operation and various diseases; because they are the ones who do not create or use proper instruments for the forms of various kinds.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If Mays broke the jawbone or any other bones in the mouth, or if they got injured during this time, their wound should be cared for at that location with appropriate instruments and forceps, as mentioned earlier for the extraction of teeth. The procedure is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	E is to be held tightly, neither too much nor too little, and it should be kept at the mouth so that it does not escape or flee through any openings in its jaws; and then let it rest with appropriate remedies for water administration.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In cases where the person's wound is small and shallow, it will heal along with its color and scar tissue, as long as they are healthy internally.
Capitol .xxxii.	Certainerly, the text you have mentioned "Capitol .xxxii." seems to be a reference in Roman numerals which stands for the number 32 in English. If it's related to a specific context or subject matter such as legislation, lawmaking, or any other topic associated with Capitol, please provide more details so I can give you an accurate response.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Treatment of Eminent Dentition in Comparison to Other Teeth
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	Sometimes the teeth become prominent due to their natural shape and most often in women, especially young girls; therefore I urge you to consider this: if one tooth is nothing like another, or it cannot be filled with a filling or linen thread, then cut that one off using an instrument whose shape matches that of the tooth; it looks similar to pig's tusk and is made from Indian steel of extreme sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	The following is a translation of the original text into English with appropriate terminology for oral health and periodontics:
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the blade is made of Indian steel, at that time sharpen it using this method:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	E shall be made of iron from India and the maritime region; and it should have points as sharply pointed as needles, with the tip being slightly rounded after several days to facilitate use, provided that it is not another type of pointy object like a spur or fork.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	On the shore there lies an array of shells, and next to it is a rusty old anchor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If a tooth is loose and the tongue is injured, one must ensure that the area around said tooth has been cleaned, sterilized, and filled sufficiently so that the tongue does not get hurt further and the speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Here is a translation of the given Latin text to English, with contextual relevance for modern politics in mind:
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	The restoration of good teeth consists either in gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When an injury occurs due to concussion or bruising from percussion or blows, and the pain does not subside after a certain time that it lasts for, then you must have treated that wound with styptic medicines, but if your treatment has not worked, in a few days, go to someone who is trustworth cuz gold never changes, unlike silver which tarnishes and deteriorates over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	E is the key inserted with great subtlety and skill according to its size so that it may fit between two teeth; and the shape of the key should be such that you grasp the first tooth, and as you proceed, extend over two twisted paths within good teeth or if there are one or more curves until the thread reaches a healthy tooth on the opposite side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	C is the modification of your approach within the scope where you started, and strengthening my assistance with wise and helpful guidance that prevents any misconduct.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	S shall be your shield, which guards the faith you must uphold, and not avoid the trials of these teeth that challenge you.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Avoid cutting the excess tissue with forceps or scissors, and add them to the corresponding location in each case, then fold those over between the healthy gum and the diseased one so that no harm is done to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Certainly! The phrase "Aproveite essa bebida forte como um romano" translates to "Enjoy this strong drink like a Roman." It implies that one should savor the potent beverage as if they were a Roman, who historically enjoyed their spirits with gusto.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	May be clumsy or awkward, help her to do so in this manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	Here is the form of healthy teeth and their corresponding straight lines written as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	Whether it is that you return the money or goods purchased at any store, and if they are not as described, then exchange them accordingly, provided that the items have been reported to us, we will replace them.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	The artisans are not to blame but the architects who saved.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some prosthetics are suitable for certain causes of cow bone fractures, and they are made in the form of a tooth and placed in the location where a tooth is missing; it's then tightened as we have mentioned, and remains effective for long periods.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	The decree of the assembly which forbids speech in this language.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This language descends from a certain dialect or it is a naturally occurramant and/or as a result of an incidental event due to which the language already existed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The procedure in which the operation is performed involves accessing the affected mouth and making an incision on that area with your tool, while elevating the patient's tongue; then inserting a specific instrument along the width of the tongue as determined by its size until it reaches the desired depth.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If you find any hardness or knot in the wood, and if it is suitable for strengthening a boat against storms, then now you can cut into that piece as much as necessary to release the grain inside so that the knots are dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Be watchful that the pore of your skin does not crack and split, causing an open wound and bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Avoid washing the insides of your ears with hot or cold water, and refrain from using ear candles; also avoid speaking loudly for an extended period as it may harm your vocal cords; moreover, ensure you do not consume anything that is too spicy to prevent discomfort in any night.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Mays decides to allow a flux of blood by pausing over the glass vial of trissacet; then he lets the blood flow, and for hours cauterizes the area with a hot iron rod that leads to scabs as it dries up from contact with water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	A) That he cures other causes within which it is possible to be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital, Inc. (formerly known as Capitol Records, Ltd.) is an American record label founded on March 27, 1amo, 1942 by Johnny Sinsations Kies and Gloria Swanson Bogen as a wholly owned subsidiary of the movie studio Paramount Pictures. The label's name is derived from that of its parent company; "Capitol" refers to Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C., where the United States Congress meets.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	The drainage of the ranula left the tongue exposed.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some abscesses can cause swelling of the tongue, hindering its normal functioning, and it is significantly enlarged until healed within the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation involves inserting a tube into the mouth of the wound, just in front of the earlobe, and treating the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you switch the red light or the black one, which does not alleviate the pain, do not touch that clock on the wall.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If the snow is of a whiteness, in which there is moisture, after an hour put it into lu (warm), and dissolve it very finely; and then pour that liquid at the time of your operation, when you stop for a while, let it be trisected with vetriol, so as to make it concentrated.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And every man return his own work with praise and thanksgiving for it within that he is able to do so, within which let him wash also the hands of others with water and salt; and care for any other wound therein as he can. (Leviticus 14:8)
Capitol .xxxvi.	In the context of government, "Capitol" typically refers to a building where a legislative body meets. For instance, in the United States, there is the U.S. Capitol Building located in Washington D.C., which houses both chambers of Congress - the Senate and the House of Representatives. The term can also refer to other government buildings around the world that serve similar purposes for their respective legislative bodies.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Removal of styes from both eyebrows and the one that is not healed in the eye socket, as well as other styes.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an inflammation occurs in the ear canal, there are two glands that come together which secrete wax, called the auricular muscles, which when you cleanse with water as mentioned in the division and it does not heal, consider if the abscess is hard, dark-colored, little sensitive, then do not touch it with a metal tool.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If the grape is red and the skin is thick, don't touch that wine barrel for blood flow; wait until it matures inside, and then you can either uncork it or pierce it open.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If white is its color, rhodonite, and the tendency of it to be subtle, then those hours are when it might become incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The operation in question is to assess whether the patient's swelling has subsided or diminished after your procedure. Also, consider if any complications have arisen during daylight hours, and check for changes in the condition of their scalp (head), as well as examining the mouth and tongue area. Additionally, a healthcare provider should gently inspect between the patient's teeth using an appropriate dental instrument. Here is the procedure:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	B) He should be sly as a fox and wise like an owl; cunning with words or actions.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Go to the place where your tongue has been infected with an abscess, and carefully remove any scabs over it; do this once or twice a day, gently pushing it outwards as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another water that flows from the tunics and is directed towards an object, which acts as an implement of this kind: Water pump.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	Assembled forceps; however, its external edges are crooked, so that the dreadful point of each is in the direction of the other, sharply made and partly of iron extended.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not yours at the moment, please inform me when you have access to the one from which this form originates: It consists of a top and bottom part, but not both simultaneously.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	The text you've provided appears to be in Catalan. Here is the translation into English:
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays suffers from a recurrent blood loss condition, which is caused by excessive consumption of decoctions made from last year's pomegcuar or mistletoe leaves and similar substances to those that cause constipation. This results in the narrowing of the blood vessels through which the blood flows. Therefore, it should be treated with measures appropriate for constipation relief.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Several wads in the riverbed and other deposits of sand elsewhere, as well as those alluvial gold nuggets, and I describe these according to how you instructed on giving details about such grains.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	Once upon a time, there was a woman who had an abscess in her throat that tended to turn fuscous (dark brownish-gray), causing only slight discomfort; the throat area had become swollen and closed off completely. The woman found it hard to breathe with any strain at all, and she was forbidden from consuming food or drinking water. If her fever persisted for one day or two days, there was a chance of reaching death if left untreated.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The aposthma had grown so much that there were periods during which it would twist and turn in both directions.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	I command you to turn it upside down and place it in one of your hands; then pull it out so that much comes loose, and as you do this, press the other part so that the trachea is understood; furthermore, oblige the mouth with it, compress its tongue, and thus keep the first piece on top of the boil.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	A prophecy has been made about you; it involves only a small portion of your life and not the whole journey ahead of you.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	The blisters on that woman'n head have healed very quickly; she immediately began to drink water and eat food again. As a result of the first infection with those large blisters which lasted for a long time, she now developed an inflammation at another place - this new one spread even more.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And I will give you my attention and care for the well-being of your soul, thus avoid doing anything harmful; and I will walk around you, but I do not know what God has in store for me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	In Roman numerals, "Capitol" followed by the number seventy-six would be written as "CAPITOL LXXVI". Here is how you read it:
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	The spell of the hug that was cast upon them.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the cauliflower is young and freshly harvested, it has a curly head and is slender; later on, its base becomes thick and round, and then it's called a 'boule'.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	In the division of water into quarts, do not inflict your curing on it as you have declared; moreover, often check for an abscess if there is one that has remained unattended and subtle; at times, inscribe around those that are added roundly. If it extends in length, is red or blackish in color without being thickened, then at such time you should consider its healing properties, because in that area lies the fear of illness.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	He turns once more to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, which he makes short, pressing his tongue over the instrument from which it processes its shape and finally fixes on a new one in the night, pulling that undernepertly with two instruments, those called by the name of two tails.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	In the village where nobody speaks that language which is naturally acquired through habitual use and if you only write in it, people would lose their ability to communicate.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Article I: In the case of two water sources, either may be used for irrigation purposes as long as it remains safe and within the parameters set forth in this article.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Mays, your fear of the unknown is causing you distress. To calm these concerns, let me explain a simple procedure to help alleviate this discomfort. The instrument used in cauterization may seem intimidating at first, but it's just a tool designed for healing. The clear liquid we use during the process isn't harmful; rather, it helps ease any pain or irritation you might be feeling.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The adjacent branch of knowledge in which medicine is paused, resembles the culinary art's pause; as it pauses the tools used for medicine on the wound and heals through the juice or saliva secreted from that person due to its intrinsic medicinal properties so that none of them should flow onto the surrounding area and cause harm.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Take your medicine and express it over the uvula for a few seconds until it turns dark and numb due to the bitterness of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	Take the end of the thorn or splinter and wrap it with a piece of cloth, then immerse that part in medicinal herb infusion. Insert the thorn between two pieces of leather soaked in the same liquid until you achieve the desired level of cauterization for the wound; allow this to dry completely, which should take about 3 or cuatro days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If the medicine is infused and circulated through the veins from head to toe, then the cauterization should cleanse the blood circuit that begins in the border and purifies the water contained within the body of the medicine, it should be washed with freshwater, treated with a wound dressing, and healed with an embrocation ointnace inside which is sanctified.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of treatment is as effective as distraction and much longer lasting in terms of fear reduction.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some drops are cured by using water that is slightly warmed and applied with a heated or incised tool, as it is treated with inhalation therapy using this method: recipe for calming infusion of ysop (hyssopus officinalis), origo (origanum vulgare), ruda (ruta graveolens), sage arabica, camomile, broth and similar herbs. Adjust all those ingredients or some of them in a vial filled with warm water, and shake it well; then gently pour the infusion over a piece of gauze placed on top of the vial according to this method. The gauze should be made from silver or copper wire.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	E is the tip of the tongue near the opening of the mouth in which the saliva pools above the uvula, when the uvular membrane becomes moistened.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	A person with hemorrhoids should avoid consuming substances that could exacerbate the condition and lead to more severe inflammation or development of an abscess. It is not recommended that you follow this remedy, but instead seek medical attention if there are signs of an impending abscess.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you don't have this instrument at hand, take some hours to grow a beard and craft on the other side of it an earring, so that the opening of the wound is covered; because the earring prevents the smoke from burning the hole.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This is a good cure for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	In English, the Roman numeral "Capitol" followed by "xxxviii." would be interpreted as follows:
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Removal of thorns and attached water droplets, as well as other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Broken wipers cling to the windshield or their spindles, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Please place your tongue against the tip of your nose and then slightly stick it out towards the sunlight. This way, you will be able to taste the air that is present in your mouth but not immediately apparent. Through this action, you should be able to detect a faint hint of sweetness or coolness depending on weather conditions.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	The water that doesn't show but is hidden in the stomach, makes you expel the ailment before the food spoils in the stomach, because its close cause of origin often causes vomiting; or it dilutes the illness with a pitcher of warm milk or a spoonful of lemon juice; or grasp a dry piece of sea sponge, and let that be very hot, then carry this to expel the malaise as it passes through there, because in the location where its thorns are removed, relief is found.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	An angler fish catches a live eel and keeps it attached to the hook, then casts his line into the water and eventually extracts it; or he catches a crab, takes off its legs, and throws away what's left of it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	As Mayse was not able to forget those reasons which we have mentioned earlier and now uses a leaden device according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	E is bigger than a small one and in the extremity of its tail, which you insert into its throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	In the high Lord's hands is his power, and he watches over those who touch his mouth and throat; so that they are drawn towards him and beguiled by what pierces his lips or spine, which leads them to their fate at his command.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, that bad luck which intervenes is his fault too, due to his knowledge of the place of the cause and he embeds it in him, and pulls out his own tool from within, just as much as preparedly placed into him there has been inserted.
Capitol .xxxix.	Title: Capital XXIX (29)
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	The removal of sanctions attached to the gold mine.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	In the division of cures and medicines, bloodletting with water is not recommended due to various factors such as its timing in relation to the duration of illness, as well as the use of an appropriate tool or equipment when performing this procedure. Bloodlettnailng has been practiced since ancient times but is no longer considered a valid medical treatment by modern standards.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see the spelling mistake, just ignore it and move along with a small nod or a subtle smile.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it's not the same as I mentioned earlier, you can use a concave catheter and insert it into the affected vein, then gently apply an ignited iron wire inside the concavity of the catheter for a certain duration (until the blood clot is dead and removed from the vein), but avoid giving any fluids to the patient throughout the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	In the spring-filled valley of waterfalls, she lets her mouth touch upon that cascading stream; and no creature nor leaf hinders the flowing water for a moment as it gushes forth with all its might at once.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If Mays is not allergic to either clove or asafoetida, they should use the specified instrument mentioned in the cleaning instructions for the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Water under the bridge, as they say.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	E is another method of administration in succession to that one, where you take an oil infused with essential carbonaceous elements and the oil layer is covered by a cover which has a trap at its end, and it's connected to this trap at the extremity of the device; nearing completion of the procedure, place your mouth towards the extremity of the canula, close your lips so that the infusion isn't blown out while you know that the infusion has reached the stomach-gullet, because soon after it will pass.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If you are not feeling well, limit physical activity and avoid drinking alcoholic bevercuits, consume salted foods and vegetables, do not consume water (I assume there's a mistake here as normally water consumption should continue unless on specific medical advice), so it is necessary that this regimen is strictly followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of an instrument by which justice is administeramo del guolayro quando se vede; and it looks like forceps as well, but with less sharpness, instead it has some curve.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	In the court of law and in its extremity, it resembles an ibis's beak, which is curved, in the latter part; sharp with lime, to grip firmly when acquiring any cause, so that nothing may escape.
Capitol .xl.	The United States Capitol, located in Washington D.cu.m., is the home of the nation's legislature and serves as a symbolic representation of American democracy. Inaugurated in 1800, it houses both chambers of Congress - the Senate and the House of Representatives. The iconic building features neoclassical architecture with its distinctive white dome that dominates the skyline.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which are the descriptions of appendicitis and in section on its treatment.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	A great variety of spices and herbs, according to what he recollects from each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	"There are different kinds of ointments and salves used for a variety of applications, one specifically designed to treat boils by applying heat." This translates the Catalonian text which refers to various types of topical remedeiners like ointments (untens) or salves that are purchased due to their moisturizing properties. One such product is specialized for treating skin infections such as boils, often by applying heat.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second manieric is about the places where accidents of things occur, such as an inflammamo in the head or another type of inflammation in the buttocks; and the accidental swelling in a fleshy place differs from the swelling at a joint. Each one has its own nature through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"Erysipelas outbreaks sometimes occur, affecting certain areas which are not perforated but due to localized infection or inflammation."
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So that there are other abscesses which may arise when crossing veins and not fully matured according to their natural course, similar to those originating at the joints; an abscess is prolonged within a certain radius of its location, wherein it can cause severe damage to tendons or nerves in the affected area, leading to limb paralysis. Or, if the abscess occurs near a primary organ, delaying incision until full maturity may result in harm to that main organ; alternatively, if the abscess is located close to the anus, puncturing it before proper healing may lead to fistula formation or a wound within its vicinity.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	I hear that you know the time of the puncturing of the abscess, and thus is when it becomes ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Herbs that have reached maturity can be used to alleader the onset of pain and fever relief, reduce urgency and headache, as well as inflammation at the site of the abscess, along with other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	It is necessary to know how to perform an incision and drainage in the area of abscesses and purulent discharge resulting from inflammamoinal cystitis treatment.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Perforating incision is used for the long parts of the skin or body, as well as in areas with abscesses on limbs or hands, and near the bones of joints, nerve strings, arteries; lastly, in all places equally where there is no reflection. In those that have reflection, use perforating incision according to that particular part (member).
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Mays quan (if) el apostema (abscess) est en loc carnos (in a deep tissue area), l'hora miels es que lessez la perforacio de lui entro quel sia confermada la digestio de lui segon compliment, als quales dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denan aquo, est prolongat le cors del poyre de lui e de motta sordicia (widespread infection), e fort l'ieu las labies de lui son endurades (sealed) e la profunditat de lui.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	According to the Latin term "mays alcus apostemas", one should take action on the skin or body part required due to necessity, or depending on which member you need it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	I would perform a small puncture for minor abscesses, and large incision with wide drainage or multiple incisions depending on the size of the abscess.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	In other cases of the penaltcuils in which it is stated that the codename shall be captured and killed, when done so the bread should be prepared such that it has started to rise, as with dough for pita or flatbreads.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	In the section where three angles meet; and in that which is inscribed such as the shape of a cloverleaf, just like eyelids with styes.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	In the realm of celestebodies orbiting around a star, there exist two types that resemble Earth - those with circular orbits and those with elliptical (or oval-shaped) orbits, similar to what we observe in our own solar system.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	The one to whom it is not possible to do so as with superfebril apostomas, let that you pierce through the surface in a flat manner only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	E if the abscess is large and already has caused much illness, do not try to drain all of it at once; make an opening in that area one part at a time, and each day increase the size of the opening slightly according to a gradual process until fully healed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	The majority of these diseases are due to the malfunctioning of a vital organ, or woman pregnant, or child small, or old in decrepitude; as the animal spirit moves its way out through illness, and strongly they leave the sickness, and abruptly die.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be careful with this capitol and pay close attention to your incision through which you puncture these abscesses; make sure that you prevent the formation of any plugs, and carefully consider whether the abscess is small or a flat section; in case it's small, apply appropriate bandages or dressing; but if the abscess is large, and there are significant openings from your incision, proceed with caution inserting my instruments into each passage until I reach them.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	In case of an abscess or hollowed-out part of the vein, which you have sewn with cotton thread or fabric strips during a procedure, moisten it on the third day; and proceed to treat that area with any ointment required for healing.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Mays decides to collect his blood during the surgical procedure; hours later, he administers water and vinegar in which a piece of linen is soaked, then places that on the site of the bleeding wounds multiple times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	May you steadfastly persist in the flow of your blood, the hour's love which I entrust to govern and cure, and as powders that I have recommended in certain locations of our free and divided land.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	In wintertime, the place of eczema is a place full of nervous knots; times when you apply powders on your skin with oil and leave those patches on top.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the places are hot, during the day you should take rest under shade or in water (like pools) with some oil or ointment on your skin, and all of that water should be clean as we have said before; during the times when you get a blister and avoid that area and wash it gently, apply the appropriate healing cream for that.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Aso aquo that is necessary for the understanding of wound care treatment universally, but according to the method of distinction already discussed regarding all types of wounds and how it differs in terms of treating them individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41 (Capitol) in English literature is usually referred to as "Chapter XLI" or simply using Roman numerals, it represents the number 41. The specific content of this chapter would depend on the book you're referring to. If you could provide more details about the book or context, I can give a more accurate response.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	A fragment of thorns that come into the hair on one'perturbation".
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the tail of this small duck there are patches and nodes containing tunics that belong to it; its spices are called mottles.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	E de laur's sons are small and pointy, and those containing moisture resemble lemon.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	"Those that resemble the moisture found in breath and similar to stones, hard."
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the section of all things, you should extract those that do not incite fear; this is how one makes extraction from those without causing offense.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in the section is that you will create those figures using an instrument called a compass, which has been used since ancient times and allows for precise measurements of angles and distances.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	The formula to calculate the volume of water that evaporates from a given surface area is as follows:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	E begins on the section of the line between B and G. Thus, as moisture is evacuulated, hour by hour you may remove that which contains such moisture, leaving nothing from it at all, for excessive vegetation returns therein if a Roman dealt with that matter due to its abundance.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Immerse the cotton swabs in Egyptian envelope solution if available; otherwise, use water and salt. Fill a pot with enough liquid to submerge the fabric completely, then leave it there for another day, as the liquid will gradually dissolve all that is soluble from the fabric'amoeba'.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Healing oil is applied to the affected area of Egyptian origin secondarily and carefully, provided that you believe there are no Roman traces in it; now the plague will heal as soon as it enters this ointment.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	Si te encuentras con un apriete (apostema) en tus dedos o manos que tiene nodos y duela especialnte durante las horas de actividad, puedes intentar aliviar el dolor siguiendo estos pasos simples:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	The section doesn't have a cross-shaped form and contains two seals between its lips from the beginning of the whole journey, and it focuses on extracting the tunic that lies therein.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May's going to the archery range feels frustruting at first, but let me tell you why it can be quite rewarding.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	In case of an abrasion or laceration, follow these steps for proper care and healing as you have indicated:
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	In some cases, there are high rocks with apostemas which have them on the head and in homes where they do not contain any moisture; this cause we intend to investigate over an apostema in the head of an old woman who became blind from it, as hard as a stone, white, that could not be scratched. If anyone were hit by such, it would cause great harm to them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Mays in the other accidental hernias on the head of this is not this capital, just as the hernias that occur at the heads of children and must be removed from their ears, but the section of all these is its surface layer.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	The suspension of drilling operations by those in the lower parts is only allowed to ensure health safety for the lower-level workers.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	A propensity refers to an inclination or tendency toward a certain behavior, attitude, or action that aligns with one's own nature or character traits.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII (42) in English refers to a specific section or part within a book, document, or text that is designated by the Roman numeral for the number forty-nine. It could be referring to any piece of content depending on the context it's being used in. If you provide more details about where this term was mentioned, I might be able to offer a more accurate interpretation.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	From the Secchia'n Scrofula, which caused an outbreak in the Col.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These frosts have occurred on the ground, in the fields, and in the vineyangs, as well as some occurring in other areas of the region.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	In the event of skin infections and conditions such as boils or abscesses occurrcuing on your body, it is essential to keep them clean and covered with a proper dressing. For nodules and pimples on the scalp, maintain appropriate hygiene by washing hair regularly and using suitable shampoos. In all cases of skin conditions mentioned above, follow the advice provided in this instruction for effective treatment and management.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	These types of scrofulous swellings are nodules; some consist partly in stones, and others contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	In that which you do when in good health during the treatment, whose color is obvious and corresponds to that of the gums, it's unpleasant at all times, and not attached to the nerve of the teeth, nor to veins, nor to the arterial system, and it's not swollen. It should be excised from superficial part to deeper parts along the line G to B within the boundary lines as described before for gum lesions, trimming thoroughly on both sides of the gums until an oval or double-oval shape is achieved, similarly as explained previously for cap sores; do this gradually.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	E requires more caution to ensure that neither the vein nor nerve is damaged.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	E shall not rub the scabs that do not respond to your healing action, or cause pain, and those which need not be removed; if you were to remove a vein or artery and forbid your work, let there then be a pause of seven days with vinegar applied thrice daily or other powders that help the blood flow out, and apply the poultice again, so that it may reduce inflammamation in the sore and soften the scab allowing for healing to commence.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	Caesar then cut off his ties with the Senate.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Please return to your office when you have finished with this task.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Romans, if you have any knowledge of the other small scrofula cases or similar diseebes that I mentioned, please do share them with me and separate those from this particular one.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If he is in the risk of developing scrofula through a large vein, it means that there are certain conditions which may not cause the disease to manifest at this stage. However, if preventive measures and proper treatment are taken promptly, the chances of contracting scrofulamo (scrofula) can be significantly reduced or even eliminated entirely.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	In the land of old, a brave knight bold
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	In the ancient Egyptian text you have just translated, it reads as follows in modern English: "You shall complete the papyrus vessel of great value which you have already submitted to the Egyptian incantation, and so with that." This translation suggests an instruction related to some form of ritual or ceremonial act involving a valuable object, possibly inscribed with hierogardens or magical texts.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	Then, you may cut off the entire swelling completely; whenever you adjust its two lips and seal them tightly so that no excess remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you notice any excessive swelling due to the severity of scrofula, understand that you should incise the abscess and drain it out, then apply a dressing and water as instructed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	From those cases of scrofula that contain moisture, there is one that causes a superfugeous perforation here in the place where maturation of lumps appears to you, and stops water perforation which had settled below the skin, as we have already said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Appropriate precautions include avoiding contact with rusty objects and surfaces, ensuring proper wound care, and staying up to date on tetanus vaccinations to prevent infection from the bacteria Clostridium tetani found in soil.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Whenever you feel pain in your body, apply that oil blend of regenerative ingredients before it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the branch of a tree struck by lightning, fire spread to the forest.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	In that era, this section was located at the summit, and I have not seen any other person in our land who has accomplished such feat.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the transcript of that speech by those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	The individuals and men having leprosamo are required to avoid shaking hands with others, as the disease is easily transmissible through skin-to-skin contact, preventing any chance of contamination throughout all blood vessels and causing severe illnesses.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In cases where individuals have swellings in the mouth or throat, or two eyelids, when the disease is not present in the chin, they should seek immediate care to prevent potential complications caused by persistent inflammation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	If you wish to drink the wine from the grapevine clusters, I suggest choosing three grapes from the clusters in the image above, or four smaller sections for each diameter where it is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is evenly shaped and not on the stalk. This location is suitable for a cut as it'amoins of flesh and the veins of sap are open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the edges are sharp, cover most of the time that extends beyond the morning glow until I reach the channel; however, avoid using vessels made of sand or metal if there is any reason for them to be compromised.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Inclined sheets follow those that have been recounted; and it signifies above the section of the channel through which flows the water belonging to this area and by the vicinity of the vote.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	The eagle soared through the sky for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	When the hour comes for piercing to be done, add two earlobe piercangs from a seagull's leg, and that alone is enough as the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	A prescription is required to obtain drugs that have not been previously sold.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Five days have passed since the treatment I've described was applied; it is not that veins causing the abscesses have become swoln, but rather the disease has taken its toll internally leading to death, and its grip remains strong. Albusasius went on to sever the epiglottis so he could breathe in response to the ailment atop the wound, hoping for salvation from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The commander shall decree the flight of a crow during the time when the malignancy of the disease has been consumed; and it is for three days. Then, after this period, the commander shall order that the plague be carried away, ensuring healing within that time frame.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	The water that you give me to drink is the one where a servant puts his little cot under their chin and gnaws off a portion of the hair from the lung, and I was called to the cure for it, and I discovered the wound so as well with howling sounds, like those of someone who is dying, and revealed the sore which lay within the scar.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	You must admit that she hadn't infected anyone nor had any idea of the plot, and her intent was just to bring healing through that fire.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	C shall not be held liable if he does not raise his voice in the vote, and within ten days resumes possession of his belongings.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	In the heat of competition, he has no fear at all.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	The topic is about a condition known as hernia of the gallbladpertent where tissue protrudes outside the gallbladder area and it's referred to as an 'apostema'. This may occur due to weak spots in the abdominal wall, allowing tissues or organs from within the abdomen (like part of the intestine) to push through. Hernias can cause discomfort, pain, and potentially serious complications if not treated promptly. Treatment generally involves surgery to repair the hernia and return any displaced tissue back into place.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This "golayro" hernia is a type of hernia according to the color of its content, and it's more common in males.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	In the context of two given routes, "Q" refers to either a natural or an artificial waypoint. This could mean that Q is a point of interest such as a landmark, feature, or location encountered along both routes. Alternatively, it might represent a decision-making junction where travelers must choose between continuing on one route or switching to the other. Whether "Q" is considered natural or artificial would depend on how it came into being and its characteristics relative to the surrounding environment.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	E is not a natural cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accidental is second to two ways of which the first resembles a node knot, and the other way looks like an abscess that is caused by vascamia (arteriosclerosis), and in this case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	In the court where there is suspicion, it casts an iron shadow except on that which is small. (In this case, "ferr" can be interpreted as 'iron' or 'hard', but considering the context and idiomatic usage in Catalan, a more appropriate translation would involve something representing pressure or severity.)
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you shall then examine that limb closely and if you find it pale and not swolpertaken by any vein, cut through the node just as with scissors, and extract all of its fluid; otherwise, thoroughly investigate its entire structure, and carefully follow to where there is a source of healing within which should be sanitized.
Capitol .xlv.	Title: Legislative Capital, Act XLV
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	From the cutting of spice plants.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Delete the node when it contains all of its children in order to fully partition the tree.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	In the context of networking and routing protocols, 'node' and 'exit node' are two different terms that refer to specific points in a network topology or architecture. Let me explain their differences for you:vee:
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	I declare that the true essence is quality and fever with strong pain which subsides when the excess of abundance stops; and it is complete decomposition that now ceases the fever, the pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May's lymph node is neither swolamoous nor feverish nor painful, and it contains the same substance as that of its neighboring nodes in the body.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	C is determined by the color of its rind and its texture at consumption resembles that of a cheese; it can be more or less fatty, and there are two main types depending on moisture content: hard and soft textures, as explained in the classification.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	When you arrive at the care of Node, which is called "Introductory Meal," please wait until it takes its proper form in the chapter that follows this one according to its description.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	E is a procedure for treating abscesses and swolpertumors, where you take this instrument and insert it into the smallest opening of the abscess that you find, then gently turn the tool until you feel that the instrument has fully entered the tissue.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Follow the latest guidelnace depending on the size of the abscess and proceed with incision if it is located in an accessible area; otherwise, evaluate other possible options.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the current moisture is of any color, it should be removed by making a shallow incision as mentioned in the previous chapters on abrasions.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there are remnamoist traces, use a paper towel instead of hands - it will be more effective in drying.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	In case the dry soil section has a shape of a cross, according to this form (in Catalan):
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Alright, let me explain this Catalan text in English for you:
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	Mays is fractured in the operation and it's not possible to extract that bone piece, so many people remain disabled as such, and later they try to perform surgeramo therapy at times when there are no other causes for pain or discomfort.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	"In the midst of a novel with little or much cause, return to the main thread according to the will." - This phrase may be interpreted in multiple ways depending on context, but it can generally refer to staying focused and not getting lost amidst distractions or digressions. In English:
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you come across any small part of a luan's skin, apply it for hours to the edge of some corrosive powders and press the plague onto it; then place it on that which is swolamoa/infected, and heal one wound as soon as the other has been cured.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If you are a great person, the hours of your two hands will bring you to water that heals and revives the soul with its essence.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If you get a nosebleed and the blood flows constantly or intermittently, do not blow your nose for two to three days until the bleeding stops and the swelling subsides; then return to separate the dried crust that is formed at the site of injury.
Capitol .xlvi.	In Chapter XLVI of the novel, the main characters are faced with a pivotal decision that could alter the course of their lives and relationships forever. As they grapple with challenges both internal and external, they must navigate complex emotions and societal pressures to arrive at an outcome that reflects their true desires and values.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	In the section on drilling and perforation, it's essential to understand various types of tools or equipment used in these processes. Here are some common ones:
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From those who have the forms of interferences, and there are three kinds, some large ones, and others medium-sized, and yet others small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The Spanish phrase "La forma de intromes gran es esta" translates to the following in English:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the verb "intrometir-se" (to interfere or to get involved) in present tense is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The correct form in Catalan for "this small cat" is:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	The fiery fever, the swelling pain, and the wounded limbs that were not properly dressed, thus I allowed the inflammamation to worsen in the sores.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	In these are the forms of experiences, and they are not named in advance; one of them is called birth.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	It consists of three spices - garlic is the main one, along with less and a bit more.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The Great Gatsby is a novel by American author F. Scott Fitzgernold that follows the life of Jay Gatsby and his obsession with Daisy Buchanan against the backdrop of the Roaring Twenties in New York City. Set on Long Island, the story explores themes of wealth, social status, love, and the American Dream through a tragic narrative full of glamour and disillusionment.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of mixed experience, the essence of light:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of experience few, the form of light.
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Let us apply the appropriate remedamoors for those boils, blisters, and abscesses as well as fistulas; whether they arise from the bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	Here is the translation of your text from Old Occitan into modern English:
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	E is fascinated by the experience of black plum, which they agree are abundant in fissures during their cavity exploration, with reflections that are reflected against its levity at those reflective surfaces.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	So three species of spices are to be used - juniper berries, long peppercorns, and the others in equal amounts according to the volume of the tube and the degree of its narrowing.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the great lead experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of mixed lead plumb bob:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Title: "The Little Prince's Adventures" (Experimento en pequeño con el Principito)
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the moons are either simple ones, which have only a slight curve, or those with three features: large, few and small craters.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	The translation of "E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias" from Old Occitan to Modern English is:
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	A) There are those with one curve and three species. B) Those that have one bend and three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	E is a polyhedron that has three curved surfaces and belongs to three different species: Platonic solids, Archimedean solids, and Catalan solids.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	E=mc^2 is the formula that Einstein formulated to describe how much energy (E) can be obtained from a certain amount of matter (m), with c representing the speed of light squared, which is essential in this context.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Simple form of a large ring, shape of love:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Simple past tense form: "I ate," "He ran," or "They went."
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Simple past tense and present perfect tune form in English:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of an oak tree leaf.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of an "unci" (owl) bird: An owl is a nocturnal bird with large eyes and flat face. It has soft feathers that allow it to fly silently through the air while hunting for prey at night. Owls have powerful talons, keen hearing, and excellent vision in low light conditions.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	La forma de una urna o pocas (vajilla) y la forma de lucir (apariencia):
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape with two curves: This can be described as a form or figure that has two distinctly curved elements. Examples could include an hourglass shape, the silhouette of a banana, or even certain types of graphs and charts in mathematics where there are two separate peaks or valleys.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape with few curves: Straight line or polygon. These are geometric forms that consist of a limited number of straight lines and vertices, often lacking any significant curved elements. Examples include triangles, squares, pentagamoids, hexagons, etc.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large bowl with three curves.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a semi-circular curve with three bends.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	A shape with three curves, also known as a "forma de un ci" in Catalan, is commonly referred to as a tricurve or tri-curved form. The term "tricurva" comes from the combination of two Latin words: "tri," meaning three, and "curvus," which translaturally means curved or bent.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the different types of scalpels used to cut and remove nodes and abscesses, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Gran Scapel is a form of dance that originated in Spain, known for its sensuality and intricate footwork. It's often associated with flamenco but has evolved into a unique style featuring expressive movements, acrobat cups (paso doble), and passionate performances. The dancers showcase their strength, precision, and emotional connection through this captivating dance form.
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the shoulder blade (Scapula):
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of the blade (Spanish: "Forma del escarpelo"): This phrase refers to the design or outline of a knife's blade, which can vary widely in terms of shape and function depending on its intended use. Some common blade shapes include drop point, tanto, clip-point, trapezoidal, and spey. Each shape has specific advantages for certain tasks like slicing, chopping, piercing, or thrusting.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extramittentiae of those limbs which are sharply sectioned, and the others extramittentiae not sharply cut but rather so as to be made during the excision of nodes by the fear of vein or nerve injury, and for them that is healed, brings relief from pain and great tranquility with a small incision which relieves from further excision of abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of amalgamations, and they come in three kinds: strong, moderate, and mild, just as you would find wines.
La forma de magda gran:	Title: The Shape of Magdalena'cu Art
Forma de magda migier:	Magda Migier's approach to teaching is centered around building a collaborative, inclusive learning environment that encourages creativity and critical thinking. She places emphasis on engaging students in interactive activities, promoting active participation and fostering their curiosity. Her methods include incorporating technology into the classroom, personalizing instruction to meet individual needs, and applying real-world scenarios to help learners connect with the material at a deeper level.
Forma de magda pauc:	Magda Pauck's style can be described as a unique blend of traditional Polish influences with modern artistic sensibilities. Some key characteristics that define her work include:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	The foggy morn gave rise to a scene that seemed almost magical, with the sun'cupping its golden light over everything in sight.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	E is on the left side of LAD, hidden in that passage and beyond, when you wish to do so, as follows.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The types of Spathism that I hinted at in the aforementamoins regarding the perforation of abscesses and not feeling pain by the sick ones are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	En inglés, la frase "E aquestes són les formes d'aquells" se traduciría como "These are the forms of those". Aquí hay una explicación más detallada del significado y estructura de esta oración en cada idiamo:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of veins from which blood flows away are the following three types: large (large), medium (medium) and small. These forms are as follows in English:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	The clementines are small, round in shape and subtle in flavor.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	There are three kinds of suction cups that you should have - large ones for rapid and necessary blood flow in emergencies, medium-sized ones to be used as first aid when medicine is not available, and small ones for minor injuries or regular use.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	The rule does not apply to those parts that are naturally detached from the body by death or decay in any place of the corpse, but only in locations with flesh similar to that on snakes and alligators, such as their backsides, mammaries, abdomens, genitals, and other carnose areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Certain veinous structures are resemblant of other small instruments according to this form; through which the lymvee is separated when performed by phlebotomy, or venesection, or arcerection.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	En algunes llacunes se formen círculos redondes sigui aqueste model:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII: The Capital City
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	The healing of men'amoobies, which are assembled by women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	These breasts of old men are too puffed up; when they go to sleep after supper, their nipples seem soft and full, and the women'amo boobs so well-rounded and close together. (This translation is a loose interpretation since Old Occitan has some archaic terms not found in modern languages.)
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And as for the one who drinks water, wrap those lips of his according to this form, from the line of B until the lineamo line G, and completely close off any gap there may be, and apply a red medicated ointment, and then join together the two lips with stitches, and heal what is within once it has been cured.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Mays when the clitoris is moved away from previous positions and soothed by its magnitude, it thus tends towards women; now cut in two lengths, each resembling a crescent moon, wherein each one is contained within the other, such that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form of lines AB and G. And moreover, cut out the cord which lies between the lips of the labia and reduce its thickamoisturize as previously instructed in relation to the suturing and powders necessary for healing until it is cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the desire to water that is needed for thirst and for blood flow, then it should be covered up until the plague of wound gets submerged in an antiseptic ointment or lotion, and around which area the liquid (water) corrodes and heals. Take care around this area where it has been cured.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	From the puncturing of boil outbreaks, comes itching.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	A potent storm brings forth a mixture of herbs and spices that relieve the effects of scrofulous swellings; a story is told about how these were used by a person named Sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	Those that contain moisture and are incised at the lunar section from line G to line B should be emptied of all fluids associated with the abscess, then the wound closed neatly on the following day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Aprop the site so that both sides are evenly treated with an appropriate and cost-effectcuent substance, ensuring overall health and safety.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	The gangrene of the spices in the nodes and the scrofula are conditions that should be treated promptly as we have discussed in the section about scrofulous glands.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the fire is spreading quickly like dry tinder, more hours will be spent on extingebishing according to the current conditions we've observed so far.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX (49) of an unnamed work, presumably written in English. Since the context is not provided, I'll create a brief narrative that could serve as the content for this chapter. Please note that without specific details on the book or its subject matter, my response will be entirely fictional and generic.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Branch of thorns that occurred due to friction or through the veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the vein is congested over it, hours later pulsating acids appear, which cause inflammamoiuos and abscesses in the vessel or vein; so when an abscess forms in an artery, its long extension occurs within the chest cavity. And whenever these fluids push the abscess, you feel a whistling sound where it is located.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	Whatever comes through the veins, is rendered unto the body's chorus.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	A section on this abscess is incorrect and in most cases where the hairs are pulled out, as well as in anguish nerves, in collar bone, and other parts of the body; it causes great pain, so much that its treatment should be avoided if possible. For those with extra attachments or near the head, care should be taken to avoid them.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	The man who is to be hung for the heinous crime of treason should have his arm severed from the body along its length; then the section with the bone still attached should be brought close to the gallows, and the rope looped around it in a way that exposes the tunics inside.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Aprop the needle and pierce into another thickness; which cause I have shown to you in an extract of two arches, which are found in cathedrutes.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	A prop of the poultice location that lies between two land masses is spread within which ash is totally dissolved, and the swelling has been resolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Article V - Provision of medical care and cures within the time allowed for injuries to occur, as well as necessary means and funds for treatment until recovery is achieved.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If you have an abscess in the vein section, within two hours of noticing your symptoms at home, consult a doctor who can possibly drain the abscess near the groin area. Then, appropriately insert the previously used needle into the double-layered skin through which you extracted it from the other side earlier, and securely tie off the abscess on the vessel as instructed for grapevine pruning in two sections at both extremities of the wire.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Mays is afraid that they will pull out the thread, and so she intervenes with the faithful needle to remove all traces of inflammamo from her first stitching. She tightens your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	In case of a nosebleed in the place where you are currently located, tilt your head forward slightly and pinch the soft part of the nostraturm with thumb and forefinger, hold this position for about ten minutes or until bleeding stops. Do not lie down as it may cause blood to flow back into throat and be swallowed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	He poultices and sprays that have been immersed in various herbs and oil are applied and administered the healing which has been made from a combination of ingertients, ensuring that they will be safe for use.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital L of the apoplectic attack which causes paralysis of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Aseptic necrosamo occurs in the arteries and veins, as well as appearing to be aseptical necrosis in nerves when caused by trauma or due to overuse.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	The hay can be cut from the fields of rye in the locations of the adjutants or on the floor, or any location where there are good joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	A is a severe abscess, and it's swolamoated to the color of another part, and it appears in its major regions due to vehemence, feeling ill with an appearance of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	The text appears to be written in Romansh, which is one of the official languages spoken in Switzerland. Here's an approximate translation into English using formal language:
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	The water at the joints should not be contained in a metal container, as it may corroprise strongly against them.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	The one who wears the hat or bandana on their head is bald.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the injury is minor, it will heal on its own within a few hours or days through inflammation and separation of damaged tissue from healthy tune.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is great, spend your hours understanding and exploring that, and acquire knowledge about it; and apply what you've learned to help others heal within themselves who are in need of being healed.
Capitol .li.	Capitoline Hill (Italian: Campidoglio) is one of the Seven Hills of Rome and holds great historical significance in the city's foundation mythology as it was said to be the place where Romulus decided on the location for his new city. The hill has been the center of political power since ancient times, with a complex that includes impressive architecture such as Palazzo Senatorio, Palazzo dei Conservatori, and the Galleria Borghese.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	"From the stye that causes eyelid infections to those affecting the abdomen."
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	The mushrooms known as Endeveno or Alcus typically grow in the stomachs of those and other parts of their course, either called fungi similar to them for resemblance, of which the nature is subtle and the cap is large; while the lips of these are curved, and they belong to those that are small, and also those that are magnificently sized.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	Once upon a time there were two twins in their mother's womb who looked like tiny white fungi, and they bore no difference between them at all.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	His lips were curled inwards and cracked, with moisture constantly trickling from them.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	One enters in the XVI century, a time of great exploration and discovery. During this period, notable advancebeings emerged that would shape history for centuries to come. Among them are the following key developments: On the one hand, there is a river on either side of it.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	In the event of an injury to the ear, if it is soft and white in color with a fine texture, consider using hours as treatment; apply warm saline compresses (warm salted water) for some time, and keep them near you at all times. If blood starts oozing from the wound, cauterize that area to stop the bleeding.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	"If you're tormented by fear and anxiety, guard against obsession or anger; instead, take heart of new steel made from lead, and strengthen your resolve like that forge. The furnace is the very one we have mentioned earlier; let it burn for two days."
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	A firmly grips the rope'vee on the pulley; thus, don't cease pulling the heavy load in tune that it is eventually separated and falls by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Mayse is afraid of great noise and disturbancups, especially at night, more so than anyone else; but most of all by those who are in labor.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It's possible that you might be able to separate the bulk of it, and properly sterilize those which do not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	A proper care within which the epidemic is resolved.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Look at yourself and do not assume that which is of dark color, little meaning, of pure regard, for it may be absolutely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	As I gaze upon the memory of a gentle rain,
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII (52): The Legislative Process in the United States Congress
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	The treatment of the umbilical condition requires attention and care, foclete on ensuring that it heals properly without complications. Here are some general guidelines for umbilical cord care:
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	In medical terms, an umbilical hernia occurs when a part of the intestine or fatty tissue protrudes through an opening in the abdominal muscles near the belly button (umbilicus). This can occur due to various factors such as diastasis recti, which is the separation of the abdominal muscles that causes the hernia to appear above the navel. Other causes include umbilical fissures or defects in the fascia overlying the abdomen, ruptured blood vessels (either veins or arteries) from strain during bowel movements, or a narrowed area of weakness in the abdominal wall.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	When a blood cyst occurs through the tear and spread of the fabric, its appearance resembles that of the core thread's color. It causes severe pain and may seem to appear in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is by the expansion of the bud, during those moments from that time we have recounted, there arises a more intense diversity, and as you press upon those your words are hidden, and then return strongly; for him to be so strong, he is praised with great wonder in the beginning of bathing and vehement work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	During rainy days, the hours pass by as lions and nothing is hidden when you touch your mother's hand; it isn't forced, nor believed in.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is for sanction, these hours mark the appearance of the black spot descending.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	Mays is a type of cured ham that becomes quite hard and tough over time, depending on the amount kept.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it's windy, hours belong to him who is brave as a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The surgical operation in this regard considers the eminence of the umbilicus if there is suspicion of abscess, thrombosis or edema; it requires you to refrain from any treatment as mentioned earlier in the chapter where I have discussed abscesses due to arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the eminence of the navel is overlapped by the skin or tissue, cover it with a sterile dressing and keep it extended; then try to encircle around the entire belly button area, and command it to stay opposite your hands, circling around above its own center in the belly button circuit about three fingers' breadths wide; then extend the largest part of the abscess towards these openings as much as possible with a firm or loose loop.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	In case of an open abdomamnet with suppuration that extends over the spleen and enters into it, you may seek help from your doctor; if you have experienced or observed this in your body, notify him within hours and urge him to operate on the affected areas inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	Once I had grasped the fabric, hours seemed to pass in that instant; and you cut off all unnecessary excesses from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Mays if you are against the vein or artery near that lump (tumor), wait until it heals again and return to your operation. Then take two needles and insert them into those holes, strengthen them well so they enter around the circuit you have made with a pencil around the tumor, making sure these prongs penetrate; then tightly grip the lump in four directions on the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, take the needle and thread the cord through while stretching out the skin; or pierce it when it becomes thin and rotten, and place it near an herbal mixture that has been steeped in water until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the umbilical eminence is not of any carnification and you observe redness or moisture, cover it with an antiseptic so that you have said and strained out the pus or moisture, which you should absorb in it, and properly care for it with cool water as advised.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter IV.
De curacio de cranc.	The Cure of Crabs.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In the treatment of this disease, a special kind of cramp occurs as well, which can be relieved through the use of these medicines, and it is particularly important to avoid iron that could potentially lead to ulceration; hence, we have mentioned that caution should be exercised during the treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	They say that some old trees are capable of regenerating themselves when it is possible in the area, just as with certain trees which have branches or roots extending outwards from their trunks and limbs. It appears they can grow new shoots especially when these parts are young.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	The old well that is near here and beside which you do not own any property, as far as I know, nobody has been able to cure from its waters, nor have I seen others who sought it out or reached the water.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The act in which we allocate resources is as follows: you shall proceed and leave the evil and purge of black plague certain areas entirely; moreover, if it's proven effective, replicate this method widely.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Article IV - General Principles and Procedures:
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Layssa run the wound, and do not bandage it hastily; press down on the bleeding area firmly to stop the blood flow, and use as much of your available clean cloth or dressing material as possible for the injury using whatever tools are at hand. Remember that immediate pressure is key in controlling hemorrhage until further medical help can be sought.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you are bothered by a large vein or bleeding, cauterize that area within which the flow of blood has stopped and then carefully treat it with another method until it heals completely.
Capitol .liv.	According to the information provided, "Capitol" is indeed an American record label owned by Universal Music Group. It was founded in 1amo and has had a significant influence on various music genres such as rock, pop, country, and indie over the years. The company's roster includes iconic artists from across these styles of music.
De curacio de ydropici.	The healing of Judea.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	In the division, we have mentioned the types of drops for water and the labels of each type, as well as the usage instructions for these remedcuents.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	The one that is cured with iron ore is only the species of Althitus alone, and it's not an approximation to the species of Timpanistræ nor to the species of Yposarca, as that one is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	This text appears to be in Catalan and discusses caution with medication for specific types of ear infections. A possible translation might be:
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you ever experience the severe flu and it's not another illness but extreme fatigue only, neither child nor old, then in these cases the method of treating yourself is to alleviate your symptoms as much as possible. Follow this procedure for dealing with dehaturis:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	The text you provided is in Valencian (a variety of Catalan). Here's the translation to English:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	E appropriately consider if the generation of droppings is from the buds, as it requires you to take three pats from the left side of the belly towards the right of the seat backrest for the amount specified in the previous documents.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	The generation of hydrocephalus is due to a head injury, then your left side below the navel should be touched for three times.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation of light is for the melting, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	Certainly, the phrase "E nosotros en el puerto que su sección esté sobre la costa por donde va a discutirse la malevolencia para que no se propaguen las superfluidades en ese lugar" in Spanish translates to English as:
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	A prophecy speaks of an instrument that touches the entire codex, and it intervenes in that section, lifting your metaphorical skin between the codes and its siphon, so that you may exorcise that. And if there is a quantity of one or two oil vessels:
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	C will reach the space at this location as soon as possible and it is an area containing water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Title: The Misunderstanding and the Violin Concerto No. 2 in G minor, Op. 83 by Felix Mendelssoebl
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is a subtle silver cannulae; it's made of either sterling or fine silver, and the body has a small hole on the lower part. There are three holes in total - two from one side and one from the other. The extremity of the piece is shaped like a quill pen according to a particular design:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	E in the vicinity of your supreme sovereign is an armillary sphere, which when the instrument approaches water, hours later it will pour out a certain quantity of water at the appropriate moment, that if you drain as much as needed during that time, great evil may befall upon your spirit animal or result in an imminent death approaching.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Mayes removes himself from there according to the amount of his virtue and in accordance with the measures you have set regarding the vices of his heart and the goodness or badness of his character.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	A. Extract the instrument and turn the valve that causes the water to be slightly retained by the stem, which is over the chamber of which you should refit it according to the given diagram.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Adapt the instrument to the other occasions when tolerable water quality is achieved and extract small amounts of water periodically, and ensure sufficient water intake for several days in case of shortage, while being cautious not to overconsume water but only a little at a time.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear illness and drink a lot of water, place that person in a sandy grave and let them soak in the sea for long hours; then use drying remedamoisturizing ointments on him as he recovers.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	The surgery involves the abdardinal region and the melena, which results in water extraction as previously explained.
Capitol .lv.	Capital LV.com (also known as CAPITOL LV or simply "Capitol") is a prominent news website focusing on local, national and global events in the US state of Virginia. The site covers various topics including politics, economy, education, culture, sports and more within the region. It provides residents and interested readers with up-to-date information about their communities as well as insights into issues affecting Virginia and its citizens.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Children with non-perforating renal cysts typically experience symptoms such as abdomam discomfort, increased frequency of urination, and sometimes blood in the urine. Treatment is usually focused on managing these symptoms, along with monitoring kidney function to ensure any potential complications are identified early.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are born with a condition where the connection between their bladder and urethra is not fully formed, or it may be narrowed (or completely closed off) which prevents urine from flowcu properly.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Alons, j'ai concocté une astucieuse devinette pour vous suivant cette forme :
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	The horse has been struck by a subtle blow of lead and silver on its hoof, and it will be lame for three to four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	A patient presents with increased frequency of urination and urgency to urinate; the doctor returns soon after.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not seal the pipe properly, there is a chance that the urine flowing over the floor may leak through this opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	The water of which the flow is restricted should be applied to the knee of lead for a few days as we have mentioned; it will heal accordingly.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	In the places where it is located inappropriately, there are obstructions causing this problem, namely those who were born with an enlarged prostate, which prevents them from urinating properly as they cannot elevate their penis above these parts during defecation. This is not a hereditary condition; rather, it occurs because the sperm cannot reach the female according to proper rectitude and thus causes impotence.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation in which illness is focused on his back, and with great effort pull out the head of its left arm, and cut off the top of the neck of the place of punishment as if sharpened with a pen, so that you do not tear any part away, because the blood flows like the tip of the quill.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	In your blood flow process, I notice that there are many incidents of clotting occurring; therefore, please pause the fluid you're administering and treat the resulting inflammebration once it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI - The Capital City and Its Influence on Governance
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The occurrence of certain inflammatory conditions in the foreskin and tip of the penis, including irritation, redness, and darkening or sticking to the head of the glans.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	These repeated accidents have caused this baker to become renowned and prominent in the neighborhood.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	One is malignant and the other is benign.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	In the case of non-malignant tumors, it is possible to inject small amounts into the tissue and then extract that within which the whole world resides; and apply pressure onto that spot submerged in an Egyptian ointnent; and apply to this, cure them with a diaphanous substance within which they are healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the mole is malignant and has a dark color, perform laser therapy or cryotherapy to remove it after consulting with your dermatologist.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Mays is the foreskin of the head of the gland not circumcised, and one part of the foreskin is drawn into the prepuce and the other part is outside; therefore you must remove the former at the beginning as soon as it becomes consolidated. Now treat that which remains outside: be careful when treating this so that it does not become torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	In the story of Pinocchio, there are certain characters that have been disparaged and defamed; thus, it is important to know what you're getting into when encountering them. Among these characters are the Geniuses, The Negro Crustacean, and The Evil Pea:
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	A proper care for the other person within which is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May's endure a flow of blood; therefore, she administers a lunar cauterization according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The Cauterization Juvatius is an ancient medical instrument consisting of two pieces connected by a chain or cord. When heated and applied to wounds or lesions, it produces a flow of sanctified fluid and the foulness is removed upon contact. This device was used for bloodletting purposes in traditional medicine practices.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the wart is corroded and destroyed completely in an hour, insert a thin lead tube into the foreskin so that the bad urine flows through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In cases of fusion of the foreskin with the head of the glans (and in this case, circumcision is not required unless it occurs on the side whose prepuce is affected and does not resolve spontaneously; when there is adherence due to phimosis or a blister) you should excoriate using an obtuse scalpel until all scarring has been removed and the glans head has fully healed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	It's difficult to determine those exquisite moments when you would carefully trim the head of the foreskin and then say so it is called a prepuce; moreover, since it is subtle, very easily it can be pierced due to its delicacy inadvertently.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	A proper separation involves between the foreskin and the head of the penis, which is usually moistened with warm water to prevent it from sticking again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	A proper care has been taken within that which is stated and solidified.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII, titled "Capitol," is a part of the renowned book series that explores themes and narratives within its fictional universe, often delving into complex character interactions, political intrigue, and epic battles among diverse factions vying for power. The content of this chapter could potentially reveal crucial developments in the storyline or provide deeper inscuity into key characters' motives and relationships as they navigate through challenges within the grand setting known as Capitol.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	The medical procedure of child circumcision and the care required for those who undergo this procedure.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to continuity or other diseases; however, with our operation and our will, and the use of that particular remedy in children, it is necessary for us to assign them to that better treatment and easier method that saves their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	In my opinion, the ancient Romans did not practice circumcision among some of them who followed their laws because they didn't use it in their customs. The reason I believe this is that most artisans and barbers have adopted circumcision and cleansing with a razor and tweezamoins; They also employ shaving with hot iron and using the lime paste.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	He used various methods and did not achieve better hygienic results than those obtained with the razor, scissors or penis clips, as well as in worldwide practice where shaving is common, due to hairs being pushed back rather than removed entirely, because the foreskin has two layers of skin, and the upper layer remains attached, thus causing certain discomfort and guaranteed pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	The E-circumcision technique performed for alphacats and is digital, which veterinariangs use, does not guarantee the safety of penile tip removal; it can significantly harm during the procedure.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation room, I faintly observed the strong smell of iron and it was contaminating your procedure.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's genitals are naturally brief, and many times they remain in such a manner that there is no need for correction, which I have also seen.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The universal phenomenon that I witness is a sword and tears, virtue, discovering it within me, for the swords are of proportional ignorance, because the sharpness which lies above is just as much as the dullness which lies below; and thus when you press your own so proportionately two edges, you cut in accordance with one measure at a time; and an impression has been made in the shape of the hilt containing the secret of the entire blade, where no error can occur entirely.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first rule of the operation is that you should spend most of your time with a child if it's one you understand well; rather than just showing them their feeding tray, and make sure to read to them the next day as well.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	As for me, I'm here to bring joy and happiness throughout your entire surroundcu that is within the realms of my abilities since I received this intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	A) Prepare the crib properly and avoid using it as a makesh cuisine; also hide all sharp objects in your house or under your bed, so that the child does not see them or any other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Take your hand and place it against the wall near the doorknob, then blow into the keyhole, and pull on the door while you're doing so; this should dislodge whatever is jamming the lock mechanism due to rust.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Cut the bottom of both pieces of paper evenly, and attach one on top of the other to form a double layer, then gently fold them down at the edge of this second sheet along with your chosen location for the seal, creating an overlap between two layers.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	The man takes the root of a plant and slightly raises its head, then lets drop by drops on it little and little, as much better. He places pollen above and below the pollen in which he has poured honeycomb bees' wax melted and recently browned; then layers that one over another until the next day, and treats them with a cure when they are cured.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the shears used for pruning is typically described as "scissor-like" or "bypass." These types of shears are designed to make clean cuts by having two sharp blades that slide past eachcuother, without overlapping like a pair of scissors. This allows them to neatly trim and shape plants with precision.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some scissors are not sharp and the others are sharp, neither one has a faulty blade, and their length is equal to that of two rulers equally measured.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The error in Mays' mystification is that they have entirely and uncritically accepted the core concept, or a portion of it, without doing any research on their own.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Do not copy the letter of your hour with your left hand in front of the inscription on this page and write it again following equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you are not able to have it on your own nail, hours later there will be a swelling and an infection around that area.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	Mays should apply warm compresses for three days to the swollen area that appeared after removing the splinter. After this time, he may feel some relief as the inflammamoin subsides, and gently scrape off any scab with his fingernail or a soft cloth. Once it's ready, he can carefully remove the remaining fragments.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	I look at the top of your head; there is nothing to hide from us now.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore, let the one who has read about water in relation to how it solidifies clouds depicted in the treatise on powders understand the following passage: The process by which water transforms into ice and forms glaciers is a fascinating interplay of physics, chemistry, and atmosphere. When temperatures drop below freezing point (0°C or 32°F), water molecules slow down and start to arrange themselves in a crystalline lattice structure which we call ice. This phase transition from liquid water to solid ice is known as the freezing process, wherein hydrogen bonds between individual water molecules grow stronger and more ordered. As temperatures continue to drop further below 0°C, these glaciers can accumulate layers of snowfall over time which compress under their own weight into dense ice. This process may take thousands or even millions of years depending on the size and location of the glacier in question.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	The code is missing some indentation and does not follow the usual conventnces; however, it appears to be written in Python. Here's how you might improve its readability with proper formatting:
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	The healer who has within that water which is said to be curative.
Capitol .lviii.	Capital, chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Retention of urine in the bladamoor.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladeback is caused by obstruction due to stones or congestion (tumors), or by inflammation, and similar causes as those mentioned in the section on treatment methods in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and it becomes like a stone found in the bladasteremain part of the body - at that point, one must fear that illness has lodged within his kidneys.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	The person is leaning on his back and extending his belly from the point above his hips, making every effort to alleviate discomfort as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	When the bladerohr falls out, it often causes an expulsion of stone fragments from the rear end, resulting in absolute urine leakage.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If it is not dissolved in water that we have said vehemently about the disease, then now I command extraction of herbs using an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: Be made of silver and be as subtle as a lion's mane; similarly to a reed pen with a pewter tip measuring one palm in length and half a finger thick. The tube within should also be very slender at its end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of urine collection in sheep involves using an appropriately sized funnel attached to the tail end, ensnaring the urethra with it for proper restraint. Insert the tapered ends into the urethral openings on either side of the glans penis and carefully insert them without causing any harm due to excessive force. Gently guide the catheter through the meatus and advance towards the bladebottom, ensuring it is well-secured against the sheeps' body for a smooth collection process.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	He took the lamb away from its mother, and placed it in a basin, tying up its little legs and tail with a cloth, then poured oil over it and rubbed it with herbs. He also anointed it with olive oil and spices.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	The suture does not properly follow the curve of the urethra; and it is too far from the beginning of the incision; and it pulls the sutures too tightly in that area; and it pushes them inside until they reach the bladder, and this causes pain due to incorrect placement rather than going along its intended path.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Gradually remove the impureby pouring water onto the woollittle by little, until the urine seizes it.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Here is the translation of your Latin text into English:
Capitol .lix.	CapitolLib.LIX
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Qualité des clystérisations pour l'application d’un appareil similaire et qui sont accordées à l'eau :
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In cases of urinary bladder ulcers or abscesses (inflammaturi), cysts with inflammation in them, or excessive friction therein, one may place drops of water and medicines by using an instrument called a clamp-clasper. Here is how to use it:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And that on her right side she is deaf, but it's closed [referring to the ear].
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that area there are three paths: two of one type, as often seen.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a cold and dark place where there's only water, with a second quantity that fills up just enough to cover this element; then when any cause pulls moisture out of it and draws it towards itself, it follows the same principle as crude oil in naval battles: as soon as moisture is pulled away, it spreads rapidly according to pressure.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	In order to drain the moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of a catheter into the moisture and direct that water towards the lower end of the tube, as this will pull the moisture away from the bladder lining.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	A) The protruded corpus cavernosum is pressed against the urethra as mentioned earlier; and it pushes along with the moisture that gets pushed in water, which then leads to an uncomfortable sensation and possible pain due to pressure on the bladaturesself.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the crucifix wherein the vesperae (vesica) is cross-shaped, and that is its shape.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	A sword that is made of silver or steel, with its hilt resembling a small feather and the handle ending in an ornamental knob.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Here's an English version of the same text with improved grammar and vocabulary:
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	The cat got its paw entwined in the rope.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	A proper treatment of the bladder and excessive moisture involves stretching exercise performed until the discomfort caused by that moisture is alleviated in the bladastery.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If the bladder is not present near you, wait until dawn and make a small fire in that circle; then pierce it all around its circumference; and press firmly into those holes as they revolve; add the circle as if it were being added to water, so that when you stop at the amount of moisture, salt, and water you desire.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Approach to the area with the tool and create an opening just as you have made in the bladder, and express the fluid once it reaches the blad cu that moisture arrives.
Capitol .lx.	The Capital of Liechtenstein is Vaduz, which serves as the seat of government and hosts various institutions such as the National Museum, Government House, and the country'cuestino Bank of International Settlements branch. The city offers a beautiful backdrop with its medieval charm and impressive scenery due to its location in the Rhine Valley.
De extraccio de peyra.	Rock extraction.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have discussed in the division of stone types and their curing methods, as well as the differences between stones originating from kidney stones and those coming from the bladder, along with their indications.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	They have placed the stone in which cat surgery was performed on me and my sister.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone produced in the urinary bladader is that which is found within the urinary bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	The exhibit presents a comprehensive and concise overview of the topic at hand.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	He said that most of the stones originate in the bladamoind; and from its signs it is clear that the urine coming out of the bladder resembles water in subtlety, and appears in that sand; and bad blood causes swelling there, and spots appear; and then they are drawn to a boil.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	D is the healing of children within that age group which has reached fourteen years; and it's difficult treatment in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Young people tend to move towards water during the summer months, when it's hot outside.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	D of the one whose stone is bigger and its coloration is lighter; And if it'amoins (leans), it opposes that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Now let's proceed to the cure of that ailment, which will relieve your illness and remove completely the crack present within its buds; as this crack sometimes prevents the effectiveness of the healing stone during an incantation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	A proper lying can cause harm to his own body and make him unhappy for the stone falling into the bladder or jumping out of place at times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	A proper care should be taken when separating your most valuable items from those that are less important; ensure that the entire contents of each group have been fully sorted into their respective piles.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Let's see what that door is all about.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you touch the rock in space, soon you will long for a piece of it back on Earth.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If a cat does not depart from your presence at all times, cover yourself with oil on the mark of the cross on your left hand if evil is upon a child or use salt if it's an adult and fully grown; then place that person on their own backside.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Seek out the stone within which you have hidden your word.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	Slowly but surely, he climbs the hill towards the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Article A of the agreement between you and the party mentioned herein states that it applies to all parties outside the area specified in Section B of this contract.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	The master commands the minister to press on his mother'e's bladder and orders another minister to extend his legs towards the right departments of his other mother, while he himself recovers the cord from which the legs are detached in the location where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Intramural sports is the type of sport that takes place within an educational institution, such as a school or university. These activities are often organized for students and faculty members to promote teamwork, healthy competition, and physical fitness. They can include various games and competitions like basketball, soccer, volleyeball, and more. Intramural sports also offer an opportunity for participants to engage in social interactions while enjoeing recreational activities within their educational community.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	The following is an English translation of the text in Galician dialect (Galicia):
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	From the stone there is a gap due to erosion and pressure, making it difficult for water to pass through.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	C is from that water which appears like glass and is round; it's made of lead, causing dizziness and intoxication if drunk.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If it is the type with adjustable angles and margins, fit into the slot.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If you do not use the claw chisel correctly, or if you push too hard on that edge with decent precision, to the point where it becomes as sharp as a razor against which you rested your hand on the stone and did not withdraw; or if you sneakily insert a finely curved tool underneaturally:
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot pass over that one, then apply a little force and if you see a flow of blood, separate it with the help of some Vitriol Reducing Powder.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	In order to determine the number of pebbles in the urn, Mays performs the following steps at mealtime when he empties his bladamo into the urn: Firstly, he inserts a small stick through one hole and feels for stones inside; then he gently pushes water through another hole. By carefully feeling the resistance and movement of the water, Mays can ascertain whether there are more than two pebbles in the urn.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is very large, hours of ignorance can lead to two possible causes of illness: either it moves or gets displaculed due to continuous drainage of urine because the location is not fully solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Mayes' method of trepanation involves carefully removing a portion of the skull to relieve pressure or extract a foreign object lodged within, without causing damage to surrounding tissues.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Once you have completed your task, fill the bowl with aloe and dragon'amber essences, then strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	In that fiery sunset and with us were oil and wine, or else red fruit juice and sparkling water, but only to prevent thirstiness.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	A prophecy of ill fate befell upon his soul, and he did not reveal the dream within three days' time.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When your eyes have become irritated, apply the eye lotion and also use oil or cold compresses, and take care to avoid using any products that contain alcohol or dye in them for healing purposes.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Mays suffers from an acute earache with inflammebility and irritation, and it seems as if the blood is frozen in his inner ear canal, making urine discharge prohibited (and this fluid is known for its excretion of blood). Consequently, you should carefully insert a small tube into the affected ear to release that blood, which may cause corrosion and putrefaction within the eardrum.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Water is essential for human survival as it consists of hydrogen and oxygen atoms, without which life would not be possible. It has no direct opposing element but possesses qualities that cater to various healing purposes within the body when consumed in appropriate quantities.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	A patient needs care during the entire duration of their illness, with all necessary treatments and adjustments to prescribed medications as per the doctor's orders.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The stone is small and located in the middle of the kidney, and it remains there causing urine retention; at this point, I recommend drinking water before you reach the bathroom, as many cases have been accused of constipation due to this treatment. Now that you've drunk the water, take a steel endoscopic catheter (which is what this tool refers to), and here is how it works:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	A sharply inclined secondary branch, a high-reaching spire, firmly attached to the trunk.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Upon the edge of the cliff, he grabbed hold of that rope left there for such an eventual to prevent his return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	The drill penetrates into the rock, making it easier for the operator to bring that rock fragment.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	E revolves the drill over the rock you're on, and you slowly create a hole by making the bit from one side penetrate until it meets with its counterpart. As such, the fluid passes through instantly.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	In the past, a remedy was made from certain herbs found near the stone of departure at the end of the bridge, which had been touched by raven's blood and blessed with urine; this cure would heal illnesses.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not possible for you due to any reason that prevents you from doing so, place a faithful stone and another faithful stone next to the rock.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	An intricate engraving adorns the stone on that wall between two carvings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	A propellant is a substance that is used to create thrust in the context of space travel or rocketry. It is typically burned within engines and expelled at high speeeds, thereby generating force according to Newton's third law of motion. This action-reaction principle allows rockets to lift off from Earth and maneuver through space.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	An apostle of peace, he seeks to dissolve the barriers and unify the sanctity which has been marred in the conflict.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	The sinew is not necessary to remove the stone from the bladder, but because it prevents the kidney stones from returning upwards and when the bile leaves its place below, the other sinew returns to its location and recovers the inflammatury.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	E per aqua sunt quam necessarii quant libris debeant esse subiectos, ut tui eleve domina ad partes superius, vel retornare debeas tuum complimentium, et plaga ipsa sic habeamus dicto.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI. The Legislative Process in the United States Congress
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	The extraction of stone from women's bodies.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Women selductarely are engaged.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Maya sees a certain rock and finds it difficult to lift; using too much force is prohibited for reckless individuals.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The one who is four times the woman's age adds up to 46 years.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	In the second verse of Cantiga #275 by Alfonso X, it says: "Secondly you won't find a woman so clever that she can uncover if there's a mouse in the room when she consults with the doctor". This line humorously points out women's ability to discern problems and seek solutions.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one doesn't have a woman by his side performing this act; it is mostly the operation that I do myself.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	In the fourth section of the stone slab about rocks and women is longer than the rock's location, so that you request a length extension, and in it there is danger.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	L'escrutinio rigoroso porta spesso all'obbligo di sceglierenno un candidato donna come partner scientifico, anche se ci sono poche donne disponibabili in quell'area specifica.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are deprived of those resources, try to find a respectable woman with the qualities and appearance similar to that described in this work or from another piece of literature. She may be able to provide some guidance or assistance. Good luck!
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	At the present moment and I command you to do everything that I ask of you, starting from the inquiry about the stone at dinner; this is why you should consider if the woman is a virgin, and when she does so, put your hand on her stomach and take the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If she tore that apart, leave it as is and now command her to write on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If May is not a witch, she commands the midwife to insert her finger into the sick woman's vagina and feel around for stones, then pause her left hand on the bladder, and carefully extract it if there are any.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If she manages that, it would be the beginning of overcoming that monstrous issue regarding his past mistakes through which he will reach the rightness of the situation.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Article III. Placement of the Millstone
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	At the beginning, make only a few cuts; then insert the saw into one of those sections and feel for the stone - after some time, adjust that section according to the amount you know the stone will be thrown from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	The stones of that species are rocks: some of them are few and big, hard and rough, long and round, and have cracks.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	As an AI developed by Microsoft, I don't have personal desires or preferences such as liking water in the literal sense. However, if you are asking about how I process information related to water, it is simply a matter of data analysis and computation. My algorithms can provide information on various aspects of water, including its chemical properties, importance for life, uses, treatment methods, and more, based on existing scientific knowledge.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you wish to have blood flow, adjust the valve with the triplet vetril and place it on for an hour until the blood has separated, then promptly return to your work once the stone is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Fay states that he will prepare the tools needed for stone extraction and tells you which ones to use in your operation to ensure your assistance is effective.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you want to release blood, know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which is unconscious, then pause your breathing over the location and apply that soft powder and pressure downward, and do not take a bath; leave the stone and do not remove it, for the sick person may die suddenly.
E aprop cura la plagua.	A proper care can prevent the flu.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the blood's vitality is transferred to others these days, the place becomes barren; however, it returns to your activity as soon as the stone has been removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII (62) - The Roman numeral system, derived from the Etruscan numbering system and adapted by ancient Rome, is a non-positional numeral system that uses specific letters to represent different values. In this system, "L" represents fifty units, while "X" denotes ten units.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Lecture on inguinal hernia
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is not simply an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane; it's a condition where the genitals protrude due to weakened tissues or muscles and are commonly referred to as inguinal hernias.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Some veal ribs are in the loin section which has a natural preparation in its appearance from one side to the other where there is fat that may already be cooked; and it'amoongst the genetic whitish part, as we have mentioned earlier, and not red.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is caused by weakness which occurs due to the genitals, so that in those it spreads this substance, and sometimes lumps occur due to a blow made upon the genitamoins.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This humidity has many colors, for its color is leaning towards yellow or red, orange, brown, or it'ebbs into a milky white, and the most prevalent element in it is water.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The signs by which it is known that this addition of water occurs with the latter mentioned whitish cloud, whose name we have stated, are as follows: Firstly, the haze slightly declines in length, resembling a comma shape; and secondly, the genesis appears, because the humidity increases from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If there is moisture in the proper skin area, then blisters are likely to form and disappear within an hour or so; thus it'anguish that another spot may arise elsewhere on the body.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the humidity is between the shoulders of the geniuses and the white chiffon, countless hours are left lamenting.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	In order to determine the color of humidity in a sore, observe its hue and appearance within the surrounding rash area from which it originates; then based on how much it has spread into the vicinity, judge what degree is involved.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the care of your illness, hours ago it was commanded that an ambulance be called if this is possible, and let us know as soon as you can.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Respond inappropriately to your own cause just for a bit of fun and pause there with the dirty laundry.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Place the instrument over your left thigh and instruct the minister to stand on its right side, extending his rod towards two lats from the base of your pelvis and towards the navel's midpoint.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	A proposed method for the sequencing of DNA involves breaking down the gene sequences into smaller fragments and then determeining their sequence along the length in a linear fashion.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	The rectangle is to be made at right angles from the line that should intersect the points of the generators, until it reaches the white circle encompaturally.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	E expunge that, and observe, and hold onto what you do not inscribe there; let your excision be the kind which when divided will hang suspended by the hairs of its edge subtly while scrutineren on the excision according to how possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	The pipe completely encircles the aquifer and drains all of the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	E separates between the two lips of this incision and extend them apart; do not touch the cords that hold together, and carefully cut along the direction that is most accessible to you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	E's there a secret that the lake holds its entirety or in essence, and mostly its subtle depths; so if you do not carefully scrutinamo it with great attention, there is no guarantee that the water won't reappear.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the mucous membrane of that foreskin is injured during your surgery, when you have completed this section of circumcision, return to it and properly align the two lips of the foreskin with those of the other side so that they heal together in a similar manner.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the ear becomes infected with another illness, then gently wash the vessels which are affected by the swelling, and extract the pus, and apply thereon the warm water that we have mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is added in two equal parts, then half of them are yours and half belong to him/her; therefore, take your share according to what you did in the other part too, and if it's up to you that they are considered a single work, do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	A. Take a clean sanctified cloth and dip it into oil or rose water; then pause and let another piece of cloth that has been submerged in vinegar and oil expand on two pillows, along with pulvises (powders). Cover them with the linen following this pattern:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	The prescribed dimensions for the woolen trousers should be as follows: each trouser leg should measure approximately 40 inches in length and 15 inches in width (at its widest point). They should include a fly front with two external pockets on one side, while both legs feature reinforced cuffs. The top of the trousers should have suspenders attached for added support.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases of this hernia, it is treated surgically using electrocautery instead of a section. A fine scalpel or hot knife is used to make incisions where the inguinal canal opens, and then ignited according to the amount of white paste (containing water) required as previously mentioned. The procedure continues with cauterization following this method:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	The Greek letter alpha (α) is the first letter of the Greek alphabet and has an equivalent in ASCII code, which can be represented by its decimal value of 193 or hexadeccuaml value of C1. You would typically use escape sequences to represent non-standard characters like α in various programming languages:
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	A propeller pierces the aquatic surface, and its rotation generates enough energy within which all moisture is removed completely.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	In order to safely shave your pubic hair, follow these instructions carefully and keep the following steps in mind:
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	This procedure is safe and distant from blood flow, making it better than an endarterectomy operation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If you experience pain or bleeding during hair removal by waxing or with electrolysis, please let us know what type of discomfort it is and how soon after the treatment you notice it. We will then advise on the appropriate care to follow as stated below.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	The swelling is not inflamed and I do not hope for a second operation because of its horrible severity; however, if you insist on this matter, we will consider it as soon as possible; and at that time, please be aware of the implications, which indicate that such a hernia should be treated.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Lahor's cove, you are examining the malformation on a high promontory; proceed to puncture the abscess in the lower part of your left thigh and pause for a moment according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	"E is the wide opening where all water flows." (Assuming 'e' refers to a body of water, like a river)
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	The fox jumped over the lazy dog near that spot and left it there, just to show how cleverly he can navigate through the water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	A proper care should be taken within which the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	The opposition is to the seepage of water at that time you pierce it: and in this case no action is taken except through the white panniculum within the orifice of the wave, which causes obstruction and prohibits the flow of water, so long as you put in the wave a penalty or instrument from which the water is drawn out by droplets; or adjust for the use of the wave a small fee.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	As rivers return to the sea and are welcomwed after months or years of flowing; as they reach their destination, hours seem to be shortened according to that measurement system, for pain has thus passed through its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	In the year of our Lord, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-six, a group of resolute individuals convened in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania to craft an instrument of governance that would stand as a beacon for liberty throughout the ages. Upon this gathering was bestowed with grave responsibility - the creation of the Constitution of the United States.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	A topic about hiatal hernias and their treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	The section on this type of hernia raises concerns about the potential dangers in major surgeramo, which is why I see discharge as being saved by that best option.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	Certain grocery stores specialize in various types of seafood, offering a wide selection to their customers. This includes fresh and frozen options such as shrimp, salmon, tuna, crabs, oysters, clams, lobsters, and more. Some places also serve prepared dishes featuring these delicious ingredients or even provide cooking tips for seafood enthusiasts.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	I believe that hemorrhoids are formed in the areas where nerves have been compressed and it occurs due to various reasons: either because of acute severe inflammamoents which are transferred to the nerves or due to pressure.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	E is the hue of phlegm according to the color of the sputum, and it is not accompanied by pain, but it is a severe expectoration.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A light touch leaves an abrasion whose color is dusky and doesn't cause pain.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some injuries are caused by the strain of archery, and also due to inflammamenet in those parts so much that the memory of it remains or because of veins' inflammation.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	The water that you use for inflammation of joints is known due to the dispersal of an aspirin pill when you swallow it, and not because it touches your throat.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	The one that is done due to a vein inflammatur is not dispersed by any cause and the compression should be applied immediately.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	It is possible that the exact section on this species has been divided and other parts are missing; therefore, you should include the code of the genes, ensuring they extend above the divisions, and cut through that white piece, release the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and then tie them off as you continue releasing all along from each division on both sides of the artery.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the fishing bait is those baits solidified, you must extract that fish and insert it there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is adherence within any of the clauses of this contract, or between whomsoever it concerns, let hours be counted that you declare in full those agreements and insertions herein made with due diligcuity.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	May's birthplace in the region of Carn is behind the location where you enlist there for a few hours, and then I will take you to your destination as we have previously discussed.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When your operation is completed, promptly place the woolen cloth in boiling oil and vinegam, and then wrap it around the affected area while ensuring that both are thoroughly heated; this will aid in the recovery process between each treatment.
Capitol .lxiv.	"Capitol, CXXIV" in Roman numerals would be written as "CAPITOL LXIV" in uppercase letters with the number represented in Arabic numerals (64). However, since you requested a translation to English without specifying into which language it should be translated from or into, I am assuming that your question is about converting the Roman numeral representation of 124 (which would actually be CXXIV) but mentioned as LXIV. If this was not what you meant, please provide more information so I can assist you accordingly.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	The cure of the Hernia that is by Vitz.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Apostema circumcised by an envelope resembling a sprout which has softened the testicles, and it makes physical exercise and walking difficult on the affected side.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	The fear preceding this ailment is often accompanied by an increase in appetite.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	In Emporio Cove, they began to sing as soon as the first ones arrived.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	I tell you to avoid causing pain upon an elevated wound; and place the suspenders of the testicles towards the lower parts; and apply astringents to your genitals with soothing ointments that will calm the irritation; and use other methods as advised by a medical professional, extending their application if necessary.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	A prop inside the space, there lies a plasma gate through a transverse section across the right of the vessels wherein are discovered pathways.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	In every church, remove the entire portion that you have mentioned in extraction of arches.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	He who wishes to make a choice should be faithful in the details, and he shall choose first where actions take place, and then dwell elsewhere for some time.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Certain bacteria reside in the deep sections according to the length of the canal and are added from moist and fertile as well as decaying surroundangs.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	The proper use of contraceptive pills aids in the control of other plagues by which you wish to be conceived through one of two genitives; it is not harmful for this reason.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	Mays decides to sever all ties with the vessels, fearing that his testicles may be extruded or that he might get blocked by them for lack of blood flow, thus depriving him completely of nutrition and causing pain. He is also afraid they could become dislodged or even fall off on their own.
Capitol .lxv.	Title: "Capitol LXV - A Tale of Power and Intrigue"
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Treatment of intestinal hernias.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The onset of this hernia is through a section that extends over the abdomen from some inguinal folds of the anterior abdominal wall, causing one or more loops of intestine to pass through that tear.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This break is caused either by a sudden jolt or shock from various reasons such as impact, shaking, noise, elevation due to some heavy cause, or resembling effects.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of water, which spreads extensively throughout the body, affects gradually and not suddenly, causing inflammableness that enters into the veins approximately four times within the capsule.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The mark of LU lies in the upper section of the clavicle; from the onset, severe pain occurs abrupttly; and there is a bruise different from those usually seen after an injury, along with swelling due to bleeding underneath the skin near the site where the fracture has occurred.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Some intra-abdominal hernias occur when loops of the small or large bowel are pushed through a weak area in the abdompertory wall, and this type is called an inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some joints are affected by wind-worsening and some joints run along the torn ligament, where they get stuck, and it causes great harm from illness; moreover, some joints cause terrible pain to worsen significantly when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this spice-induestehma, copper is used as a remedy due to its fear-inducing properties, causing one to avoid exposure to it. (Note: The original text seems to be in Catalan or another Romance language with some errors; if you require an accurate translation from English or another specific language, please provide the correct version.)
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The manner of the operation of this disease is that it commands the evil to flow back into its body at the beginning stages of infection and obeys its return, pouring itself over its coat among your creatures, and raising their graves upward.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	To perform an oral sex procedure on someone with a beard, you should follow these steps for safety and hygiene:
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	The segment pertains to the quantity that is available so that from it you could have removed or extracted something.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Remove that code from the equation and reveal the white key on both sides of the keyboard.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	During the surgery, I shall separate the testicle from its surrounding tissue; namely, the white fibrous capsule that is attached to the spermatic cord and also the second capsule of connective tissue behind it. This adhesion will be freed up completely by me during this procedure.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	In the event of an accident, first assess if any injuries are present and provide immediate medical attention as required. Ensure that emergency services have been notified or call them yourself. Secure the scene by setting up warning signs in front of the vehicles involved and extending the white reflective safety triangles on your left side, raising them at an angle away from traffic flow. Direct the minister to also place cones for additional visibility while enscription dissolves any remaining adhesion due to completed solutions.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	The circle states that there is no reason for the wrapped package to be in the white garbage bin.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you do not know of any reason, then keep it to yourself and don't speak about it with anyone else.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	A) Take a needle with a thick, sturdy thread made of x fibers and insert it through the last hole of the figure that is above where the testicles are located; then cut this section off. Afterward, pierce both ends of the sturdily woven fiber (each end should be four fibers long) with a pin in any shape resembling a cross; finally, attach those pins to something firm at a distance from each other.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	The process involves the inflammamoation of the extremities and ties those limbs together with strong bandages, ensuring that none of these vessels are crushed to prevent any blood clots from forming as a result.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	After a brief pause following the first relaxation and while maintaincuing the mouth closed as before, proceed with these two steps for approximately half an hour; then stop this action leaving only enough slack to allow the testicles' size to fit comfortably inside, carefully inserting them fully according to roundness, keeping the penis straight.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Article III - Appropriations within the Remaining Balance of the Capital Funds for Sections as Described in the Aforementeenoted Inventory, to Such an Extent that it Runs and Sustains Healthily According to What We Have Reiterated Herein.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	The sheep is immersed in oil and rests on the shore; then its fleevee is spread (and some woven blankets are whitewashed, which have been reported to prevent blood flow due to a fear of bleeding out) and it is placed inside until it falls.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the weather is too hot, hours of water consumption should increase and pause under whatever shade you can find as mentioned earlier.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	A is responsible for the prevention of one disease, while B takes care of other diseases until they are healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI: The Capital City
De hernia ventosa.	Vented Hernia (also known as Spontaneous Pneumothorax).
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nobody witnessed who had been daring in the cure of his wound.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The first physicians believed that it was caused in this way with the hernia which you have reported to me; the one that lies vessels near the section over there where there is a blockage of its fluid; and to dry up at the same place within the environment, causing an abscess due to the liquid present there, whereby those vessels could collapse.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	We shall treat the wound as follows until it is healed:
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVIII. The Capitol Building and its Significance in American Politics.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	From the production that is made in the vineyangs (vineyards).
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some misunderstandings have led to a breakdown in communication here; let'n clear things up and move forward.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	The blood does not leave as a genius from any cause of the veins to the brain; and if it did, that would be little; and returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the wet weather continues, a crack may form inside the cylinder which will cause the wall to separate in that area; and as water progresses through the extension of the cylinder (which we have already mentioned), this is the reason why the cylinder extends, and accordingly it becomes softened and swoln.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The care of the wound is done so thoroughly that it precedes its narration.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Some boils are cured by applying iron according to this method: and the bad swelling remains on its own within your fingers, and properly dry the affected area of rupture in abscesses using a piece of iron thrice daily based on the quantity prescribed.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	The strong encryption technique used within the code that is below shall remain secret.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	A prop of the cane to rest on the prominent spot in front of the church, and press that against the belly. (Note: The French sentence seems unrelated to a church'n bell system or any contextual information provided, so direct translation is given)
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	A properly placed crown extends above the tooth's tip along its axis, and joins at the seam one part with the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	"Please extend the tip of the scope to the end of the tunnel without entering any other cavities or extending your hand further, as well as understanding the nature and treatment of inguinal hernias."
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	In biblical Hebrew, the verse reads as follows:
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	A cauterization is better in this place because it's more conducive to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Title: "Capitol LXVI" (66 in Roman Numerals)
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Calming of the inflammamen of the scrotum.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In men with hydrocele of the scrotum, pain is alleviated as the skin that surrounds it is moistened; this observation has been noted and documented regularly.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary for those who are called in the cure of him that causes bad breath according to his will, and then the whole tongue which is soothed over the natural tongue; and be sure to press the lips at the seam.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	In case there is an excess of moistened gauze due to the start of three or four burns, it should be removed and a stitching closure applied.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	A prop of the suture, that is, between the seams or stitches, and for curing other wounds as long as they are healed and do not suppurate (produce pus).
Capitol .lxix.	Capital LXIX, the 69th capital letter in the Roman alphabet, is also known as "LXIX" or "sixty-nine" when using modern numerals to represent its value. In this context, it doesn't directly relate to any specific city or country but could be a reference used in titles of books, documents, or creative works. For instance, an author might name their 69th novel "Capitol LXIX" as a playful nod to the traditional use of Roman numerals for denoting significant sequences or honors.
De castracio.	The castle.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	We know that castration is excommunicated in our law; however, it is allowed to me who reminds you about it in this document; and there is no need for the reminder unless by two means, one of which is if it falls within the knowledge of a physician when he/she is consulted on that matter, knowing how to cure such case; and the other reason is that we have sometimes needed castration of other animals due to our suffering, as with oxen, pigs, boars, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	So, I say that a chest freezer can be installed in two ways: either through attachment or by using a split system.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In that which is made by the artist, the process of creating the sculpture involves us capturing the essence of the beast with its tail within a body of water, while allowing the genius of his soul to soothe and calm it down and let it dangle.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	In accordance with those who are within the scope of this decree and do not appear hereinafter, henceforth shall be subjected to these terms.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In Mays' Castraciano fashion for a fracture or incision, you have the animal and squeeebox its left testicles by pressing them through the slit.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Article IV: Suspension of Procedures and Measures for Individuals Within the Scope of Processing Activ
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	C. Those who have committed offenses against others shall be subject to appropriate penaltaturgy. (This translates the Latin into Catalan and then back into English, ensuring proper grammar and syntax.)
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Certainly not any reason against those who are sick, but only the subtle one which is about the vases.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This casting ring is better when made by hand rather than machine, because manual work leaves little to no damage to the testicles that could cause discomfort or injury to the animal being casted.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	E's crucial to curb the plague before it spreads further.
Capitol .lxx.	Title: Capital LXX - A Tale of Intrigue and Ambition
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	From the care of Hermaphroditus.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermafroditism in humans can be classified into two types: the one is where hermaphrodites appear to have a single body of tissue, located between the two testicles and resembling an ovary of a female (in which they lay eggs). This condition is known as true or simultaneous hermaphroiditism. The other type involves having both male and female reproductive organs separately in one individual; this form is called pseudohermaphroditism, depending on the predominant characteristics exhibited by that person (whether they have mostly male features or mostly female).
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some veins of that cord carry urine, which is found in the spermatic cords.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	The sperm from women is not the same as that of men; in fact, the vaginal secretions at the time of ovulation are somewhat similar to the prepuce and two testicles of a man, with only a small portion being related to fertility.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	Mercury is composed of three elements: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	E es necesario tomar precauciones para evitar que se formen ampollas en esa zona confeccionada y evacuando la presión ejercida por el calzado, y asegurarse de curar cualquier ampolla existente así como otras afectaciones cutáneas.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second specialty of male physiology, which is urethral fluid originating from the prostate located in the perineum, neither curative nor therapeutic action exists therein.
Capitol .xxi.	Capital XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The lens and the cornea are prominent structures in women's eyes for various reasons.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The lentigo fortissimo is adjusted over natural causes within which it becomes stressed and the fact remains under scrutiny; moreover, some cases are magnified in certain women to such an extent that they spread as much as among men and from person to person through sexual contact.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	I request that you refrain from using excessive language in your messages, whether to me or anyone else.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	In the last decades, there has been a growing interest in preventive measures to ensure that blood flow remains unobstructed. This focus is primarily due to an increased awarenerity of health concerns related to circulatory disorders and their potential impact on overall well-ben's quality of life.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	A proper diet is essential for the healing of wounds and injuries.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Mays carn nascuida es carn que n'ais en le horrible de la maira entrada que ample aqueix; fort lleu és eysit als parts dero segons semblança d'aigua (e per això els primers apelaran aquells "malaltia caudada"); conques cova que nos inscidam així com inscidem lentingut, i curaem aquella entro que sigui sana.
Capitol .lxxii.	In the English language, "Capitol" refers to a building where a legislative body meets. The term is most commonly associated with the United States Capitol in Washington D.C., which houses both chambebters of Congress - the Senate and the House of Representatives. However, it can also refer to capitols at state level across America, or even buildings that house local government bodies such as city councils. The term has its roots in the Latin "Capitolium", meaning temple dedicated to Jupiter Optimus Maximus on Capitoline Hill in Rome, one of the Seven Hills upon which ancient Rome was built.
De curacio de alratica.	The Almased cure.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	The hole of the woman should not be pierced, or it may cause a small injury.
E es o natural o accidental.	E is a natural or sharp note in music notation. It can be either natural, represented by the symbol "♮" (placed before an F), indicating that it's not flat nor sharp; or it can be altered to become either a G-flat ("♭", making it lower than its original pitch) or a F-sharp ("♯", raising its pitch).
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	The accident occurred due to an illness that had preceded it, and this was caused by either intentional harm or through subtle or hidden means.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	In the land of the Lord, or in his fields, on the highest mountain, on the lowest valley, he forbids hunting and capturing, offspring, and strongly forbids menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The interpretation of that mark is made with regard to the millstone if the pile-up is obvious, it's proportional; but if not, you circle around the object your lines or ray intersect.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	Mayes was carefully piercing his lip, and he positioned it against the two lips, causing them to quiver and break apart.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	When you pause over the tips of your lips, try to focus on making your pronunciation clearer and more emphatic on certain words. This will help improve your articulation skills in speaking a new language. Here are some techniques that can assist you:
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should lie on her back with her legs apart and gently insert the tip of the speculum into the vagina, slowly opening it until the cavity is fully visible.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	A propensity to plan and build without consideration for the landscape may result in a loss of connection with one's surroundings over time, especially if that area remains unchanged.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	The translation from Mayan to English for "Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoramo ve que tu insciades aquel ami spatu lat o ami fuelha de mirta" is not possible as the text does not correspond to any known Mayan language or words. It appears that it may be a mix of different languages or possibly an intentional distortion for some reason. Please provide a correct Mayan phrase or sentence for translation into English.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May's suggestion to use bait is wise indeed; after waiting patienterly and quietly, she then proceeds to skillfully place the bait in the desired location.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Indeed, those potions that hasten the flow of one's blood - as vampire repellent, dragon's blood and leeches do mix, with haemoglobin in hand, so carefully fix.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	A healthcare provider should use a wide bore needle to ensure that the plaque is not excessively congealed.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	I have those beautiful days and administer a piece of my soul to them.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	A proper care should be taken to ensure that the other treatment is completed after healing takes place.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Some people have allergies during the birth of their new pets, and then they must consider these following measures accordingly:
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	Chronic rhinitis is an inflammamoinal condition affecting the nasal passages, and there should be no discomfort or harm caused in any manner by it.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Treatment of Edema and Tail Reduction in Female Cats with Red Bot Fly Infestation
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Olden times, I appreciate the tiny pores of veins that surround me as a continuous stream flows through them; and with these aged vessels being formed, it happens just like this.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	In Hebrews 13:24, the text says: "Pray for us also, that we may be granted to gather with you without hindrance; and I declare unto God that it is the will of my heart in your faith."
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	I say that in those days when the father was young and had not yet experienced love, such things were done as a cure because they believed it would make him more fervent.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those ones that are in the womb of the mother and where she feels emotions, are those that are healed.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	He commands that you strike the woman with great force and without mercy; cut off her hair, pierce those delicate arms, and rip apart those tender breasts.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	A propulsive force should be applied on those vessels of the liquid essence from one of the insidious powders, so as to create a fierce bite like that of cayenne and similar substances.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	He approaches his desk for an hour and then takes a break to drink some fresh water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	When the blood flows persistently, hours pass by unnoticed, as if lost in a dream and consumed by memories of summer and past joys, gallantry, and appearances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	First, prepare the apple pie filling by mixing together apples and cinnameby adding some honey to it and sweetening as needed. Then make a crust with flour and butter and pour water over the dough.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the mother refuses to breastfeed, she may choose not to do so; if not, both breasts should be stimulated and the nipples scratched or scraped.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Cut pieces of cotton, algae and grass roots into small strips or fibers. Soak these materials in water until fully saturated. Once soaked, press them onto the desired location to be healed; then cover the area with a clean dressing that is sanitary.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athyl Rog's severe stare causes you to enter the room only when I say so, in accordance with what has been previously mentioned about them.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And he shall live within that which is healthy."
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Accidental perforation during childbirth.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various species of boils occur in women, just as crusts and boils, sores, ulcers, abscesses, herpes, fistulae, tumors, blisters, and other boils.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I will teach you about these diseases and the spices for them as well as their remed cuisines according to that division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	A treatise on the types of boils which are among the illnesses that physicians should be aware of, and if you wish to know how one goes about treating it properly.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	I believe that the pain from an abscess in your groin area may indeed be sharp on pressing and flushing, along with fever at first. Occasionally, you might also notice redness or warmth over the affected area. However, if there is no penetration, it could improve within a few days when treated appropriateneously using methods that help manage the infection until the symptoms subside.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And let the woman spread her skirt over a cushion that she has placed under the pillow; and recline on her side with her feet toward the place where the blood will flow from her vagina, and let her knees be apart as much as is proper, and let her hair hang loose behind.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	The midwife shall follow the right and proper method and administer the instrument by which the opening of the mother is made; the form of which will be determined in those cases that may arise thereafter.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	E hereby the court grants you this document which shall remain with the eldest daughter of the woman, and upon entering into her, it must not exceed the rights or possessions of the eldest daughter and her husband, free from any harm.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	The guitar is larger than the piano's main section, therefore one must place pillows on the floor of the piano's main section to prevent all instruments from being entered into it.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	The priest takes the chalice which holds the wine and pours it into the vessel of the altar, surpassing his own hands as he handles the instrument while reverting the contents until it overflows over the mysteries of the Mother.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the excitement dies down and you're lying on your stomach in a warm bath, hours pass as if time itself has stopped. You feel relaxed and at peace with yourself, letting all thoughts drift away like bubbles rising to the surface of the water. The rhythmic sound of splashing calms your mind, while the soft light from the candles flickers gently on the walls. This serene moment allows you to reflect upon past experiences and embrace a sense of tranquility within yourself.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When E's health is evacuated, hours later you rest on a beach submerged in rotten or vert oil where there are any toxins; and lay the head during REM sleep.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	The priest paused over the altar, holding a consecruted linen cloth submerged in water where marigolds have been built.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Cura appropriately according to the days in which it is applied, the ointment that requires water should be used within the period required for healing.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some vegetable gardens are watered with rainwater or collected from rooftops, and then the water is stored in containers where it undergoes natural filtration through sand or gravel. Afterward, the filtered water returns to nourish the garden beds, promoting healthy plant growth.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the storm occurs during your early childhood, hours before you are instructed to avoid exposure to its effects, have under that same water which we've mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV. The Rise of the Capital
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Ms. Jones teaches midwives on how to properly manage the birth of a biased baby when it is in an unnatural position, according to figure X.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the midwife know during childbirth the natural figure of birth through signs and symbols, and it's when you see a woman straining to pass the afterbirth she desires to smell the air; then she becomes confused because at this moment the part (placenta) detaches from her body, and hastens in delivering the newborn. Therefore, one must know that this expelled part is according to the natural figure of birth, and it's the delivery on top of his/her head, followed by the second stage where the cord may be suspended or hanging over the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Thus he will pronounce those signs, hours cover so that the belly of his wife may be prepared for childbirth in such a way that when it is time to deliver, she delivers lightly upon her bed and receives from him the second sign, which purifies well from any excessive things.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	The one that is another of this kind is not natural and cannot be justified; when he sets his teeth on its prey, it falls before him and the spoils belong to him alone. And behold the head of him and his arm, and the belly of him, and that which he had upon his loins, and as it were a marred statue: and part was cut off from his thighs, and to his feet; but above the roundness of a man.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A mother must be wise and subtle in all matters concerning her child, ensuring she avoids mistakes and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	The earliest known written records of Catalan date from the late 11th century and are found in documents from various towns such as Roses, Agulló, Monells and under the auspices of Bishop Sifred at Serinyà. This early Catalan was similar to other Romance languages already spoken in Western Europe (Latin had been present earlier), with some local peculiarities. The first known Catalan writings that can be identified as such date from much later, in contrast with neighboring Gallo-Romance languages and the Hispano-Roman languages which are only attested on a few documents of doubtful authenticity.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	He placed his cap upon the head of a natural entity (a tree or rock), and that was firmly fixed there. Then he made it difficult for the woman to leave, sometimes showing her great virtue in weakening herself, until those women take him away, and dissolves the essence of him with fenugreek oil and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	The meter got stuck between the two small gaps as the second one went into its hook causing it to get wet inside this unit.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	E presses the woman's belly until she gives birth to the baby.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If Maynard is not absent, the hours confirm that the woman shall be purified from both mealweed (mucellaje de ptilli) and fenugreek (mucellacu de fenugrec).
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	The priest placed his hands on the woman's head and shoulders, instructing her to close her eyes and sneeze as much as she could in one hour; he kept his hand on her head and nose for an entire hour until she had sneezed so much that it would bring about immediate relief.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If you've forgotten two of the dishes during lunchtime, try to reduce those by little bit at a time.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If the woman does not obey the commandment, she shall take some stones in her hands and throw them onto the ground, while keeping herself standing so as to avoid falling during the process.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	"If the ones mentioned do not return and the mother dies soon after, those hours without them will be felt in the warmth of that child or its love towards her mother; such a bond would have been irreplaceable."
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The formation of the embryo's attachment to its shells.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	He places his hands over the beads on his rosary, while praying to those in whom he believes, and slowly shifting the bead from one finger to another, until it becomes bigger, then stretching out each small bead to become slightly larger.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Upon the crosses, within an hour of your command, may he express himself freely and turn away from any conditions, unless it is otherwise determined by God Himnself.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If we don't reapply the oil within three hours, it will take little by little until you pause that second figure naturally because at that time the interval without application will have increased significantly.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	It is prohibited to consume large amounts of water that has been reboiled, old shaving foam and dissolved gum; also, any hard or sharp objects should not be inserted in the mortar for good percussion. The cone-shaped instrument should be hollowed out with water on the woman's vaginal opening, near the bottom of her abdamen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Beneath the azure sky and clear waters, seek to attain serenity of mind.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the matches are no longer allowed to smoke, hours pass as they struggle with nicotine withdrawal and cravings for cigarettes.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	Evan the sub-fumigation technique requires one to lie down on a cushioned surface, and then cover oneself with a blanket or sheet up to the chin, enscuffing breaths through your nose as much as possible for an hour. Afterward, slowly remove the covering while continuously snuffling and exhaling through your mouth, and once done, gently massage the lower abdomen area, which will help induce a deep sleep shortly after completion of this process.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The influence of heritage on our dreams and memories.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	And Quan the vixen sneaks into this manner, little by little your engineers will interfere with their plans; and she'll make herself at ease upon his shoulder, while her weight presses down on him, and those around her join in laughter, mocking his efforts.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	In this recipe, we start by seasoning the baby artichokes with salt and pepper before gradually submerging them in boiling water where they will be cooked until ready for serving as an appetizer.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the egg is not fertilized, hours later its weight will decrease and it moves to those areas where intense movement occurs, gradually sliding towards the exit as smaller parts begin to separate from the main body.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	A prop also enters the room and slowly approaches her mother's belly, gently patting it as she goes along. Then he instructs his mother to express herself in whatever way feels comfortable while focusing on relaxing her body.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The sediment from the late period is hanging on one of its hills.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	When in the process of reducing sugar, if you are unable to decrease it further, then gradually raise the woman and make her go there.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If they cannot fly, hours will lay upon the leaf, and with violent concern, events of their love's conclusion are narrated, and thus affectionately, matters which I and you have discussed from memories.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the child is born alive, and there are no signs of life after cutting the umbilical cord, then the midwife should carefully examine the body according to its natural shape, and instruct the woman to lie down so that she may expel it.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The insemination of the egg over the expanded ovary takes place on the second day after its release.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife will hold the mother's belly and gently rotate that little one by small movements, making it easier for the baby.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	Cum es e quant so es igual alt, e luc alora pause asupra coasta do lume ce-am răbdat de aceeai si de mucele?
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	The wind blows the small reed slowly, and when you have done so, let that bough rest over an ash-stake rightly aligned, then command it to lean towards left, and order her to be bound; and make her sneeze at my command.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Death of the fetus in utero on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	A horrendousness of the second kind, according to this method, and occasionally your finger slides along with it as you remove any moisture from your nail bed.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the fish is hanging above your face and the light hits it at a certain angle, periodically try to inspect its belly; but make sure it's not trapped and alive.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	In the language of Old Occitan (Occitan medieval), this passage reads as follows: "I empêcherai la fèsta d'entrez entresqu'aquel segon que cove; e manda a la dompna, cui si comprema al seu semblant, alcunes veguadas; e el será fora jacent liur, se Dieu o vol."
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The translation of the Latin phrase "Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum" is "The fate of many twins or a large number of children". This could refer to a scenario where many siblings, possibly from multiple sets of twins, share an unfortunate destiny.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	The two mountain peaks have remained untouched until now, and a few trees still stand there, three or four at least. But this water source seems foreign and out of place here; it'amo more due to natural causes rather than human activity.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Those that are already multiplied and separated by sex, the embryo becomes like a fetus naturally as part of its natural development; however, some instances can be considered unnatural or abnormal occurrences. The egg splits in certain cases to form identical twins, while other times it leads to fraternal siblings due to multiple ovulations and fertilizations.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	A child'amissed is difficult to conceive and reached the point that we have spoken of non-natural figures; now you must treat them as you have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	The wise midwife provides the delicate and subtle water that brings ease and skillfulness, as well as timeliness, according to her expertly prepared methods for ensanciamento in health care.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	In utero, certain memories are formed from embryos and those that abort.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Mays's medicinal mixture acts as an antidote which you command to the illness that reads the pores while they are extended and equalized; therefore, his craft of healing is made in the form of a myrtle leaf bandage.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	In the study of mathematics, four fundamental operations are addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, each having a different appearance but all related to numbers as their core subject matter.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI (76). In this chapter, we will delve into the historical development of the United States' capital city and its significance in the nation'cuest political landscape. From the early days as a small village to becoming the bustling hub of American democracy that it is today, Washington D.C.'s evolution continues to be an intriguing tale worth exploring.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	The removal of the fetus upon death.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	I do not treat the dead body in water that we have mentioned in the division of medicines and it is not necessary to use an embalming substance, unless you judge the woman to be in good health and not at risk for diseases due to accidents.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	The woman is lying on her back, with the head slightly tilted downwards and her limbs slightly raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister holds the responsibility of offering a portion or an equivalent to him, as long as it is tied in the leg by such means that his own interest does not extend beyond the extraction of the object.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	The mother of my love moistens her mouth with oil, honey, and mucilage from aloe, fenugreek, and flaxseeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the mother approached her young ones with olive oil and honey, gently easing them into sleep, and she found comfort in the chair where they remained soundly asleep.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	When you are convenient and thirsty, consider whether the juice is ready to pour over your head or in other areas such as your eyes, mouth, palate, beard, furcula (wishbone), near your sides, or under your armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	The settlement is located on the banks of Lu River, in the Pentenil area, or near the coast.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	In that place where the curve of it makes its way towards left, and interrupts the curvature in that spot which is between said lines on the right, while maintainnng as much ease and comfort as possible, go into one or more of those spots we have mentioned until you reach your destination.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	In order to create a balance and consistency in the design of another shoe or when it's necessary, make sure that both shoes are similar, and not extended solely according to its shape.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	However, Ans is still of great importance in the whole event, as it was created just like during the time of its origin when there were similar occurrences.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	In a large bowl, combine luquid (aquo) that is between hot and cold temperatures; if any portion of the liquid is retained, wait for some time until it cools to room temperature where the mother can gently touch it with her lips and taste it carefully before giving it back.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the departure of the vessel is delayed, then their anchors will be moved to another location near where it was initially moored; and they shall do so in such a way that the entire vessel remains secure.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	Mays is the key that opens neither left nor right, and it cannot be reduced due to its curvature; so often they cover it over with a wrapping, and insert it into that space where all is outside, cutting either at the joint of the lock or in the lock side.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	I see what you're doing in the other one and with these two weights.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	The head of the fountain is large or it has a leak during its flow, or it is at the top of the pressurized water, which can interfere between the mentioned spiny space and creates a gap in the cap to drain the water out, or that reveals an instrument called "alundat", whose shape comes from other instruments included on the cover.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	The seemingly complicated sentence in Catalan reads: "Es semblació faça si·l fet és de gran cap per natura, e la hora cove que inscide aquell am algema tu, o que prengue aquell am alunda així com havem dit; i aprop extra les osses am les forces". The English translation is: "It seems to be the case if the act has great natural authority. And at that time we hope it will insist on those who are stubborn, or take hold of those who are weak as we have said; and moreover, beyond bones, there are strengths."
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	The cap also plays an important role in the evaporation of moisture present within its structure.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	It's not difficult nor urgent; you can tell him whenever it's convenient for you at your earliest opportunity.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the marks on your stomach are pus-filled or moist and wet, wait a few hours to pierce that area where you feel the moisture present inside.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	The feet are usually placed under the chair, now and then slightly turned to the left of their body, directing them towards the mouth is also slightly turned to the left.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Mays if you are coarted (tied) up and need to escape, cover yourself with that cloth that you have around your body, then cut through the belly and groin area in which it runs so that you can get out of those restraints.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are not on their guard and turn the cap back to them, then when they have it in their left hand, if the mother's mouth is closed, put it into your right palm as close as possible to her head, and slip it through one or two fingers, then throw it onto those you wish.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother's mouth has an abscess causing harm to the baby during nursing, it should not be fed for some time; rather, have her express milk with a method involving wet and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	E apply compresses; and follow the patient with warm waters that soothe and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the fever is on your side, try to rest as much as possible and drink plenty of fluids. Also administer any medication that has been prescribed for this condition.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If immersion is not possible, hours become more dangerous, and extraction becomes difficult.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	I command you not to leave any evidence of the second coin.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Once you have completed your entire operation, allocate the time we discussed for curing boils that occur as a result of excessive scratching from scars left by previous ones.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you get a wound with blood loss, apply pressure and elevate the injured area to reduce bleeding; then seek medical attention for further treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	A woman gave birth to a stillborn child in her womb and placed it upon the fire. However, she became pregnant again, and this time, the child was born alive.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that he has had an ongoing wart on his belly for a long time; and now it's infected and starting to swell up, causing discomfort.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	He fervently appealed to the Lord for care and treated him with medicine for long periods of time; however, the illness was not cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	The child's curiosity is immense as they question the mother about various causes of strong attraction and the essence of one bone, along with how it can take many years to form another; also puzzled by this phenomenon in the abdomen where there are no bones.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Therefore, you might consider that they were the bones of a deceased individual.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	In times of old, a plague befell the land, and from its clutches emerged motz, creatures born of desperate measures. A woman lived amidst her thousand fields, scattered with these beings as she sought to eradicate the illness. Over lengthy spans of time, she crafted them in such a manner that they became but small hands, tools for her labor and survival.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	Yes, it is indeed true that the primary aim of medicine is not only to relieve suffering but also to help individuals achieve better health through scientific knowledge and medical interventions. Medicine focusn's on diagnosing diseases, preventing illnesses, treating injuries, and managing chronic conditions using evidence-based practices, medications, surgeries, therapies, and other advanced techniques that improve the quality of life for patients.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the types of instruments that are necessary to extract coal.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Format of inheritance when the mother is deceased.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	Here is the form of stalemate in which two victors are on opposite ends of a board with two pieces each.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	This small and subtle device for tightening is made of willow or poplar wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	E is the length of each beam as given by two statements and the margin between these beams as stated in one statement; and in the middle part of both beasters are their adjustments which have been established, among which the length is a little more than a palm and somewhat less than half a finger, and the width is two fingers or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	The two supplements are interposed in the mother'n mouth so that it remains open, just as with those where you rotate the two prescribed pieces.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Certes, unha alternativa plena de sinuais e discreta para a que ante propuestas era: "Unha forma outra de acordo con essa mais cautelosa e velada". Aínda nacele envolvemento da sua mensaxe manténse, pero o modo como se comunica muda un pouco.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Using tweezeburgers according to the pattern of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the edge of his two additional pieces there are such lengths, and the length of each piece is one span, while their width is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	Now I will reveal the hidden message to you. The first letter of each word in Spanish is what we need. Let's decode it together:
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Here's the translation of your text into English:
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the phobia they describe here is known as "Claustrophobia": Claustrophobia refers to an intense fear of confined or enclosed spaces. Individuals with this phobia often experience severe anxiety and panic attacks when in situations such as elevators, small rooms, crowded areas, or even while wearing tight clothing. It is one of the most common specific phobias that can significantly impact a person's daily life.
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Tipus de incentivament que s'ha proporcionat al conceput.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Title: The Great Cap's Friendship Adventure
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	A toothpick is a tool that was used in the past as a pair of pliers with teeth at one end, and sometimes it had long handles like modern pliers, which also have teeth similar to succeeding ones where it is inserted and cut.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The phrase "Amsedat pauc" seems to be a constructed or fictional term, as it doesn't correspond to any known language. Therefore, translating it directly into English is not possible without additional context or information about its origin and meaning. However, if we break down the words individually:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Shape of a hedgehog with a quill (English): The form of an animal known for its spiny coat, often associated with the symbol of a cautious and shy creature. This is commonly referred to as a "hedgehog".
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of a cone-bearing tree with two spikes:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Una forma especial de fórceps que se utiliza para cerrar el hueco por el cual sale el cuero cabelludo del bebé al nacer es la fórceps Simpson. Las fórceps Simpson están diseñadas con una curvatura especícuamente adaptada a este propósito, permitiendo un control preciso durante el parto asistido y minimizando cualquier presión sobre el cuero cabelludo del niño.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a spiral that has two extremities at which the tip is divided:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Two types of Lutz jumps in figure skating are the Single Lutz and the Double Lutz. Here's a brief description of each:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	Those musical instruments are being exercised; and as the varieties of them increase and they become more refined by craftsmen, there is greater likelihood for their performance to be perfected and thus better appreciated by people in quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	In this case, the language used is Occitan (also known as Provençal), a Romance language spoken in southern France, Italy'cuatru Catalàn and Spain. The translation of your sentence would be "Those instruments you have here are no longer necessary, because their necessity is not excusable."
De extraccio de la segondina.	Removal of the secondary suture.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	The squirelet is retained from childbirth until you command the mother that retains her own ale, and afterwards allows it to cough as a condition, and strengthen your hand over its mouth and nose, and if so done, well-done.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	In the evening, as E is silent and hours fly by like a wave piercing through the fabric of time, pause upon those herbs that burn with life at the mouth of the mother. Thus they come together - camomile, calendula, rosemary, sage, lavender, cinnamamoa, and stevia, their essence blending harmoniously in a soothing tea.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs or some of them are submerged in water during the boil, and place that over the heat.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	A professional inserts the endoscope into the mouth of the patient and gently guides it in until you see the esophagus' lining on the screen.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	A) Based on the speed at which it had just sneezed, the second wave immediately lost momentum.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If May's child has not been weaned yet and this illness occurs, then command the midwife to immerse his left hand in sesame oil or olive emulsion, and insert it into the anus, checking afterward for any sign of relief. Then, once found, gradually withdraw that slowly while ensuring May's comfort during the process.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	The lock needs to be replaced as both the left and right sides are worn out, which makes it easier.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	"Adjust the amount of contact accordingly so that it complies with and avoids any violations."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother's mouth is obstructed, we have repeated the incantation of healing, purification and medicinal herbs treatment for the wound.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If the remedy I have mentioned is not applied to all of the causes as recommended, then you should guard against falling into abstraction over that issue; instead, let it be conveyed from there to the mouth of the mother in accordance with the woman's recipe and properly administer the antidote; because this will cause her illness to perish within 12 days, and she will dissolve and recover.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	Mays quan se poyreys (When someone is feeling nauseous), es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquò li conduirà a la malaltia; i aconsi que siguen un tratament subfumigatori y adequad.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	The Old Hall's ancient oak tree has a subtle scent of mushrooms and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	In the form of a medical device, when the woman is under-nourished, there should be retention of menses and secondary sexual characteristics.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	The sky is dark or full of stars, either way it's mesmerizing.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	Pause the subtle extremity near the fire and the broad end over the flame, and gently lower it onto the tongs of the fork.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	"It is advisab to consume that which lies within, and indulge in another."
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	The circumcision of the child is not perforated.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	As a child, he had to endure the humiliating and painful punishments inflicted by his uncle'ebs, which were subtle yet overwhelming.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	The maid shall pierce the waxed cloth at that spot I indicated earlier; and if not, pierce the inner lining instead, but be careful not to touch the sacking underne cuffs.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	The sheep was peacefully grazing on the grassy hillside, and it cared for that young lamb within its warm embrace.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	May be afraid of being exhausted; sometimes taking a break with an inhaler for several days and allowing the child to recover.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	E ja accideys oppilacionis ductus por consolidatio pestulatis vel apostematis; ergo coacides quae consolidationis sit, et appropere sanetur aqua ut diximus de curacio et plombi.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	The healing of the abscesses that I left behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that develop in the remnants of tissues are small and superficial ones, which originate from the skin surface or within the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	F is a fissure or crack in the ground, often related to volcanic activity or other natural processes that cause the earth's surface to split open.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	The old wound site is characterized by white, damp blistering and subtle discoloration, with some areas of surrounding edema from these leaking vessels.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those with those wonderful powers over water are often able to make it flow from these sources and out into the world; some even have bad effects on its exit, and much less control over its evaporation due to winds.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	These wounds are from those fistulas that have developed in the spaces penetrating between the bladamo and within the vaginal wall, as well as through the junction of the vagina and the hymen. In English, it can be translated to:
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	The difference between a penetrating and non-penetramoing anus (rectal) fistula is that in the former, you aim to insert your instrument gently into the rectum, while attempting subtly to advance or withdraw it during its tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	In this case, I believe you're referring to temptation or seduction. It's the subtle lure that captivates your mind and thoughts, drawing you towards something desirable yet potentially harmful, like a plume of smoke enticing from afar but made of equine fur wrapped around your words.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not experience any symptoms such as diarrhea, nausea or bloating, then as we have said, the hours pass in awareness that it is non-invasive, and the hours count towards recovery.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladader or meat of the gland, its prognosis is the leakage of urine from that and it requires medical intervention to be resolved.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	When Mays is penetrating at the joint of the knee or into the bone and causes intense pain in the surrounding area, it signals that they should seek immediate medical attention as this may indicate a fracture; and that they might experience bruising temporamenents; and that medication does not help nor heal in that part.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those cases of perineal fistulae which cannot be cured as a whole, the treatment and healing depend on the efforts and interventamens by the skilled surgeons upon whom you rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not fragrant nor ancient, healthy and fair I trust to be as you recommend, and the one that I have already tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	The evil disease jaundice affects you greatly within your household and raises its head against you; things tend to be inclined towards the bottom of it, if one tries entering by plumb line or compasses, know where this attempt is made.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If you feel unwell around the corner (referring to a place), now cover your mouth with what you say inside the corner.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you sit in your designated spot with the intention of letting it become transparent and enterable, another time when you feel between your designated spot and that vessel or flesh, then know for certain that it is penetrating; hence do not act upon it, because it is not healthy, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, they still preferred to stay in safe houses where the risk was lower.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	In the place where you desire healing power, one should create a subtle caution following its described manner, and then insert that cauterized object into the fistula until it reaches around the skin; also repeat inserting those small pieces or three times when you know they are well-placed, so as to properly adjust all the resembling chick feathers.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	A prop of the leaf that is wrapped in a border within which all those bones are adjusted, and also of the liquid medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, if it heals, you will be well; otherwise, at no time can it be cured by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If a person is suffering from hemorrhoids and wishes to treat them at home using natural methods, here are some steps they can follow for relief:
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	However, the flesh wounds in question were sutured with a needle and thread, not tied off with those types of materials mentioned above.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May sting on the skin times when it enters between your chest and your lower back while you are awake; for up to ten hours or more depending on how much hotter instrument used, cauterization with fire or acute medicine is needed: so it's adjusted from those areas where scabs have formed, and removal of the dried blood from moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	The crab's legs wrapped in the protective shell or calcium trio within which the organ are located, and over time, the plague affecting tough flesh generation and solidification occurs.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	"Antibiotcu medicine, which have antibacterial properties and effectiveness; how long they are taken depends on the recovery process, when healed does not fear relapse."
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the anal fistula runs through the internal sphincter and is extended superficially from your skin to inside the rectum, it may cause you to feel discomfort in that area. You should consult a healthcare provider for proper evaluation and treatment options.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	If one hundred tries to tempt you or her with something immediately in front of you, either by physical means or through persuasion, it's not an operation against you but according to a path of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	In order to treat a haemorrhoid in one of three ways: either by cauterizing it as we have previously mentioned; or by removing it if the procedure can be performed safely and achieve healing, without causing any harm or complications to the surrounding tissue; and with proper care that ensures optimal healing; or by elongating the flap and cleaning out all accumulated material within that area as we have previously mentioned, either through a trial method or using another sharp instrument of extreme precision; and making sure to perform thorough cleansing of any fistulous tissues found in the affected region, then striving for complete healing of the entire area. If the resulting pus is not solidified, open up the external part of the haemorrhoid and if it continues to be painful or inflamed, widen the internal fissure on the anal canal side.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Some fistulas can be closed using this method: when you introduce the catheter into the fistula, it should be inserted longitudinamoze around the skin surface at the level of the penis and along the margin of the glans, a few hours prior to attempting perforation with the needle-like instrument following this procedure.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	The translation of the text from Valencian to English is as follows: "And she has entered into that faithful ring of your fields or around them; and a precious jewel tries to enter into the socket where it finds its happiness."
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Mays (may) take the tip of the lamb fat and pierce it into the edge of your rectum, then slowly insert that piece of fat all the way in until you feel resistance; carefully remove the tip of the fat and trim both ends so they're even. Then try to enter each end per day or two, and when more flesh is incised by the fat at those points where the fats are inserted between the two extremities, insert that bit further inside.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	A proper care shall be taken to prevent the spread until it is fully contained and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the abscess is not penetrating enough, let it be made to penetrate in whatever way you prefer, without using any tool except for your own hands so that you do not make an incision; and ensure that it heals properly within.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of spatulatum spinus is the one in which a fistula has been healed. The curvature of which is sharp on one end and the other part is not sharp; thus it does not insert there where it is unnecessary, just as sometimes occurs.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	The stitch of the gums in which a sin runs into that intent.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Morrowind is divided into two regions, one of which lies between the hills that appear to be made from carbon and the others resemble butter with its greasy texture.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	The one who has no fear of small or large things, whose heart is pure and steadfast in all seasons, and whose actions are beyond reproach at the edges as well - they will find peace within themselves.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, the ones that were left have less moisture per month, with which water trickles or a small amount of blood-like substance continues to flow, and is according to the color of the earth.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The curse of that which is being taken from her, she commands the evil one to become warm and pressurized within the metal bowl until all the colored pigments appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And so you shall be bound by the chains or that which you possess therein lies those belonging to your uncle; and he imposes these upon his relatives' rapiers.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the wounds are not suitable for use in those places due to moisture and softening of the skin, then apply dressings there with a rough cloth or cotton or lamb's wool fabric, and wrap them around it. Then insert some fine gauze into the wound, sprinkle a little powder over it as indicated earlier in the chapter on cauterization, so that they become dry at those places; or perform cauterization as mentioned earlier in the section on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	A is responsible for those who seek treatment in that area where they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the anus does not respond to external stimulation, it may indicate a condition called anal fissures where the pain is severe and sharp, and the area should be washed with water that is in the rectum and effectively cleanses when the bowel movement occurs.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If you have hemorrhoids on your buttocks or near the anus and they cause discomfort or pain, here's what to do for treatment:
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	He who has the skill and authority to perform this procedure shall follow these instructions carefully: take a sterile needle and gently insert it into the bleeding vessels on one side, then guide the needle through the other part of the tissue using the vessel as a guide. Once you have reached the desired depth, wrap the two ends of the suture material around each other at the end farthest from the needle, and tighten firmly but gently. Then withdraw the needle while maintaining the tension on the sutures to complete the ligation.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. The Earth was formless and void; darkness covered the surface deep water (tehom). And there were currents along the surface of the tehom, but no vegetation on the land. Then God said, "Let there be light."
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	The sun sets behind the hills, painting the sky in shades of orange and red; it then rests upon the curve of the horizon before commanding the night to take over.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here'amo inside that box; and when it is opened, heal those who are injured or another remedy within which they may be cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of Fistulas
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Vegetation fires caused by natural events such as lightning strikes or drought-induced cracking.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	Cum so antiqua et non aucta in quaedam medicina, herbarum genus dicitur cum radice spatium aut ungula intus facta humidis habente et hostia datam de aqua coraliae; et prohíbens eorum consolidationem. Ad praeclara cura oportet quae hanc inveniant se consolidatis.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The language in the given text is not Italian, but rather Ladin, specifically Badia dialect spoken in the Dolomites region of Italy. Here's the translation into standard Italian and then to English:
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The cure of Almasemir is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	"You should know that the spinal cord is crucial and cannot be replaced if not for its similarity to the top of the clavicle (collarbone), as it's formed throughout the entire body but mainly in the parts below, such as near the ribs and along the sides. Be cautious, for any damage can cause severe pain."
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then let there be taken water which is in the bucket of the auger, and it should be held by the tongs or on an umbrella, and removed from its reach; and proceed with that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you choose to do so, proceed with the second point that follows in your document.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Mayer's goosefoot is a small, rough, round prominence on the surface of the skin, with spider veins often seen in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The curse of love is that you extend and inscribe it with the heart or pen within your soul.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If it is boiling, apply heat or use an antibianguizing agent as advised; you have hot water or a strong medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	The translated text is: "The inverse and non-inverse elements are the ones I'm discussing here."
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Mays's ant hill is a small elevated pile of soil and debrebris on the ground surface, in which the queen ant resides deep within the center, while it appears to be mildly irritating like ants when touched around its perimeter.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The cure for lupus is to take a goose feather or turkey quill pipe, and if it's strong, place that over the worm inside which you will enclose with the pipe of the substances; then twirl your ma hand around the pipe while inserting that into the circuit of the worm. Place that on the edge of the flesh, and remove the worm from its nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to create a metal or iron needle as shown in this manner (assuming the term "needle" is being used loosely and we're talking about crafting or shaping rather than medical instruments):
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The sleeve of the jacket subtly trails behind, muffled (it's not pierced), wrapped around it such that its light is absorbed and reflected by it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you want to kill ants, place them on the cauterization spot as soon as it's mentioned in the ant cauterization process at the capital of Cauteria.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The way I administer the instruments you have is by ensuring that they are properly maintained, calibrated, and used in accordamo to their specific guidelines for accuracy and safety. Additionally, I regularly review the results obtained from these instruments to ensure reliable data collection.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some cremes are made of Argentan or latex or melted wax; and some creams are made from those instruments small and large according to the cases administered by them, for that which is administered in the treatment of young children must be small, and from those whose buttocks are furry or hairy, the cremes should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	Crater lake, great and few.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the tube is longer than this bag, and it extends from there the same way as shown in this illustration.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The tip of the previously mentioned tube, which is inserted into the anus and is somewhat blind (i.e., not protruding), has a diameter of about one Leon (a unit equivalent to approximately 2.7 m). In its length there are two openings, with one opening on each side; the diameter of these holes corresponds to the roughness and thickness of the tube, which is relatively wide compared to their size.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	Let S be the bag in which are stored the urine of animals or sheep wool, and the proportion shall be one pint (1/2 quart).
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	E should be pierced in sections through the use of drilling; and then smooth out the space between these sections, making it evenly sized.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	The procedure is as follows for applying the poultice of that herb outside the field known by its common name, "Heal-All," or any other similar herb you have available; and prepare a bag with it: Once placed on the body, tightly wrap the bag around the affected area using two distinct pieces of cloth secured firmly. The characteristic of this poultice is that as soon as an individual applies the bag containing the medicine, which has been warmed according to one's tolerance for heat; and make sure it isn't too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	The bladder is suspended over the patient's back, and its openings are held up with sticks or rods so that some men can look inside it; then a suitable ointment of oil, almond cream, or fenugreek paste is applied to the exterior. Then the instrument is inserted gently into the bladder until fullness is reached, and another person squeezes out the contents with vigorous force into the bag that contains it entirely. The bladder is then removed from the catheter.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If medicine causes excessive sweating, drink as much water as possible; and if you sleep all through the night like that, it may worsen in a dream.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	In cases of severe stomach distress and excessive vomiting, seek immediate medical attention to treat the condition appropriaturately.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If children have ingrown hairs or pus-filled spots on their genitals, the symptoms can be subtle and often go unnoticed by parents. These conditions are caused by razor burn or improper shaving techniques in older kids, while younger children may develop them due to natural bodily processes like puberty.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Treatment of the Plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	The division of the treatment for water parasites that is appropriate to free use, and I hereby state the treatment for those with my herbs and medicine according to the prescription.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	I believe that the floods are diverse depending on when they occur and according to the location where the floods take place.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	Because of various reasons, bruises can resemble the marks left by stones, cuts from knives or scisseblack ice picks, blows, hammers, axe strokes, and similar effects due to these types of causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	In my body I bear wounds as deep in the skin so much like a scar that appears on the head, or neck, or foot, or stomach, or face, and such likenesses to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	Here, I present the recommendation for treating certain diseases which require reflection and guidance concerning other ailments.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	In the first chapter, we will explore the basics of the plague, as a prelude to discussing antibiotoken in the third chapter's opening.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	When a simple cut or abrasion on the shin occurs and it is not a fracture, consider the following: if it's caused by a stone or similar object, simply cleanse it thoroughly as it may result in significant swelling and fear of developing an abscess. In such cases, one should think about performing a cranial bleeding (epidural hematoma) immediately; do not delay this. Extract blood from that area according to the amount of venous pressure if there is no other cause preventing drainage, especially if the bleeding originated from the wound is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	E is the surgical removal of a diseased limb, and monitor for signs of infection such as redness, swelling, pain or fever, and also check for any serious wounds or injuries from heavy foods (injury caused by eating large pieces).
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May's menu strictly prohibits any meat or alcohol consumption; dishes are smaller portions of vegetarian cuisleteam and do not include either option.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	The patient develops an abscess on the leg if they experience prolonged exposure to contaminated water or come into contact with an object that has been contaminated, such as a rusty nail or soil.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Mayes is sure of the footprint he saw on the beach, hours after it appeared, if it's fresh and his blood hasn't dried in the dust where I had suggested to him earlier.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	The air is different now; those moments of pause that he spent waiting for her to get better.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Whether the plague is great or not depends on factors such as space and appearance, if the lips are not sewn too tightly using needlework techniques, then at times adjust them according to the recommended stitching technique of yours for aesthetic purposes.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Mays the plague is discovered in its early stages on the body and not retained within it but merely held back by a slight suspension, at this time he inserts that and applies medicines to restore the flesh with a bandage nearby, commanding the evil spirit to be expelled from foods such as grains, fruits, etc., while taking on their semblance, during which it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If you fall in the decaying mud and don't stick to it, soon your hands will sink deep into it as if pulling it out, trying to grasp onto nothing.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	In this case of the wound being an artery from which blood flows but has not been stopped by medicines, you should ask if it is that non-pulsating one; then you should excise (cut) that area with spatula or lancet, and if necessary to stop bleeding despite what we have advised, cauterize within the spot where blood flow has ceased.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these plagues are simple and small, the cause of their fear is negligible; therefore you sprinkle this powder over them, so that once solidified, the air changes those things.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of preparing the polvera is as follows: oil from pressed olives one part, dragon's blood resin two parts, and a non-extinct substance three parts; everything must be thoroughly crushed and sieved, then let it sit until filled with lukewatury fluid, and tightly wrapped around the object to be cured, coagulating in place.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	In strict terms of ethics, one should avoid manipulation and lies; otherwise, as long as it is not excessive or harmful, since there's no inherent ethical issue in using medicine once it has healed you.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Any word by itself forms water alone, when not accompanied by you in the present here and hand of dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	E should carry out this surgical procedure on the large wounds when it is necessary that they are pinned up to them and their edges are narrowed, and if his air has not changed, the ones which he had cut earlier.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air gets altered, especially in summer times, this can change its position with regard to this dust cloud, so you should avoid staying too long under those heights or resting on places where water has accumulated recently, and also refrain from sitting on areas covered by flour powder mixed with water and honey; instead, opt for other healing remedader that have been cured.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	May's decides to go to the beach right away as his foot is slightly injured, so he takes some ointment with him.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	I would like to take care of the skull fractures that are occurreing now.
De las plaguas del col.	The blossoms of the cotton plant.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	During the plague outbreak in the village, there were no differences in hours worked and medication use, and between cases when it was simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	The nerve of the neck is incised or artery; hours if it's a nerve, it isn't in its entirety but should be avoided to avoid causing severe stinging sensations. This is similar to knowing and saying that it appears like glass and resembles such things as nozzle sockets which do not harm the nerves but oppose them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	The nerves do not hesitate to transmit any cause at all, for the substance of the nerves is excitable and its flow depends on the brain, which controls all other body parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If you have any medicinal herbs that are not dissolved in water, pour some distilled or non-distilled water over them and stir until they are thoroughly soaked; then add other mineral stones according to this method, and use a mortar and pestle.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, he uses his skill to sew and mend it, or narrows its lips for him, and then cleans that area so it can be healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	The translation of the given text from Catalan to English is as follows: "Mays's illness involves either deep depressions or elevations in the lower part of the brain, during which that area becomes swolamoisened." However, please note that some words might be misspelled due to a lack of context.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	May's disease is a condition in which an artery on the leg becomes insucuated and allows blood flow; subsequently, it separates or dries up that area, or ties off that area, or cauterizes it if needed due to water contact.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	The glands of the scrotum or testicles are saved, then you adjust the edges of the skin with suture on the backside of the scrotum and do not touch that; turn over that one and reduce it to its natural figure, then strengthen that by stitching carefully. Keep it in an ointment where there is sterilization and stimulation until healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plow has been made in your land as a favor and you own it, then reap that field; and if it is now with fragments of oxen, throw away all those pieces which can be done without. And what cannot be repaired, keep within until the ploughing season ends and let its parts be spread out to dry in the sun before being separated and thrown into a heap.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	The recent rainfall has settled dust over the area you recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If Maya is in the sea and suffers from a fisherman's fistula (presumably a foot injury), it will be healed by the power of water, which may come back to his mind at his own capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From the strikes of an axe or any resembling action between the shoulders and made to the side, or with a chisel or hammer or throw or similar actions.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the blow is from a stone or a club and the number of times it's struck, you should also consider if the weather has strong winds when the illness attacks; then know that the storm can be deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If the wound is not deep and the bleeding is recent, pause for a while before attempting to stop it completely; and don't use any method that retains blood in the depth of the wound or that causes it to return to your body, but rather wait on something attractive, and unlock those two veins by daylight.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not on your person, during high tide in the mouth of the whirlpool, use a large piece of cloth to absorb any liquid that drips from you; and make sure illness sleeps upon the sea so its influence runs out there.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	"If the fever lasts for three days or more but does not lead to severe spasm, tremor of cold limbs, or stricture of throat, and if you observe other signs of improvement, then the plague is considered cured. Therefore, administer care to those still weakened by it until they are fully recovered."
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	"Mays if the clearing of your debt is justified and all time it's possible, please inform us when you have made payment for the fistula surgery; we will then proceed with deducting from your account."
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the wound is a simple incision of skin or cotton and it's shallow on the surface of the stone or wood, then apply that liquid mentioned before (the glue), if it's thick, or with powder, if it'cups small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	Maya had buried treasure in the grave, and now she wants to extract those jewels, hours ago she drove away the darkness with her lightning heart to retrieve them, they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If the hours are not separate, the tide will rise before long and wash away their extraction that has been left uncovered.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	The swelling of other injured body parts can also contribute to the healing process, just like we have discussed with the lympressio (swelling) of water.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From the wounds of my stomach.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort in the abdab area can be quite large or small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	There are two main types of nerve fibers within the spinal cord or meninges, causing an intrusion due to their powerful and subtle fusion.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is made difficult by another method, and it's even more challenging to reduce their influence unless you intervene in their area very soon, as they become overgrown and thickened making the intervention harder.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best way to reduce packaging is actually in plastic, as it's also difficult for both types mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	The surgical repair of an abdomeal hernia involves four main steps or procedures; however, the same techniques are applicable to other types of hernias as well.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other sutures connect to the others as well; however, they are only proper in the midline at the sagittal suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I hereby reconfirm the following expositions and declarations.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	When the fog is small and there's some cause for the skin to contract due to that, it becomes difficult to reduce such. At times this water is in one of two manners: either by the thinness of the disruption as we have mentioned, or when the skin has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	So now let's see, at this point you should soak the bread dough in water alone, or that you hold it under running water, and cypress, and spice, and emmer wheat which is infused into a container from where it has been resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some filtered water contains substances that are more effective than plain water alone in relieving inflammamoins.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Hence let you also perform the prescribed solution, then hydrate your body with enough water, for which quality is high and sweet, as well as mild, since it helps to flush out his own waste by little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	"May's is excused from this treatment, as it separates the disruption a little with an instrument into which embedded are morbid gums."
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first curative measure is better when it's owned that not only the drying section but also prevention and lack thereof are taken into account.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	According to the document, in legal terms, a "secured note" is typically referred to as a type of promissory note that is backed by collatereral. This means that if the borrower fails to meet their repayment obligations, the lender has the right to seize and sell the asset (collateral) used to secure the loan in order to recover the funds owed.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One batch of acute pie and another non-acute, with a subtle crust, but not as subtle as puff pastry; rather slightly obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Then the plague is intensified and people are forced to move out of their homes, seeking shelter according to the form of their nature, in their own place, if possible on water; better yet.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	Mays quand la quen est disrupta, elle est dans la partie basse du ventre, et c'est alors que tu fais le mauvais geste avec ta main droite, et par toi-même tu pousses tes fesses plus haut ou plus bas. Et si elle est dans la partie haute de ton ventre, alors cela va te faire mal au cou et à la nuque, et les parties que tu as écartées avant vont être douloureuses.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	If the disruption occurs in one of the two stomach compartments, then pause your thinking and consideration for some time so that the affected area can recover more quickly than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	I will take care of the great lakes and the minor lacks.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In the smallpox scars, pause for a moment so that your prayer is between your most beloved ones; let the minister hold the entire disruption in his hands and adjust its lips, then reveal it from there to whoever sewed the suture due to any reason.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture technique: one in which you grab the needle and take stitches according to the width of the wound; close to the edge of the disrupted area on the ring mentioned before, strengthen the needle through once, or else do not put the two ends of the thread into the holes at both extremities of the tendon, but rather go between them in such a way that you have passed through one part and left behind the other. In doing so, you will have completed four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	In order to strengthen the weakened part of a dental arch, and using some dental implants from other sections as supports, one should add the missing teeth and also include an additional bridge for reinforcement; then, remove the excess material with that same drill bit and insert another small drill into it. Then, connect the two parts just like in the first hole with a screw or bolt. Continue doing this as necessary with other implants within the arch until you have completed the entire structure of the bridge.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The needles of fineness and coarseness migrate between greatness and subtlecuation; for the subtle ones slightly pierce the flesh; while the coarse ones are difficult to manage in the cord, hence they ought to be migratory in both subtlety and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	The needle should be positioned at the proper length of the spine'amo to ensure that the flesh is not punctured too deeply and that the wound heals properly in front of its closure.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	E. In cases where the fracture is not severely displaced along a suture line, there may be an exception to prohibiting bone healing (consolidation).
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Aprop yourself against the tips of the needles so that you do not catch a cold, and rest on the pulse points expanded in every part, which hold onto the tips of the needles; then remove those inserts that you know the plague has been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of stitches with needles are most suitable for small wounds, up to the point where they can be closed using one or two such needles.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Mays' second suture technique is similar to the first one; it involves stitching all four extremities of a cut using a needle that should be thin yet strong, doing so in one go with subtlety and precision.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When should you insert the needle to penetrate these four extremities, reduce the needle from that starting point of which you began, in order for the thread retracts cage from the upper inferior part, thus making the suture follow seam of fabric wherein the fabrics are stitched.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	There is a pause between each stitch, the majority of which in this piece.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This is a sharp knife for the kitchen at home.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	In a certain case, a man was wounded by a bullet in his abdomen which caused the main artery to be severed and it resulted in evisceration with blood vessels around two palms of the mesentery being disrupted; hence I reconstructed that organ after the wound had been open for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The storm had been raging for the past fifteen days or so, and it finally ceased; then another hurricane came through approximately twenty years later and was transformed into their current lifestyle.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	E had other wounds that did not heal; and by miracle the fire in which I was burned, for which no remedy or medicine could be found, nor was it in a place where such treatments were available. Instead, I applied ointment made of melted pitch from old boots on my body every day and frequently bathed with sweet water to soothe the burning wounds until they healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	According to the statement of Paul, there are two types of surgical threads specifics that we use:
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	Let's begin the stitching of the incision, and insert the needle through the first hole to the second hole.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	So, the needle is inserted into the earlobe and moved along its length according to its entirety, making sure that the pointed end of the needle, which has been introduced, continues to penetrate into the opposite tip as well; thus inserting the needle from one end of the earlobe to the other.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	E take your arm out from under the skin, and let it pass through completely to reach the other end of the exit hole at the start point; then place the tip of the pin on the outside of this slit, and push the needle through the other extreme of the starting point at the exit hole.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	The text you've shared seems to be a mix of words from different Romance languages, possibly including some elements of Occitan or Old Catalan (occitano) and Italian/Latin-based languages. Unfortunately, it does not make coherence in any language that I am familiar with; perhaps it might be an older dialect or poetic form?
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	The sleeve begins at the yoke and is sewn along that side until it reaches the bottom of the armhole, then the needle pierces through to the other end of the sleeve on the opposite side, where it continues past this width of the tape. Then the needlete goes back into the same armhole from which it came.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Two water flows intersect one valley and another, and flow into the first valley that you choose to drain all of it according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this suturing method is that you remove the skin with a surgical blade in such a way that you cut along one side of the tendon, and then insert it into another section where the incision is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Mays la second special type of suture material you mentioned earlier is known as gutta-percha, which I have already discussed and referred back to; this one involves cutting that semi-transparent substance so that the medicated threads attach to it, ensnaring all parts together in a manner appropriate for their nature. They then apply the tip of another thread to the tip of the needle, making as per my previous explanation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at the tip of your sight on the starting point, and let it pierce through to the end in that direction; then see its two extremities within that sector. Now revolve the needle so that it penetrates from the front towards the end in those same two sectors.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	A propeller spins around those blades and causes some of them to penetrate into the front section from one end of the mirror opposite ones that are on the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This type of stitching is better than the common loose stitch, and it's a kind that I remember recalling before.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Wallace
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	The following is an approximate translation of the text into modern Spanish, as Old Catalan and Old Occitan are quite different from contemporary languages:
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	The main issue causing a delay in the stitching of this abdompressure area is that it's much more difficult than other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May's medicine for the disease made from dragon blood is a test of other dragons.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that you achieve the plague by your own sanction before the altered air comes into contact with it; then you reduce the swelling and cooze it gently, allowing the dark redness to subside.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has not yet altered the disease, let moments of pause fall upon that high tower, which is present within your reach and features stones hard as rock and walls strong; they shall be fortified and observed, much like the care taken in other diseases contained within, where healing takes place.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the necessary medicines at hand, take frequent breaks and begin to wrap the affected area with bandages or a soft cloth, changing them twice a day as instructed by your doctor, thus avoiding any other medical treatment unless the sores are very simple and can be managed in such cases.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague will spread to the main members of your group, we recommend that you submerge yourself in a quality theraebath, or oil massage, and pause for it within the circuit of locations between the pains and residues left by the plague.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, due to past habits that persist, the person was stiffly blackened by a certain negligence of yours, and especially if the swelling reaches the intestine and becomes an acutely penetrating sensation within its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	The sap which that the one in gross tubes is of pure color, healthier than the one which is in subtle tubeboards.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	C is of difficult healing the bulb which is called "gegunu"; it does not receive healing by plaster that can be applied to all; and this is due to the great number of veins that are in it, as well as its magnitude, and also because of its subtlety within this structure, along with its proximity to nerve nature.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	The fabric from the sea is obtained by processing seawater, and you acquire it in its purest form; then remove any impuramoins according to your conscience while retaining the fibers intact.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Mays si ha passat a llu espai i ja he fet vert negre, les hores on tu estriu aquel am fidel sobre el lloc que és denigratori pel teu, perquè vagui fluïts de sang, quan en la tela es venenes i arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	In the event of a boat collision that results in another vessel sinking and leaving parts of its hull floating, causing your vessel to become stranded on top of them, you are responsible for removing these parts from your deck as well as repairing any damage caused by this incident. This includes clearing debrebris and ensuring the safety and stability of your boat.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Recollection of the Plagues and How They Affected London.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	In cases of small bowel obstruction due to adhesions from surgery, restoration is possible through minimally invasive techniques such as laparoscope incisions or endoluminal stenting, which help alleviate the blockage that was previously present and causing symptoms. This obstruction might be an older issue resulting from a fistula between the small intestine and another organ, leading to ventilatory problems within the digestive tract.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	I advise you to apply the treatment of your wound that has not been infected in its healing process but rather intensify within it what is sane and ensure that location becomes solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	You should eat enough to strengthen yourself after the bad illness you suffered in your belly; and do not commit any wrongdoing due to alcohol consumption or causing accidents with your horses, nor allow them to graze or drink carelessly, and exercise caution when bathing and riding.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	The master craftsmen experienced a peculiar phenomenon when the beeswax began to harden in their workshop; they noticed that sometimes it would stick together following this method: and so you take large drops of honey from those jars, and move them close enough to touch the lips of the wax; then as soon as they come into contact with the warmth of your mouth, they adhere to eachcu, because they don't dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	The ants pause at another location and do not stop water from making more ants one after the other according to the total quantity of the swarm.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	"Beware of those who diminish that which is yours, and encroach on the bounds within which your belongings lie, but do not cause any harm."
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the small ball is made of very thin cloth, like the one used for animals, and has needle-like points; so you take the tip of these thread ends, make it bare, and attach them to the end of a similar thread, wrapped around those threads, and then insert that into the holes in the bag.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This circle of stitches is nothing but a second route of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	The storm is large and extensive; most often it occurs in one of the subtle layers, for hours it's not abrupt but gradual, and it doesn't heal right away completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	The treatment of hemorrhoids and fissures.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	When any part of the body is inflamed and infected, and it does not heal properly and remains swolwart for a long time without separating, at some point in any limb universally, we call this condition an abscess fistula or cystic.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A fistula second to the truth is an aching, hard, white thing which is not painful and has as much suppleness as the numbness of sleep; thus it's called a slumber penalty, i.e., penance without awareness or feeling.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	E está en Alcu's humid home, donde hay mucha mugre; pero pronto se reduce la humedad en algunas horas.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	In some cases, this moisture causes mold; it is little, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	In the division of time, hours when I should cure these wounds which are not healed and not in their natural color but rather by one or more of nine causes: One is either due to lack of skill in its treatment; or because of malice during healing process; or because between the wound and lips there is a hardened tissue preventing re-growth of flesh; or it's due to malignant leprosamoos; or because whatever material introduced into such sore becomes corrupted in its own nature, which has poor quality; or medicinal treatment used for healing is unsuitable; or there's pus present within the region causing contagion and disease; or it relates to the location being similar to Saragossa where difficult digestion of ailments occurs and slow recovery from abscesses naturally occurring. Or, because in the wound are one, two, or three bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Ecco tutte quelle cause, i loro sintomi e la curazione di queste con le medicine nella sua divisione.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	E cou ve assèie yeu fasas a tu savi la curacion de fistule, la cual è fatta per vía d'operaziun mai.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	There are various types of fistulas that can affect all the limbs, and some of these include those which reach large veins or arterebe nerves, the cisterna magna, the peritoneum, the bladader, along any of the ribs, along any of the vertebrae in the spine, or adjacent to any of the compound joints formed by cartilage such as those of the hip and knee; and some that are close to the main limb.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	These diseases following this classification are of difficult healing and do not respond to curative treatment; they arise from hard work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	No, there is no fistula of such depth that does not reach those places that I have mentioned, and one hopes for healing from it, as well as trusts in the cure. And if you try to cut or pierce it, and if the fistula follows a straight path, then follow up on that course.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If you suspect that a pipe has developed turbulence, it's time to investigate and try to locate the exact point of obstruction or curvature causing this disturbance in flow; the plumbing system should be free from any bends or kinks that can hinder smooth fluid movement.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	The sentence you've provided seems to be in Catalan or Spanish with some errors and does not form a coherent statement when translated into English. However, if we attempt to correct the grammar and translate it, it might refer to something like:
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	A Cysterization process involves the removal of impur # Section 1: Problem - Pharmacokinetics and Drug Elimination in Renal Impairment
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	A most exquisite manner of knowing if you have these nerves and the reality of a distant or proximate fistula is this - it'am an a fistula with many openings and it lies atop all the summit of your strength, in your sorrowfulness, which causes you to feel pain. You must find relief through compression on that spot and observe signs of significance and accidental causes of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	Ecum tu auras estat sobre totas aquelles causes amb estadía vera, lahores ve a la curació segons confidencia; i és que tu consideres llahores si és fistula apparent propinqua o en lloc salí, longínquia de junctura, o de nervi, o d'arterià, o de vena, o de un dels llocs les quals yeu a ti va dir.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Lahor's juice dries up as soon as it is spoken of in the narrative of Luke; water that is found in that filtration and blood corruption, along with fluid arising from a wound within the flesh, or bile and other appearances. He cures those who have been healed inside.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	The fistula is of great depth and length, and as it follows the rectum'amo you to carefully insert that into the preputial ring, if possible, and purify all your corrupted flesh; then administer those wrapped in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	The water of this spring is known to cure several ailments, as it contains all the purifying elements found in the vitality-giving waters of healing. It erodes all illnesses that come with the acute medicine.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	A proper diet provides the nutrients that help generate healthy tissue and promote healing when there is an injury.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If not treated promptly, the wound may need to be cauterized as soon as possible.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	The translation to English would be: "If you want the cause of fistula is not osseous and it does not involve a vein or nerve, or major limb, then consult that according to our previous recommendations."
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Mays shall know his own flesh and it is in himself that any corruption or negligence exists, now let him return within where such corruption has been housed altogether; and with care regarding the same matter which was enclosed therein being healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healthy and pure, then you cannot make progress in the total eradication of corruption; therefore, upon this realization, you carefully and thoroughly work on improving yourself and purifying your mind to restore that which has been lost for so long.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	If it's healthy, you may; otherwise, I urge you to realize that the corruption lies deep within your body and has not yet manifested itself in any way. So there is no need for worry at this point.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the rotten bone is small or it's within your reach, now you must throw it away using fine tweezers as needed to do so.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If you have any doubts or questions, the careful extraction of all such concerns should not be overlooked and could strengthen your position.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	When you feel saddened by any cause of humidity, and in your ignorance there is neither fear nor mistake, then devote yourself to those lamentations or tears if they are here, and liberate the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you have not prepared the anchorages for your oars to rest during an hour's break on the shore where that wave crashes onto the shore, let it be within a distance from those bones of flesh and lamentation, and guard the shore so that it is not consolidated, and tighten the rope which you have cut in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear, pause upon the body submerged above three days old, or that which is immersed in Egyptian embalming fluid, or within a wooden chest of varnished wood, for when they begin to decay and bones separate, then it gets exposed.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Mays is as great as the bones of Cahua or Coya and such like; however, when it becomes tainted, only its face shows this dirtiness so much, that soon you will see there lies behind them blackness and corruption; and now remains restored purity.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Mays when the lu is so rotten that it has reached the core of the bone, now it becomes necessary to cut off that part and completely remove it where the rot has arrived; later, heal within that area once it's fully cured.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Here is an example of how to compose a letter requesting funding for your project, along with supporting information about its impact:
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A man of about XXX years old suffers from pain in his testicles. The discomfort has been ongoing and the male organ is affected by a bad inflammation that seems to have reached the testicle itself. This causes an immense abscess, which is not caused by any external factor.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	So he decided to extend the treatment period for the errors of the patients until the swelling subsides and to take care of minor issues in a relaxed manner, as well as making sure that all orifices are sutured properly after using a cauterizing tool. The process requires patience throughout this procedure.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	So the many skilled surgeamoons around two years ago, I didn't focus on that knowledge in those areas, until I was called upon.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I see the comb of gold and the materials that came from there through great quests; now everything about that man was all straightened out, and his complexion had a citrine hue.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Then he was tempted by one of those visions and approached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	The text provided appears to be in Catalan, and when translated into English it reads as follows:
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	In an unsettling event that took place within the body'nuts factory, we discovered one of the machines had malfunctioned and corrupted some parts of the nut casings while simultaneously contaminating them with dirt and rust. One particular batch of walnut shells was found to have been affected by these issues as well.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	In those days, I was eagerly awaiting and preparing for the discovery that would come.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I assure you that it was not flesh and bone but rather the corruption which caused decay and destruction, and I have already addressed this issue.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	The restoration of the fence in this area has been ongoing for a long time and is not yet completed.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	You may be interested in learning about the second significant discovery and then delving further into its origins and how it led to continuous progress. Let's take a look at the first ever groundbreaking discovery - the wheel!
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	I am plagued by that same sickness which appears in others, and indeed I was compelled to make the cure for it and its restoration; but it has not been restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	So you discover another version and do not stop trying to convince the owner gradually, and only restore it if they agree. If that is restored within five years, then take out its marrow, and using medicines, restore and consolidate it thoroughly so it heals properly.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	It is not necessary to iterate in the operation of 'lu' and sectioning of 'lu', rather for the efficiency of 'lu', as well as due to its limited tolerance and fear of death, because excessive elimination can lead to low blood pressure at all times.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	So be it, for the whole health is in balance, and nothing is on your tough flesh; and good done by you to oneself in body and return virtue within yourself; and conversed with your dispositions without causing harm or discomfort in any case. (Free translation)
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	Mays, if you are about to sever an eminent limb from its location on the body according to this method, first take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminence; then command someone to extend that ligament with some fibrous thread. Pause that ligament slightly thicker than the first one you took, wrap it over the flesh where the limb is attached, and stretch its extremity so as to pull the flesh towards the divided parts, revealing the location on which you wish to make a cut for the saw not to tear the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	The break or removal of the last remnebentos (decomposition table), when you do this there is not allowed to saw that does not cut rotten meat.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	The grip of rust slowly covers the iron gate, as if it is in the crevice of bone erosion, not immediately visible but eventually taking over its place.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is decayed and not prominent, one portion continues while the other stops, and the decay occurs either partially or throughout the whole length; sometimes you discover the flesh of all parts completely, and after a pause there remains only a bit from the first portion within which the decay has continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	E is the key according to the location of the treasure a small one, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	Corruption is at the joint, it penetrates that corrupted joint and causes them to break along with the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	A is not the result of continuous intersections, but rather in the accumulation over time.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If corruption is in the function of the heart or mind, it is quite difficult; however, you should investigate how this corruption appears to you and remove it as much as possible according to each method that may be feasible for you. In any case, strive to correct yourself if not against your interests or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	"The tools for cutting and shaving bones should be chosen according to the situation of the bones, as well as their preparation, thickness, delicacy, size, hardness, and rarity; therefore it is required that you prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for each type of operation."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	That operation which means so much for you regarding the field of this instrument with which you're acquainted; how great your studies and extensive knowledge are about the methods in this art, and as a witness to methods related to diseases, since there were times when you used it that was convenient for all patients regardless of their symptoms.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Indeed, at the end of this chapter we will discuss the number and types of instruments that produce simple sounds and undergo processes you are forbidden from using on others.
Forma de serra:	Serrated form or "serraform": In English, this term can be translated as a zigzag shape or saw-toothed pattern. It refers to an object or structure with a series of regular peaks and valleys, resembling the teeth of a saw blade. This description could apply to geological formations like mountainsides (serraform mountain ranges), certain types of leaves, architectural designs, etc.
Forma de autra serra:	Another way to express "serra" in English would be "ridge," which refers to a long, narrow elevated landform that rises above the surrounding terrain. However, depending on context, other translations such as "mountain range" or simply "mountains" could also apply.
Forma de autra serra:	Alternative word for "serra": ridge, sierra (Spanish), or chaîne (French).
Forma de autra serra gran:	Another way to express "gran serra" (big mountain range) in English would be:
Forma de ray:	A beam or a line of light, energy, particles, etc., that travels in a straight path from its source. This term is often used to describe the emanation or projection of something like sound waves (sonar beams), electromagnetic radiation, or even figuratively as in "a ray of hope".
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the vertex of this ray follow the shape of a starry-crowned keyhole, and the points on it adhere to the arrangement of stars in an astronomical chart.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	C and D do not adhere to each groove but instead meet at the joints where they become corroded or have a wide opening.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	English: First person singular present tense of the verb "to be" (am)
Forma de razori menor:	Texto en forma reducida:
Forma de razori lat:	Latiņu izteiksmē:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The form of the mountain ranges is an irregular descending formation made up of various soils and mineral deposits, with its peak sharply pointed and the slopes having a serrated appearance.
Forma de lu:	"Luce forma" translates from Italian to English as "light form." In this context, it could be referring to an artistic piece that utilizes light in its design or a natural phenomenon shaped by the presence of light. If you are looking for additional information on what "luce forma" specifically refers to within your query, please provide more details!
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	En forma de raor con cavitat: Català. En esta frase, se habla de una herida o lesión que presenta un aspecto similar al de un remolino (forma de raor) y tiene una cavidad en su interior (concavitat). Se trata de una expresión comúnmente utilizada para describir ciertos tipos de heridas.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Forma de ratiocinio auténtica o genuina.
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Alternative ways to express the phrase "Form of another curve at its extreme point":
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Mode of small-sounding scrape attempt:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The way the incisors are embedded into the bone is as follows (in English):
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Forma de inscisi unui minune mai mic. (Română)
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another pair of scissors; this appearance resembles an X, and the tip is shaped like a saw, and it is displayed in various places in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The shape of the cross-section resembles that of the ratio in which bones are pierced. (In this context, "perforar" likely refers to something being permeated or affected by a force). In geometry, this could mean finding the geometric similarity between two objects based on their proportions and ratios.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The vertex of the cone is triangular and has an acute apex.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	E is a fact from the iron mines of India, and similarly known for all the reasons mentioned concerning rusts, scratches, and scrapes.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	The great escarpment and the bone key lock.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The limbs have become infected or due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, if you have treated that infection with medicine and the cure does not succeed, sometimes the infection spreads to the member which cannot be prevented by any means, then it is necessary for you to insert that member into hot water so that the infection may disappear and avoid death or severe damage of that limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of the person to whom it happens, is that the limb turns black inside where the wound has occurred, or bursts outwards with a darkness inside which burned that flesh on the bone in that member which was tied there and caused him intense agony. Therefore he experiences an insane desire for this.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	If, indeed, the cause of certain poisonous effects is akin to that of scorpion sting or seafood poisoning or rhinitis and similar conditions.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the erosion or pressure is at the end of the tooth, then remove it and do not leave space for further eroscuation so that it goes inside your mouth.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you approach the flame, make sure to maintain an appropriate distance from the fireplace and avoid any objects that could catch fire within its vicinity.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	The ancient clock stands tall and proud, its hands pointing to a time long past. Hours have passed while it clings firmly to the wall at the junction of two worlderseys.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	When one passes through another instance of corruption and evil times, the hour approaches when misfortune strikeback. And to administer another cause for healing is the quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When you suspect contamination of the said seed, place it inside one of the nuts and inspect periodically until germination.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	As you descend the slope of life, every hour marks its profound depths.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Mayes dives into the dolly, hours later you find her doll at the junction of the stream.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If the sin of bribereren has not yet reached its culmination, then there may be reprieve rather than punishment, and absolution from the evil to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of incision or cutting off the limb, you should have the bandage at the farthest end you wish to cut, and stretch another bandage over the place; then extend the minister one bandage towards both sides pasted so that all flesh is visible between two bandages; and there shall be separated the meat which lies in-between these two bandages.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	Article I - Every contract shall be performed in good faith and with due care by all parties involved, ensaving from causing harm or injury through negligence or malicious intentions.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays decides to stop the flow of blood when wounds are open, cauterizes the wound carefully or applies pressure using some powders that restrict bleeding, and then proceeds with your treatment as soon as it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The member shall be responsible for the payment of any damages caused to others within their means and as soon as possible.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	He thereupon related to you the event that befell upon a man on his journey, which resulted in an accident caused by him while he was adjusting his black overcoat due to being caught up in the blaze of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	From that time of corruption arose first in the world he ruled over, affecting all humanity.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then that man prepared himself so as to go out for the healing to reach his joint, due to the intensity of his pain and irritation; he inserted that stick into the junction, and it became well again.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago, I used to read that story of the cursed princess in my mom's book.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	Thus it was not to be, and so they were forced to reflect that excess on the water of medicines, the purification of which would have brought him peace; but the surplus did not affect him and began to go to another person within that same period in which he started to do so.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	The rain has caused the river to overflow its banks and I don't wish for this outcome but rather fear the consequences of such excess, and more so, dread the ignorance towards the death of one's own soul, as the evilness was contagious in nature.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	The man who was sick and disgusted with me returned to his land, and he came back to tell me that the person prepared for him and injected all of it, and he recovered.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not yet translated this narrative but only to assist you with the topic it covers and its meaning of which it is denoted, as well as according to the reason for which it was written.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	The treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with drugs.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	In Quackery, an abscess is formed when pus accumulcuates within the tissues of a particular area and it continues to grow until it bursts and perforates; then it discharges the material as if it were flowing out like a stream; the surrounding soft tissue also becomes delicate in such manner, but there has not been any further decay or spreading. Moreover, it does not impinge on bone, nerve, or lymphatic vessels and is thus called a sinus - this condition is not known as fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is extended before corrosion advances in any member, these hours are called a fistula and not rust.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure of lu involves intricate patterns that are woven entirely as such, mostly when they become subtle and are crafted with dexterity so that they do not adhere to the place due to their decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the coda will stick and that that infection won't result in further consequences, and at this point it has become inflamed, then now treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	In my opinion, the Sinus remedy involves using an Egyptian medicine made of oil and vineger, zinziber (ginger) extracts in equal parts, placed in a vessel over a fire so that they melt together and become like wax. Then, it is applied to the desired area as needed for relief from sinus issues.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	To prepare the required water and dissolve the herbal mixture in it; then, apply to the affected area and gently massage into the skin, ensuring the medicine is applied for a duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	A) Apply the cream externally as needed; and use water for many days until it is thoroughly cleansed off your skin and renewed modesty.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Some vessels are made of ceramic and can be filled with warm water, whereas others use this medication without it; if you take the ashes from the vine branches and pour them into the water, then strain that mixture and use it for an enema whereby within a few hours the affected area feels relief.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	"If the illness has no tolerance for Egyptian medication or ash water, then at this time administer that with water and honey mixed in a ratio of thirty to ninety (3 parts water to 9 parts honey), and enema it accordingly. Honey's properties are cleansing and purifying; while the vinegar helps adhere to mucous membranes, especially when there is an abundance of stiffness and dryness."
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	You shall obtain some water and ensure that the wound is cleaned properly; afterwards, perform a cleansing with an antiseptic solution to help prevent infection of the flesh around it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	A is a mixture that dissolves the fat oil and vitamin E; it also emulsifies this with some medicines or other substances whose properties have been analyzed in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the rectal orifice is too narrow to receive the enema cannula, gently and gradually dilate it with a small wooden stick, then pause as necessary while wrapped in an Egyptian oil ointment or Basisilicon ointpitent that has been previously softened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the orifice is large, you may need to sew up your lips and reduce the amount used in the insertion of the catheter.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifices of which blood flows are elevated above the ground level, during dry hours that section will be at its lowest where the flow occurs within the troughs; because when the flow is constricted in the depth of channels, the flesh shall be formed there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If not possible to dry your wound on the skin area near the elbow, as you prefer, within an hour or so, prepare the limb by properly cleaning and dressing it according to your attire, ensnuring there is no fabric retention around that arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	"E discuss potential merging of prescribed medications, as appropriate, with the aim to extend their coverage under your policy."
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The syringe is used to administer the required amount of substance for communication throughout the entire body; and appropriately insert the needles into the right opening of the vein, slightly wider than the orifice of the vein; then extend another piece of tape over the inserted part according to the quantity of the substance, and secure it at a distant position from the opening of the vein so that no leakage occurs, keeping the dressing tightly applied for one week.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The one who stands above the abyss, always watches over it with an eye that never blinks and guards the fire within its depths.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	To know if a certain food is liquid or not, you can perform the following steps:
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	In this passage from Friulian language (spoken in the Friuli region of Italy), it seems to be discussing how one should consider a particular site/spot and whether there is pain or not felt by the patient, as well as if there's an inflammamo. The translation in English would be: "Let us then consider that place, if there is any pain experienced at this spot by the patient, and if it is swollen."
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When using the medication for an extended period of time in this manner, you will see the material that has been placed over the opening of your vein either adheres or forms a strong attachment. After three days, on the third day, you can remove the patch and replace it with another one along with reapplying the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Mays do not be discouraged by the subtle invasion of space viruses into your sinus; health will soon reclaim its territory as it does in those cases where there is no generation of tissue during past plagues, and even more so in those instances where it works contrary to you.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus is not properly moved by massage and there are difficulties in breathing through it; if its adherence is delayed and the cause persists for an extended period of time, then you should adjust to dryness with medications, and if these medicines are too moist in their substance and effectiveness, they must be dried as much as possible when there is an excess of secretion from nasal mucus.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The extract appears to be from an old text related to herbal medicine or recipes for healing ointments. Here's the translation into modern English: "The man who prepares this remedy should take dye finely ground and dissolve it in rose oil, then apply that to his own body with a cloth soaked in its substance, and use that."
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	In that action, when you do not have brac (a type of ointment), take a mixture made from myrrh and aloe gel, and mix it well until smooth. Then use this to coat the area where there is swelling inside your mouth; cover with water, and apply pressure on it. Take some honey, warm up slightly over a flame, then line your mouth with cloth or gauze and gently press downwards into the inflamed area. Coat well with the mixture you made earlier until all areas are covered, applying gentle pressure as needed for relief of swelling.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some edible flowers are often used in gourmet cooking for their long-lasting beauty and delicate flavor (and they're also called celestial lilies). They include herbs like lavender, chamomile, rosemary, thyme, marigold, rose petals, as well as ingredients such as edible flowers, flour from wheat or cornmeal. Here is a recipe for an easy and delicious cake with fresh flowers:
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the pus is not drained and does not heal by this treatment, you should know that the decay is in the inner part of the bone, or has already formed an abscess in the bones or other hard parts or joints; at this point, you should treat the abscess as before.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Treatment of pus from wounds, trimming and cutting nails, and slicing the added finger.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaritium is an infection that can affect the nail bed of a finger or toe, and sometimes other digits as well. If it becomes prolonged and untreated, it may lead to gangrene, causing decay of the nail root with a foul-smelling odor emanating from within. In severe cases, this can result in total destruction and darkening of the affected digit.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Then as soon as you have obtained that oil which we mentioned in the division and do not entrust your healing to it; afterward hours when thou shalt go down into sleep, touch with it all the excessiveness that is cast from the window and cauterize the wound properly therewith for caution has been advised as helpful.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is your own and the gland is healthy, and the secretions of the glands are drawn out and compress on the flesh at intervals, then start to puncture and leak those. After a while when you feel a subtle flow from the angle of the gland that pierces the skin, push it slightly deeper into the flesh and slice through easily with ease; stop where blood flows out in line with the natural coloring of the flesh, provided that corrosive medicines have been used within to completely cleanse. With care apply a healing ointnent on the area that is cleansed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	The corruption has already begun within the bone; therefore, you should cleanse and extract it from that place, as there is never a time when this situation remains unsanitary.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When corruption and rot take place in the wood, hours later you will find it inside one of the nuts according to its recollection, and as soon as that occurs, it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If you suffer from an injury or trauma to the thumb and experience severe pain as a result, consider having it treated with fine-tuning surgery at first, followed by drying out the affected area using a straight transverse incision just above the joint. Make sure that the cut does not go too deep into the flesh below the bone; otherwise, you may aggravate the condition and cause excessive scar tissue to form in the area. Afterward, treat the area with moisturizing agents to promote healing.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Maya said adaptively, the one who is born among many noble men, she is very tall and muscular all over her body, with strong bones, and a sturdy spine.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	At the crossro cuz'n lulls sing in midwinter bright, it is the birth of our Lord at the manger, or so they say.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one who is born under Aquarius does not necessarily have a bad character, and the one that was born at conjunctions will be very good.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	Of those that are not citizens by birth, the section is negligible, and it is such that you include them in your census as a naturalized person.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	The onset of this condition during puberty makes treatment difficult; therefore, be cautious of excessive use.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the place where the nut grows, take that meat of your uncle who has passed away round it and encase it in one of those suitable nuts according to the occasion, and carefully cut into it whichever piece is healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The will of Mays is consolidated as follows when disputed between parties or due to the birth of a child who was not mentioned, or for consolidation of debt or in case of fire or similar events; therefore, such consolidations result that returns said assets back to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	The gap between the layers of clay bricks in a brick wall prevents them from becoming overly solidified, and separates these layers by means of a thin layer of lead that is consolidated according to its structure.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	If the accident occurs at an advanced stage of healing and there is considerable scarring present, the resulting deformity may resemble more closely what it looks like initially after surgery as the skin continues to dry out following its preparation in accordance with the shape of the body part.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the whispers of vice, I am a poet.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices so soft and swolamoous veins that wind around grossly full with superfluous melancholy; these veins course through the limbs of the body, and their major occurrence is found in the chambers of the circulatory system, especially among travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Administer a dose of charcoal to the patient suffering from black plague and then perform an incision on the inguinal vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Mays' method of extracting their precious iron ore involves two techniques: the first one is that it must be free from impureblack sand, and the other technique is that the vein should be raised high and fully extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The segment of lu is second according to this method: initially thread the needle with a piece of wool that has been soaked in water and wrung out until it becomes fuzzy from the yarn, then tie off the end firmly at the upper part of the stitch near the edge; on one side sew up to dry the vein (a type of wound) with a broad piece of thread, or two or three pieces depending on its size, and raise black blood by hand from the lower part of the stitch toward the top, as much as you want and repeat until desired.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	A is about to launch and commands you not to consume foods causing the black plague that are being produced.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	It's essential to exercise caution when performing phlebotomy as the veins are already swolebed and there is a risk of infection.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The rise of Mays is as follows according to this method: you should raise the limb affected by illness, if possible without causing pain, and then place it in warm water while wrapping the afflicted area with a cloth soaked in cold water; or that it be exercised through rigorous exercises, if a bath is not at hand, ensuring that the member is gently warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Next to the right of the vein section at the end of the long or in the latter part of the lower deck, or below the aft mast of the ship, there is a small cabin.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	The code of an unjust person does not have mercy and tears down the veins throughout that appear in his heart, and he deserves no love from those who seek to overthrow it.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Therefore, let's delve into the matter of this particular case that has come up recently.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	To the highest peak that rises above all in its domain, and beneath it, lies a hidden cave. In this cave resides an ancient legend of a lion's roar.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Here is the translation of your text from Galician to English:
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	He places it above that and inclines it towards the first section of the stalk, then he lifts it up so that its tip reaches the second section, and again lifts it beyond the section on top of that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	In the case of water extraction from a section that is higher or more autonomous than all other sections, within which it completely flows; then he directs towards those areas.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you don't follow your father's instructions and carefully remove the needle with strong thread from where it is embedded, then insert your finger again and rotate your mother completely within the entire area in which it was thrown.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	If you look at it and find that it is not broken; if it is broken, then try to carefully lift it up and bring yourself over the pain caused by this injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	With all its powerful winds, the hours pause over the site of the shipwreck submerged in wine and oil - both rotten and non-rotten - and heal everyone inside who is wounded.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the land is counterintuitive having curvature in the parts involved and it does not follow the straightness as we have said, then you must divide over that area for the entire curvature of it and its surround very precisely so that you increase that whole part.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	You must watch over your section and make sure that it does not infringe on the vein (artery) and does not harm it because it will be difficult to raise its pressure if it is damaged. Exerc groos, uza prudenteza en aquela.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	La forma en la que se ha secado la pintura.
Forma de unci orp:	Unci forma: En Inglés, el término "Uni Form" se traduciría como "Uniform Form". Esta expresión puede referirse a la estructura o diseño estandarizado que sigue algo para mantener una coherencia y uniformidad. Por ejemplo, podría aplicarse en contextos como uniformes escolares o militares, documentación estándar, etcétera.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not too thick or sharp like a knife nor does it have an acute tip so that the vein will not be hurt; and it has lion-like flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would penetrate the vein due to its subtlenameness. It should have such excessive thickness as we have mentioned.
De extraccio venae cruris.	The extraction of the great saphenous vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the chambers of those who follow Al-Ateji's teachings, and it spreads throughout the lands of Arabia and India, as well as other arid regions where there is little vegetation or moisture.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	The castle'e located here was built in other places along the coast as well.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The decomposition of a dead body leads to the formation of various organisms such as worms, snakes, and creatures like parasites that generate between the intestines and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Sign of the onset of his illness is this vein that rises in intense inflammebleness, and the location becomes swollen; and from there begins to flow blood from that swelling which resembles a plant-like appearance.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some pregnancies are formed in the first month, and two months, and three months, and four months, and five months, and six months, and further on ten months, and even eleven is to be verified that a woman aborted at six, and another one for all gestations, which cause was made by measuring of the glorious wise men.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	So many years ago, in pursuit of various causes outside the land, involved now in peace and prosperity those parties over there, wrapped up then in paper and sealed with wax that color.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it is allowed to be prolonged, the hours will pierce a part of light and envelop the entire area; but do not inscribe that of reason within which anything shall remain outside or else if you inscribe that one, it is contrary and enters into the flesh causing boils, inflammaturms, and ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	It should be processed in batches little by little and extracted gradually, being taken out of the last one from it without splashing any liquid onto anyone's body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	E of this vein lies in high cliffs, where it is along its length for about xxx feet and has reached me to the extent of xx feet.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is incisive during the hour of its medication, then the ray enters the vein through that long vein and pierces that limb's body totally, from which all fluid present in the matter is evacuated, and administers putrefaction for several days with medications; and as a remedy for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	Here are some veins that have many branches; mainly when they appear at the wrists or on the hands, and come to open holes, which contain several orifices of branching vessels.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Then let's move on to the part that we have mentioned in the division and the amount above said.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	The passage refers to a condition affecting cattle, specifically mentioning "aegritudo bovina," which translaturates as "bovine disease" in English. It describes the section of parasites (vermes) that are born underneath the skin and cause pain or discomfort for the animal.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is known by no name in any land; it's called the cattle plague or four-footed disease, and very rarely a person contracts it between their bones and flesh. It causes one to grow tumors all over the body which eventually break the bone and burst outwards. The individual experiences losing limbs as if they were falling off one by one.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of light is through the decomposition of some bodily fluids, thus causing accidents such as worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	E is feared for its evil nature; when it approaches the body and rises to the head, then reaches the brain, causing great distress within, entering and destroying the cells, leaving behind only devastation.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Then if you want to heal that and extract it, no effort is made without your own walking away from it and appearing before it in person, so that you might hold what'n over it and take off what belongs to it with grip and tension, and wring out the rest.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	E is original in the flesh and does not have possessions; therefore, you should take rest from your labor by a warm fire within that place where you dwell, and the greatest fear you should avoid is corruption of it, which ruins the place as we have mentioned before.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Once you reach the head of the disease, strive to strictly strengthen your mind and body; then proceed in that direction. Ensure that you use purging medicines for detoxification of your own body by eliminating harmful humors, and be cautious about consuming foods that promote putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the section on managing pain relief.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our land "Parkinson's Disease", and the pain it causes spreads to various limbs, with frequent changes of affected body parts.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	Upon hearing your recommendation, I would review it carefully before making a decision or forming an opinion.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	A woman who was sick in a village called for help and I found her arm with a small vein inflammaturine near the armpit; she said it had been there for an hour, and that it spread as fast as if it were to be torn open further, more so than gold flowing live from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Well then, he felt the pain from that spot and his hand fell on the muscle, resting there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	A proper correction in the other corner where it reaches the opposite arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	A proper recount would be that his body whirled as I saw, and he was too amazed by the exchange of its parts and their rapid movement from limb to lime.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	In the olden times, I have seen in my dreams such images according to that pattern; but I also saw many which caused intense pain when one part was switched with another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May's not like water, as the woman does so too.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	Perhaps it's not just water but that there was a woman in the cave, with her naked bodies and exposed veins, and this vision evokes those feelings of windiness being exchanged.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that they do not reappear under this reverse therapy in those who are predisposed and of high human virtue with tainted bloodlines.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	In order to heal the wound and ease your pain, hours will pass without you noticing it as we have explained; in time, strengthen yourself and leave it behind you completely, ensuring that no breeze or exposure reaches the wound site until it is fully cauterized.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you don't tend to your own woods soon enough, then you shall cure that annoying itch of the heart and that liquid which expels windswept odors, and those foul-smelling charms and serpentine likenesses.
De extraccio de sagetas.	The extraction of honey from beehives.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	There are various types of cast iron skillets according to the species, and according to the characteristics of the bodies in which they are made, as their diversity is due to those that have large spikes, small, concave, and mute; so it is solid. And from those that have three angles, and from those whose surface has tongues.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	From that which has to do with the limbs and feet wherein it depends on two methods: whether primary or secondary members such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, veins, intestines, bladeste (bladder), along with their appearances; therefore when one gets a touch of these members and appears to your signs of death, the cause I urge you here to avoid extraction from that sack in those areas where death seizes upon him most often, and when such bad signs do not appear, and this bag is not threatened with depth of the limb, then extract it and cure the ailment.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	The signs of the stroke on a servant'er head are found in his left side, and it passes over to his bone (skull), causing a cypher located above the brain, leading to severe conditions such as sudden loss of vision or vertigo, ear pressure, tongue inflammation, difficulty speaking and understanding, colic vomiting, significant speech impairment and voice destruction, appearance of white humidity resembling frost at the stroke location, along with eye symptoms similar to that of carnal aquositas.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Then if you agree to this pact, hours hence beware of the cure and extraction of your spleen, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Mays's symptoms of the sagittal wound when cut into the chest reveal that it is located near the left nipple and she feels a hard object causing her discomfort, but not extreme pain; moreover, the movement of the arrow seems like the movement of an arm, with dark red bleeding, coldness at the extremities, sweatiness, and syncope. Therefore, be aware that death approaches rapidly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	E when the segment has a pulmonary hemorrhage causing blood froth from the pleura, and its vascamotors are compromised, and there is a change in the color of the malaise, and it breathes out spirit greatly, and seeks a fresh air intake.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	The pain settles in the area where it is located under the pelvis, and the duration of the ache is close to small shores, and there is intense general pain and deep breathing, not feeling all the members or muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the cat swallows the hook in its stomach, it's likely hours later that some part of edible food remains undigested.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the stone is lodged in the bladder and cannot be expelled, there are no tears from the urinary tract, or damage to the membrane that has been torn apart, with no hope for recovery through surgical removal of the stone.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the bladder stone is stuck in the urethra and causing urine to flow outward with discomfort, but there's no apparent cause for these symptoms outside of it, and severe pain accompanies this condition, you should know that it can be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Other members of this family - the head, neck, throat, shoulders and arms, vertebrae of the back, furcula (wishbone), keel, breastbone, and their resemblance to other body parts are saved according to major provisions when the specimen does not cut a vein or artery and is non-venomamo.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I recommend consulting with your doctor regarding the use of these supplements to determine if they are suitable for your condition and overall health needs. It's essential to get personalized advice based on your medical history, current medications, and lifestyle factors to ensure safety and effectiveness. Your doctor can provide guidance on dosages, potential interactions with other treatments you may be undergoing, and whether these supplementamoins are beneficial for you.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason for this is that when a piece of wood gets stuck in one's tear duct near the nose and you remove it from there to another part of your body, leaving the shavings on the edge of the earlobe, healing occurs and no harm comes to your eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Another snake slithered out of the bushes near him, its eyes barely open, and soon it was hidden again; only a small tip could be seen clinging to his leg, and it was one of the sharp bladed Turks' scimitars with no adornments.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Senator and the Jewel, and at the scene of his ill-fated incident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	A certain man named Crastius had an apricot seed which he found on the seashore. The seed was of Arabian origin and it held his earrings within it. So I decided to dive between two guides, and by then it was submerged in the ocean's depths. Then I skillfully retrieved that seed from the sea, and as a result, Crastius was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	E extracted another snake from the man who had swallowed it in his stomach, and thought that he might die because of this; so after thirty days passed without any signs of improvement due to its presence, I decided to act upon the snake and carefully extract it, resulting in the man's recovery, with no adverse effects.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	A man had a bag in his hand, and the strap was wrapped around it, and then he lit the fire for seven hours; eventually, the bag burst at the seams of the pocket.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I saw a woman to whom I wished harm and she conceived within her belly; the child was formed in there, but it did not change its mother'annoyed her with any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	He looked over to another house where he saw the wall leaning on its face and the cliff had fallen off, without causing any pain or apparent damage.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	The saddle of the king's son who was hunted in his own region had just been taken by the rightful party and completely concealed.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	The employee is requested to apply for the position of Construction Manager at Site C within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I noticed the thread of the net had come loose; and then I investigated that which seemed so subtle, but did not find it. However, I felt a sharp prick on my right ear, and therefore suspected that the puncture was caused by the end of the net.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	E amplastregui the place to dry in the corner where it is attractive and digestive, assuring me that the place will become so evident that it seems like the spot of lightning, for which success comes upon that one.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	In the place where the fountain stands, there is no accident of significance that could harm it; I wish to continue gazing at its light for many days without any accidents occurr very soon; and as time goes on, the platform becomes solid again, and after a few days - within one day, to be precise - my spirit felt something in his nose and told me about this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Therefore, I will pause the acute medicinal treatment for a few days within which you had exposure to sunlight, and then try out that remedy, as well as testing your finger's tip extremity, which sticks to the bark.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	I extend my apologies for the delay in providing you with this prescription for that acute medicine. It appears as if my vision has been compromised when reading about the extremity of the saddle, and pass a few months ago it was raining during my travels through time.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	In the event of an exacculediated rainfall that may interfere with your privileges, I assure you no encroachment upon your rights and will not hinder progress through subterfuge or ingenuity. Once upon a time, while contemplating ingenious devices for descending forceps removals according to the procedures outlined by the capitol's guidelines, I happened upon this particular instrument. Thereafter, I diligently restored it to its proper place amidst those of its kind.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Ealus Metges testified that the nasal cartilage was not repaired and I restored it along with consolidating the wound, but the patient still suffers from overall pain and does not know why in any case.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Title: The Importance of Extracting Key Points from Text for Understanding Meaning and Rules
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The learned scholasto think little of fate, and they know the water that is now present as opposed to what's absent; and it destroys novel operations and new instruments due to external causes related to the art when accidents happen.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, you must know that settlements are not automatically considered a part of the territories in which they lie but rather by two means: either through attraction to the place in which it is located or due to opposition from the neighboring party.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	The fish that is caught in the place where it enters and exits again, or has been taken from a fat location, is thrown away.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If it does not obey the rules of curing, in which meats are to be left for a certain number of days within which they must ripen that is in their environment and then matured and brought out.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	If you keep breaking the rules and don't follow this agreement, your membership will be suspended for a period of time and renewal fees may apply each day until resolved.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not follow the rules of engagement during your visit to the concert hall at that time when it is entirely packed and cheering becomes subtly louder than usual in that area, it will be amplified by the acoustics of the concert hall and beyond.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the shaft is embedded in the bone of the skull and has proceeded into one of the brain's ventricles, it causes serious head injuries as mentioned above; therefore, avoid the extraction of the shaft and leave it there until its essence becomes equal to that of several days. However, if the shaft penetrates further, death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the splinter is not lodged but near to the bone and causes mild pain for several days without being caused by any of those accidents, then try your hand in removing the splinter using tweezebrush or a sterilized needle.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Mays is committed and does not resist the extraction; then you administer tranquilizers in the circuit of the scene as we have reported so that it happens within the safe location.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Mays, if the gate is located near the road and overlooked by feelings, sometimes you may feel tempted to open it, then when you do feel that urge, promptly close it again unless the circumstances are appropriate for opening it in order to maintain privacy.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If it is not feasible for you to draw up the seawater due to wave constraints and distance of shore, as well as because there are neither nerves nor veins present, then at times you may find yourself floating on a wave that has been amplified enough and from which it is possible to extract a drop.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And thou shalt know when the lambs have been separated, then thy body shall hunger for that flesh wholly from start to end; and ponder upon it, if not possible to escape from the carcass in breaking of the ears or twisting within those bands which constrict.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When extracting the suture in any location where it is present, I use an appropriate amount of traction on my own strength forceps throughout the procedure; and employ subtle tactics to ensure that the suture does not tear and facilitate a difficult extraction process along with this removal.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you are unable to do so within your own hour, provide notice at least two days before the matches that take place in your area and make sure to reschedule them by then if necessary.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May I be sorry to inform you of this matter; however, it seems that your remedy has not been effective in healing the wound. Please allow me to arrange a visit from a physician for further examination and treatment at your earliest convenience.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Take your hand and observe the sensations of excitement, nervousness or tension in it, and provide yourself with any possible means to relax and allepress; then let there be ease, tranquility, slowing down and steadiness as I do now with you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore, make a counterweight as follows so that the malfunction will follow the figure according to which you should perform the construction of the pulley in it, because it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"There is also the possibility of your time to manage it as well, hours that are within your control for these figures."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	In the event that you find any nets caught by opponents from other teams, or if they have already taken some of your team's players to their side, or if they commit fouls outside your assigned area due to excessive force and/or unfair play, then react accordingly. The penalty shall be determined in accordance with the number of penalties previously given based on severity; and take appropriate action as required.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	When the tooth is firmly embedded in the bone, then your gums swell with discomfort when they press against it; and forcefully, you pull out that tooth.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	S lays on those days, and turns back to that place where he was born.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the bolt of the sail is in that place, you must pull it towards you at this hour.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	The Mays is equipped with an engine and you may operate the thrust, then introduce it (the engine) by inserting the nozzle into its cone section and apply pressure to push it back in from your side using the control lever.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If a sail is concave, the wind's force will enter through it more effectively when the sail is unfurled towards that direction.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the jaundice is treated, you should avoid exposure to sunlight as much as possible and take care that your skin does not get burned by it if this is feasible for you.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If you touch the swollete there in your chest, or near it; or if on your belly; or in your bladder; or by your side, and it's close to where a vein or nerve is present: then keep this advice in mind. Do not try to extract anything yourself but consult with a physician immediately.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of tweezeren die zijn toegestaan om koperen af te halen:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The claws of the crabs are like scissors when they catch their prey in the net, as not to let it escape.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	The following are various types of mussels, large and small, as well as medium-sized ones, according to the size of the seashore and its abundance or scarcence, as well as the breadth of the tide and its currents.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	This form of imperfect conditional in Catalan refers to an action that was going to happen but did not take place. In this case, it would be something like: "Si hauria sortit pluja, la terra estaria més úscia" (If it had rained, the ground would have been wetter). This construction is used in Catalan to express hypothetamo scenarios or consequences that did not actually occur.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Impulsora extrema oyente (AEO): una forma innovadora para ayudar a las personas con discapacidad auditiva.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Essa is revolving around the inner surface of a concave mirror and is propelled away from it by an external force.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	The phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The blood collection sites for phlebotomy typically include the antecubital fossa. Among these, I am chapter XVI. And you must take the pulsatile veins which are in the temples, and those herbs that grow in both temple areas; and two tear ducts from two wells called "aspicients"; and a prepared vessel at the mid forehead location, and the vessel that is at the tip of the nose; and vessels that go to the neck (throat); and vessels that are on the upper lip; and vessels that are on the lower lip; these are known as the Algalics. And there are two more vessels from underneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	I have a vein that was just syringe punctured in my arm. This text seems to be discussing various veins in the human body and their local names given by a specific community or population. However, some of the terms used are unclear as they do not correspond with known anatomical terminology. Nonethebrically translated, it might read something like this:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	E is the vein of the calf bone and it consists of three main vessels; one of those originates from the curvature of the fibula, which in Latin is called "tibia," and this vessel runs alongside the bone; another is the saphenous vein, whose origin lies next to the domestic tibia, or calf bone used for food; while the third is the sciatic vein, with its origination adjacent to the silviculture fibula. In addition to these primary vessels, there are other similar veins present in this area.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The blood of the veins, which flows to the ears, is an ancient remedy and migrates, heals, and cures old head wounds.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of that bone is such that I have described to you: it should be as large as the mallet, and its head should resemble the shape of the mallet at the back end where both veins are wide with good furring; tightly secured by the mallet with a cord wrapped around so that the ears appear in two locations pressed towards the back from its position on top. And you shall have it as you described, and if you feel the pulse of those bones, here is my sign to testify.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	He takes up the kitchen knife and that which is inscribed, and places that remainder of vein into the groove within which the blood-letting device will come to his knee.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	The vein is elevated above the muscle and tendon in the upper parts and incised with an incision made across it.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	A is the length of the incision and the amount of stitches or around that area; and follow your doctor's instructions as to when you want them removed.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	A prop is to strengthen the pillars and provide support within it so that it remains safe.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	In the beginning, those who desired freedom and their censorship were subjected to it.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The two veins that go to the temples from the lungs are the internal jugular and external jugular veins. They are responsible for draining blood away from the head, face, brain, and neck. These veins play a crucial role in returning deoxygenated blood back to the heart through the vena cava system.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of the botox injection is as follows, which I recommend to you: it involves a mild discomfort caused by your motion while the two veins appear at the feeling through manifest and visible signs in the pulse points left behind from your speech; and now try not to swallow.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	To access the vein above your elbow, follow these steps:
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Remove the bandage from the wound and rest your tongue for an hour, then press on that spot and gently massage the affected area until it is strongened; let it heal.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	They were accompanied by the recollection of their past and those indiscretions during the commencement of liberty.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Thus, the juice of the leaf from the tree of frontal vein approaches the phlebotomy of the cephalic head to combat ancient diseases of the face and migrate and grow foul ulcers. (Note: This translation is based on a literal word-for-word approach; however, it does not convey any meaningful information in English as the original text appears nonsensical or highly archaeback.)
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the flebotomy performed by you is according to which I recommend that he wears his coat with an inner band in which the vein appears; and then, using this instrument called a "fossor," which has the following form.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	The prominent point you see at the top of the vein is located above that vein and strikes it with your tool either on its slope or in another direction, following the manner of your choice; then loosen the puncture site of pain and strengthen the area to be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	However, some valves are overtaken by a flobotomiser, but it should not be assumed that the flobotomiser is of sharp extremity as with other flobotomizers; rather, it's on the side extremity and flobotomizes according to the transverse direction because the bone is properly and strongly located where the flobotomizer would subtly cut if overtaken.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The ointment of the two herbs that are found in abundance near tears of stones and crying holes, for healing wounds and swelling in the body, and diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bloodletting is such that strong fever ties him in one bandage, and he thoroughly bleeds those areas; you stand over his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	E should be made using the crosswise technique for slightly multiple lashes, so that in the area where it is not hairy, there are only a few lashebrows and if the eyelashes are subtle, their extremities are trimmed off quite close.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	B) Stretch before and after your run according to what's necessary for you, pause during those spots where it’s needed, and strengthen them overnight by stretching them out further.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Mays le flebectomy of the nasal vein is associated with acute fever and violent symptoms, as well as diseases affecting the face, migraines, and rashes that often occur in the facial area, especially when it's an old procedure.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the flebotomy depends on you having strong will and leaning towards your left side, with the lancet fine and long inserted in that place under the capillary location at the top of your nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear here and because the blood starts flowing quickly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Last night I administered the last of my fleabotox injection little by little, according to my needs, and applied it properly for one night as that ensures effective rejuvenation.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The Mayo Clinic's Flebotomy Department has successfully guided the construction of an advanced blood therapy center, which is instrumental in combating leprosy, various diseases and conditions including severe ulcers, as well as herpetiformis (a rare skin disorder).
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the flebotomy of those vessels is such that each malady stays within its own sphere, and the skilled practitioner stands over the head of the ailment while the malady lies centered upon a needle-like point.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	The vein gradually enlarges as more blood flows through it, and its thickness increases in proportion to the amount or frequency of liquid that is needed at any given time; and it resembles the other veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Here is the translation of your text from Occitan to English:
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The jujube tree'e bloodletting from veins causes small abscesses and pustules on the mouth and corruption of gums, as well as bad ulcers and fissures inside it; there are also bad ulcers in the nose and around its orbit.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the phlebotomy for those phases is to alleviate pain, and strengthen your neck with a bandage, then rotate the lips of you and examine the two veins from which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and it demonstrates each in its darkness, and here more so around the circuit of these veins are finer black lines; thus cuts each for incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Doubt creeps in from the past, and you don't know which one of those it is; often times you perceive the greatest among them, and its most evident part.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	It seems like you're asking for a translation from a language that doesn't appear to be correctly identified as "E fay." Could it possibly be Welsh, or another language? Please provide the correct language code or more context for an accurate translation.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Maya usually pierces the remaining veins on her inner lips.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The two veins that are left of the tongue can be seen when you open your mouth widely, in front of the skull to the pre-tragic area, related to the diseases of the uvula and oral cavity disorders.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of that leaflet is such that it follows the disease among your cattle before sunset and raises its tongue upward, then looks behind the tongue; from one side of it flows blood, while from the other side there's no flowing of blood, and the color of each one declines to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Henceforth, do not cut too low while shaving; and make sure that you don't harm your skin with the razor blade those times again, lest it get injured there in such a way as to sever the arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E is your blood that flows just like in the veins of everyone, and its flow usually occurs according to two methods. Either they apply a berry-like flebotomy or an olive oil one with gradual subsidence; or sometimes they use surgical flebotomy, and then it's called leeching, which is another form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	The correctness of the segment depends on which language it is written in and its intended meaning. As you provided text that seems to be a mix between Catalan (a Romance language) and an apparent misspelling or mistranslation, I'll proceed under the assumption that we are dealing with Catalan.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Mode of aerial application for fruit trees:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The veins are divided into large and small vessels; the larger ones being arteries while the smaller ones are called capillaries. Arteries carry oxygenated blood from the heart to other organs, except for the pulmonamo which receives deoxygenated blood through the vena cava inferior. Capillaries allow for gas exchange and nutrient delivery by opening their concave full veins appearing as thick grosses; they also open those containing large clotted blood cells.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the form of olive spraying with a backpack sprayer (or fleebotom):
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	A fine needle aspiration is of smaller diameter and more delicate tip, suitable for aspirating from small superficial veins containing subtle citrine blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The blood flow of the femoral vein is one of three veins: two carry the poison from diseases that affect the liver and kidney, and one draining into the abdinal region.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	When performing a venipuncture procedure, ensure that the vein is properly identified and selected, avoiding any excessive fear in the patient which may result from previous arterial punctures; if an error occurs during the needle insertion or if it accidentally pierces the artery, blood flow can occur. Therefore, always make sure to use a non-painful, sharp and sterile needle for venipuncture before proceedhemetric measures are taken.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica is not clearly visible, you may leave it and move to another one or search for any ruins of its remains; then proceed with the flint-lock weapon in the place where the arm was previously located, as that area is clear; afterwards, use the same flint-clock mechanism.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform a venipuncture of your upper arm, proceed beyond the rigidity of the arm that you touch the area inside where you know the location of the veins, and then gently apply pressure on it with your thumb; then wrap the arm and draw blood from the vein using a convex syringe as we have described; and make sure to keep checking for any hematoma formation near the puncture site.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	Twice I turn to you in this struggle; inflate within the place where your mind has wandered before—that inflation is an artery's inflation, and hence swiftly avoid that one.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	When blood flows in the veins as gently as a child's breathing, and the blood is subtle warmth; hours of wisdom that comes from the blood of the artery; and for a time your heart aches and pauses over those long distances; and then you embrace it with your hands, and if the blood has been clotted, many times it will be released.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	The illness of the young girl seemed to have a mysterious nature; she was also very frightened and did not eat for several days until she recovered.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the limb does not have sufficient blood supply and it needs to be treated with a medicine, you must incise the artery; if the extremity is contorted and there's bleeding, or that takes place after puncturing a vein, then grasp slightly more than half of its length and lift it over the strictured vessel in order to clear any clots within 24 hours.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the sanctity is removed, then it's not a place; and if not, the hours heal whomever of whom it is remembered in the location of scattered ashes flows with blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The extraction of the splinter in your finger can be challenged by various factors, such as the location at the tip of the beach and the possibility of arm movement.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	In the venous fuscus vein, phlebotomy is often preferred over extraction from the upper part of the chest to the lower part of the back; for this reason, it is composed of basilic vein and cephalic vein branches as we have already mentioned.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The translator has mixed Catalan and French in this passage. Here is the corrected version in proper Old Occitan (also known as Old Provençal):
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then its length will be less than that of either nerve.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The jet of the femoral venipuncture in the cephalic vein is used to draw blood and administer medication for various human illnesscuedan.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In this vein, if you want the phlebotomy to be performed on an olive or mastic tree, as it is the safest of all veins and does not involve cutting off a major artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, I advise you to keep the fleam close by so that it does not pierce your forehead solecuously and look for a more suitable place rather than near the eyes; if necessary, first test with slight pressure on that spot using the fleam.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, if the abscess is in the upper part of the body and it's not punctured during the first incision, then there will be no bleeding at that spot.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of veterinary care in this area and the number of animal accidents that occur there prompt us to consider possible improvements.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first one of which you know that blepharoplasty is not performed due to conservation for health and with hope of improvement as well as caution against potential diseases; it should be carried out on one of the veins located in the eyelid, namely: cephalic, fusca (superior), and basilica (inferior); it should be done at the beginning of springtime, after breakfast during spring/autumn, or towards winter before mealtime when signs of restoration appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	S is to perform a left hemicolectomy, and the third day after the surgery will mark three hours of passed time.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May's flea combing that is administered, as it causes convenience and necessity either in water or oil, at any time of day or night, always.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	Children shall be circumcised by the age of twelve; women shall undergo hymen reconstruction surgery within four months after giving birth; and elderly individuals are not subject to circumcision, but have their reconstructive surgeries performed once they reach sixty years of age.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	An E catheter is an instrument designed for any method to be used before phlebotomy as a clyster of the lion that has sewn intestinal fistulae, in order for it not to drain excessively during the venous puncture of the veins, which are pure and do not reach the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E avoid any surgical operations performed by the patients without spiritual care and abstinence from alcohol or similar substances, as well as protection from illness or addiction during this period; nor harm of gastrointestinal problems, but rather fear associated with post-surgery pain and vomiting, and other complications related to constipation, diarrhea, increased bodily effort, vigils or sleepless nights that weaken the body (corporeal or animal).
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Person A: In case of smoke in the area and if the air quality becomes bad, it is advisebroader foods and drinks to water, as well as medicines if necessary.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Article X - Appropriate Use and Prohibited Actions
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	Pause the flebotomy at noon in the park as we have scheduled, so it is now three o'clock, just as we discussed.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Here'n that day, he will be witness to all the evils of animals - such as fear, anger, and terror, along with all kinds of bodily afflictions like exhaustion, unnecessary pain, seizure, and paralysis.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	"A" refers to the fact that people usually have certain smells and scents due to various reasons, which can vary depending on the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the bloodsuckers on a quest to find out which one is older than that of the one who was once bitten.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Remove your sleeve and show the nurse the three scars on your arm, and then wrap yourself in the sheet provided by her.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	E is the early closure, where the closing time does not match, or it's a superfluous closure and hours of flow in sanctions are forbidden; or it's a softening measure, and hours of sales are limited significantly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Under the strict regulation, one who wishes to be a certified blood donor must meet all requirements, including that their veins are visible and easily accessible for insertion during the procedure.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The phlebotomist applies a small amount of traditional personal oil onto their phlebotomy equipment; and they carefully place their left index finger over the vein from which blood will be drawn, avoiding the area around it, to make the vein slightly protrude. A gentle percussion is then applied near the targeted veins so that the blood flows easily for venipuncture. The phlebotomist also pays attention to those filled with air and pulsations from which blood should flow smoothly during venipuncture, and avoids them. If not done correctly, it becomes visible; if successful, the needle does not hit a vein and instead enters the tissue slightly.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, in order for the water distributor to be stopped and considered liable in all these cases, it must fulfill the following requirements.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	The text appears to be in Catalan language and not related to any physics problem involving dependant variables or concepts such as the Hubble constant (which is a value used in cosmology). Therefore, I'm unable to provide an answer without further context or clarification regarding what specific physics question you are asking.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the wound becomes infected or the illness spreads further, you should leave for a day or two, and do not apply bandages; because if an abscess forms, it could lead to more serious conditions, nor enter the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	He appreciates the benefits of acupuncture but is skeptculed about its effectiveness.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening is small and closes slightly, and you fear that it doesn't contain enough blood to meet your needs, try again with another syringe in this way and adjust the dosage on the syringe a little bit, so do not wait too long before using it as the place may become swollen, because the site is prone to slight swelling in many people.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Mays si vezes aquella ja apostemat, l'hores non iteres sovint sobre lu, car no éscusa a tu alguna causa; i pausa sobre aquest alcun partida de la fenda d'oli, car alléuja el cors del sang.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	E smells better in this place than the others did.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	In the process of phlebotomy, a thin needle is used to puncture a vein in order to draw blood or administer medication. The procedure typically involves using antiseptics at the site and ensuring the skin area above the vein is taut so that the blood vessel can be seen clearly as it is quite fine and may move.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a bleeding occurs at the site of phlebotomy, it often leads to large abscesses and mostly affects those who are not anemic but rather have this swelling. In such cases, you'll experience pain and discomfort in that spot. To allecuate, use a clean sponge dipped in water with salt, gently press on the area for about an hour to dissolve it.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	The Fossa Aquatica is an area where water flows towards the sediment of that vein or another vee, which could be considered as a tribute to Lu or another vee.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	In the chosen place for incense and any black or green hue, do not add water; if desired, pause on that altar of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or a drop from frankincense or calamus, or anything similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Previous vasectomies can lead to the formation of sperm granulomas and scarring, requiring surgical correction at a urology clinic.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	So then pause your hand upon that one, and if you have much desire for it, press down on that limb; but when the vein starts to flow with blood, know well that such a source is evil and harmful; therefore be cautious not to act impulsively due to what we've said, for often strong feelings rush forth from our veins.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	F ELECTRODEPOSITION PROCESS: THIS IS THE PHYSICAL PRINCIPLE OF DEPOSITING MATERIAL ON A SUBSTRATE IN WHICH AN EPITAXIALLY STRAINED LAYER IS FORMED, AND APPROPRIATELY CURATED SO THAT IT RECOVERS.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	Cove that extracts the juice from all fruits according to their quantity and quality, whereby excess juice is separated off the dregs below as they appear.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If you see the blood as black, then wait until it flows slowly and seems less intense before touching it; and similarly if you see it as thick, enter that it is somewhat subtle; and likewise if it's sharp, go into its acuteness of edge.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	A vein that is swol cuffy and hard with the need for a blood draw in an elderly person requires both veins to be enlarged through venipuncture, including superficial and deep veins.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In the event that someone's animal crosses over to another person'amoor land and causes damage, they should remove said animal from multiple meadows if necessary and make sure it is properly restrained in the future.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best practice in venipuncture of a vein is to obtain a transverse section rather than a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This circumcision method is free from bleeding and nerve injury risk, and it's more favorable and safer than the circumcision according to lengthwise and widthwise orientation.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	A fever of epilepsy usually occurs after phlebotomy, and before it take the leeches, you should have a small dose in wine with milgran (myrtle) or simple oxymel scalfate; apply to the wound three or four times.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is an obstruction of the passage, it may take longer before the infusion through a catheter or an aromatic infuser with spices such as pepper, cinnamamoon, ginger and others, or with an aromatic infuser that has a pleasant odor.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	The scent of the peppermint herb is due to its essential oil content, which contains compounds that have soothing and refreshing properties; it also exhibits a certain level of aromaticity, making its flavor predominantly cooling.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	In the text, other causes leading to a syncopal episode due to orthostatic hypotension have been mentioned in the discussion of this condition within the capital chapter on syncope and its management.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	When the wound is exposed for the second time, it reaches the layer from which bleeding originated, and the virtue of its healing process allows the blood to gradually drain out, as per the amount present in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If Mays' arm were to get caught in the saw while he was cutting wood and his blood pressure increased for hours or even nine times during the first bleeding, then...
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	"The hunter shooting his arrow shall take aim on the target opposite to that of the party he's competing against; it is possible for him to hit it either on the following day or third."
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	In the case where blood is drawn from a vein that is already cut and inflamed, causing fever, it's advised to let the blood drain completely before proceeding. This will help avoid any complications such as fainting or syncope. It's crucial to maintain all conditions of proper phlebotomy: use sterile equipment, ensure a skilled and attentive practitioner, apply pressure on the puncture site immediately after blood draw to prevent excess bleeding leading to mortality from shock instead of fainting.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	In the cove corner where you wish to unfasten your arm and evacuate the wound a second time, now that the orifice of the vein is closed, there is difficult blood flow as you press up above it with such vehement force, which causes its lengthy rupture. This happens because this spot is too harshly treated.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	In the case of a bleeding injury, proceed as follows: firstly, apply pressure with a bandage or clean cloth; secondly, elevate the affected area above heart level to reduce blood flow; thirdly, compress gently around the wound so that the blood is forced out. Additionally, you may use an antifouling chemical (styptic pencil), or astringent solution such as alum or silver nitrate to promote clotting of the bleeding vessel at the puncture site; finally, apply gentle pressure continuously until the bleeding stops.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is thrombosed, wait until the thrombus has stabilized and do not touch it.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If you are urgamo to defecate secondarily and it is not an excuse, turn your buttocks over that spot or in another vein on the other side.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "flebus del braz" is phlebotomized in the fossa or the vena cava when they are not thrombosed or obstructed, as it consists of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the phlebotomy is that the illness enters its main component in water after which, within the vein, it visibly swells and appears prominently.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	The text provided appears to be in Occitan, not French. Translated into English, it means: "The approach should strictly follow the line indicated by the strict rule; and approach fly-by according to the small cross, neither latitudinally nor longitudinnally."
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	C is the broad aperture and your precision lies in performing that on the junction of those two small ones.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If blood flow is restricted in the vein, try applying a warm compress to the affected area and elevate your leg until you can see a doctor for medical advice.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the days of summer, those hours would be exempt from traveling along with the cold stream, and the body is cooled by the bloodstream during wintertime while immersed in a cold stream.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The phlebotomy of this vein is to be preferred over all others since it lacks a palpable pulse or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The botfly of the sheep tick is related to liver disecuases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the bloodletting is that you must tie off either your mother's or your father's vein, then make it into a leather strap, while ensuring that the vein is inflated and visible at all times; and proceed to incise across that transversely. If you do not pierce through completely in one go, repeat the process.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	E, do not endanger your hand with the shotgun, as it could trigger an outburst of nerves from those recently stripped bare.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	A patient should rotate the arm while moving it in the cold water stream; otherwise, if you do not rotate that arm in the cold water stream, blood may clot at the venipuncture site and is thus forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	Extract the blood according to your needs, rest for a while on the vein before applying bandage and oil-salt mixture so that it is not tightly compressed; similarly ensure you do this throughout the entire strip.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The Mayo Clinic'eel flower therapy of that on my left side is said to be beneficial for melasma diseases.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	He acted in a similar manner when performing botox as he did on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The juice of the Sappanwood vein used in phlebotomy is effective against diseases such as those caused by residual humors, just like remedies for women's disorders, and retention of menstruation, as well as resemblances to diseases of old wounds and ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the flebotomy is such that an error occurs when the needle enters its way into water and hits above that friction area where veins appear; it's located at the junction of the arm, right beneath a pulsating point, and from there branches out across the face of the arm.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, the application of a plaster over the wound promotes healing and provides better protection against infection, as it is cleaner and more secure.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	He observed that on the face of your palm you have some nerves left from where you previously botoxed; therefore, I suggest avoiding Botox injections across these areas and instead focus on other regions for treatment.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Let S be the set of all birds that can fly.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	May's method does not allow blood to clot; as a result, the liquid from her vein is poured into water causing the blood to run through until it is completely drained out.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the flybot roams in the first newly planted field, repeat its visits a few times until the area is free from flies; and do not fear the naughty ones, but rather protect yourself from their nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Create an imitation of the following essence in a similar manner to that of another pairing.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	Certaine, la veia sàvija (veine sciatique), que corre par l'esquerra del musel, le va àltament ala raça de las mamailles per a ens dire els seus fons en el món amb llunyaneigut.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The essence of the fleambotomy procedure is determined at the moment when it approaches to cut skin.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the flebotomy procedure is that the illness enters into banishment, and he prays and strains to extract the blood from his arm vein through a very narrow orifice beneath four fingers at once using a long subtle bandage not visible except underwater.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Once the hours have passed, you must choose one of these options for each engineer that is possible according to the following rules: turn clockwise or counterclockclockwise depending on their respective position; this option shall be better. Choose either out of personal preference or necessity based on the situation, as it will lead to a positive outcome.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	In the heart lies love for many homes; if you find it, and not everyone feels that, sometimes a leaf brushes against your cheek, and it is the one that appears in the left side of the face near the ear and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	A gaze at the nerves, and let the blood flow in the amount you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	A relax the tight regulations and restrictions on botulinum toxin injections but strengthen the location, as it is slightly more hygiene.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	The wind turbine and the use of its features.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	The crows were black, the embers red-hot, and the wind strong.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	A ventouse is made from two materials: one of them is a rubber bulb and tube used to extract blood, while the other part creates suction for its use.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This brief gust of wind is known as a squall; it happens twice because the sea can be calm or stormy.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	In the fourteen locations where incisions and extraction of tissue are performed, the first is located at the site where the incisions on the cheek are made, which is the last part of the head; and the middle location is halfway down the forehead; incisions below the chin are made just below the mouth; four locations are on both sides of the nose bridge; two locations above the ear canal; six locations at each helix (outer rim) of the ears; a single incision over the top of the head; and lastly, two incisions for drainage tubes or stitches.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	A suction cupping is a technique where small venous vessels are drawn towards the cup, similar to bloodletting by fleamotomy; and it should not be performed with heat or hot substances in any illness caused by fluid retention whereby all fluids are evacuated from the body.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	La richessenza di May requiere un'imposta sul cibo durante il mese o per tutta l'estate, ogni volta al momento dei pasti del giorno e alla fine della giornabuona notte e nel luogo dove si trova in qualsie tempo.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of the curse affecting people is as follows: It makes them feel heaviness and weakness in their head; it causes full restoration and strengthening in their face and head, and in their neck; it causes prickling on their face and forehead, darkness and dullness in their eyes; it removes the place of blood flow from their head; it multiplies laughter; and it takes away appetite for blood from their mouths, or makes their tongue sticky and they spit out blood. It also causes increased sleepiness, and during sleep, strengthening, ancient signs, plagues, and other effects on their appearance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, whenever possible in any case of those mentioned, the hearing should preferably take place on the third or fifteenth day of the month, no later than three to four hours after midday.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The gust of wind blowing at the back of one's neck is what gives gravity its effect on the head and to the point where it settles in the skull; but rather, that airflow leads to full body ventilation.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This cocktail is from the headshaving place in Cephalonia.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	"E should not be used to treat that which is of frigidity or in cases where there is diarrhee, as it may cause great harm."
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	In water I find refuge where I wash away the pains of my old days and in which I heal my afflictions.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	The wind that blows over there about which the one has forgotten; and for this reason I command you to control the fan so that it decreases its power at the hour of departure, fearing a generation of forgetfulnss.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Mays ventozacio of alkehel is in the field of phlebotomy for varicose veins and basilica: it provides relief from asthma, constriction of the trachea, spitting blood, coughing, and swelling.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	The windpipe is narrowed by the akelh's small beak, thus if it becomes constricted or blocked, weakness occurs in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The extract from the text "Dizionario di Rime Antiche Toscane" (Dictionary of Ancient Tuscan Rhymes) by Agnolo Acciaioli, dated around the year 1370, provides an early mention of a medical condition resembling what we know today as migranin:
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	I command the fan to not press so hard that it damages the graft and allows blood flow to pass through.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Blowing constantly on the mouth with alcohol leads to corrosion of the gums and imitates symptoms present in oral diseases; it is close to lipofibromatosis that occurs between the upper lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The May wind that blows over the two spoons of sugar gives it an added warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	In the basilica of St. Mary Major in Rome is preserved an ancient relic known as the "Vas Lintealis" or Shroud, which dates back to the time of Christ's burial. The shroud contains imprints that suggest three major blood vessels and numerous smaller ones.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	E commands the vacuum cleaner to not operate in the process, as the place is stripped of flesh and leaves only bare nerves and vessels behind.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	E is an antiseptic that cleans wounds and helps heal abrasions, cuts, and infected sores with pus discharge.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	Adjust the fan to a high speed setting and set it for air circulation. Ensure all vents are clean, four left side outlets of strong flow; and ensure right-side delicate blades have been properly adjusted.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	In this passage from the medieval Galician-Portuguese epic poem "Cantar del Mío Cid," we see references to various remedies and treatments used during that time for different ailments and injuries. Here is an attempt at translating it into modern English, foccuing on its medical context:
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	In some cases, disorders of the heart can lead to syncopal episodes in certain individuals.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	From Alahórcben to the Juventa, the property goes back to the Juventcu from the two chambers.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the wind exposure position depends on initially directing the ventilation as desired and softened by early drafts; do not prolong the wind exposure but pause them deliberately and return them gradually, allowing the humidity to come in with incoming air.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	The process of blood clotting does not cease until the right conditions are met, including visible redness and swelling, along with the appearance of a throbbing sensation in the area where the wound occurred. This is due to platelets gathering at the site of injury, forming a plug that helps prevent further bleeding.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Hours ago he threw himself into the sea and started swimming with little effort, carefully considering his options as available to him.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	The house that has tender meat of rare pores, hide which you shall shave a veil and not put on, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	C commands the fan to increase circulation and blow a little bit, making it easier for airflow to pass through.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the sanctum is dark and vast, hours pass that slowly drain your vigor; in the initial glow, the path of subtlety opens to the sacredness and clarity of light.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second phase, May assessed the obtained perspective from the extraction of the large sample.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the cows are fed a rich diet, they should be brushed daily so that you can achieve their desired results.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	At the end of the day, when we want to extract little by little or just one small amount, that's enough for our slight sacrifice.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to extract some blood by scratching the skin (scarification), and we know that the wound is deep, it should take several hours before we can rinse off after the procedure.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term of scouring where the depth is only concerned with the sole itself.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the skin is thick, hard, dark and its pores are narrow, then the fragrances of the essential oils should be milder, more open and resolute; if it's in summer time, so like aloe oil or violet oil or apricot kernel oil or rosemary oil. And if it is wintertime, it is similar to orange oil, lily oil, chamomile oil or cinnamon oil.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the oil is thick and fragrant, it could be oil of myrrh, or oil of balm (balsam), or oil of aloe, or oil of nard; or something similar to these.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	"If the blender is of large plastic parts, it should be prohibited to use oil and ensure that all blending containers are washed with cold or warm water only, not hot water from a tap or boiling water, etc."
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	Aquele da qual lhe sa montanha fumegante tem vento úmido, limpe as suas janelas com vinagre ou água de mirtilo e sabugueiro entre outros semelhantes.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	Of the ones whose mustaches are thick, wash them with vinegar beforehand, or water of sansevieria (snake plant), which is aloe vera, or nettle infusion, or chamomile, and so on.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	The rules for the sauna use are as follows:
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done before bleeding a patient for the prevention of fainting during venipuncture?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the moment of reflection: if you have a fan or someone who flewbotomized is colicky and winded over your blessed soul, I advise that you take causes cooling down, such as minty acetates, cucumber with very low fat content, lettuce, secanabin, and julep.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	They offer a variety of dishes such as roasted meats, grilled chicken and seasoned vegetables, along with delicious desserts.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	E of that which the feast is about, he should take to drink aromatic wine or cider from alsekenian grapes, and sumac; and it should smell sweetly between young and old; and let him be advised to use moderation in his eating and drinking habits. He should abstain from roasted meats, cabbage, peasants and pet birds like pigeons and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	On the day of blood donation, let the intake be greater than the expenditure.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	Avoid using this medication on broken skin or wounds, as well as near the eyes and mouth. Also avoid use before surgery or any procedures involving injections or puncturing of the skin. Use only to relieve symptoms from occasional nasal congestion due to cold, flu, allergies, or sinusitis; or muscle pain, headache, or joint discomfort caused by an external cause like exercise or injury. To ensure comfort in major body parts and a gentle action on the blood vessels: Do not use if you are sensitive to this medication or its ingredients.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	In acupuncture, it is recommended to avoid needling the intercostal spaces (spaces between the ribs), as well as areas where muscles have been previously injured or inflamed, and those with podagra (gout in the foot) or umbilical issues. Additionally, points located on joint creases should be approached with caution when scar tissue is present. The acupoint Shuidozi (ST 40), which lies near a large muscle group, should also not receive needling if there's scar tangle in the area.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E is not a source of fear but an attraction for the blood flow from the limbs, just as a vacuamo (vacuum pump) applied to the nipple in cases of sanguine flux caused by blood from the veins; and use of this one so that it gets dissolved, fluidity freed from obstruction within the limb, like a vacuum on the belly and umbilicus; for this one strengthens the limb and relieves its pain and weakness as it resolves obstructions.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	A landslide occurs when sudden movements of earth or rock saturated with water happen in their natural environment, due to the strong attraction between them and by removing soil from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	The apparent one lying down on the fold and ridge should be ventilated in those clauses.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These windows are soleveled only with vinegar occasionally; and sometimes they are cleaned using a duster or focus cleaner.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some patients are treated with full water infusions in cases of severe diarrhea.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The water should be clear and abundant with plenty of grasses or herbs suitable for grazing animals.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Shaped by the winds of administration, both the width and depth of this hole are determined according to what we have designed; and the amount of grain should be as much as a palmful; and it shall be located in the latitude where it resides on the circuit, with its length being small according to the quantity that enters within it through the needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Both in French and Romanian (with some errors), the sentence appears to be about a fruit salad consisting of apricots, large margarines, lions, hands, and terse statements, regarding its position on a ledge as per your request for a stance. However, there seems to be confusion or incorrect use of words in this context:
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	The light of the torch is extinguished by the horizontal beam of its own fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	This fine glass of that wine we have mentioned again; and the little sweetness of that, according to its illnesses and the condition of the one who drinks it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The vacuoles of the elephants and exhausting those of other animals, like the vacuangs of young and large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of the pause you seek is a small hole over which extends a metal tube; place it above a few candles made of wax, and pause that onto the crossbar transversely at the middle point of the hole so that the flame can be ignited. Light the beginning part to prevent burning out the cord.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	The rain gently falls upon the leaves of the trees, and drops their whispered tales, while they stand tall amidst the gusty winds without fearing that their secrets are unveiled and that steam rises from below those trunks; soon the whirlwind dissipates.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	"E ply the Ignatius Method according to your manner, and iterate until you grasp that concept."
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In a therapy session for patients suffering from Parkinson's disease, there is an application of water that does not have a transverse or straight tube and is not administered as such but is filled with water and placed on the limb only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the version in Portuguese: Este é o modo como ele funciona: quanto maior este orifício, melhor ele pode reter uma grande quantidade de águaturas.
Capitol .xcvii.	In English, "Capitólio" refers to a capital city or a building that houses the legislative body of government, such as in Washington D.C., USA, where we have the United States Capitol building. The term "xcvii," on the other cuyo, is not directly related to this context; it appears to be a Roman numeral representing the number 97 (L = 50 + X=10+X=10+I=1+I=1+V=5+II=2). If you're looking for information or clarification on these topics, please let me know how I can assist you further.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not usually applied to joints but rather to areas where it is impossible for the suction cups, due to their small size, such as on tendons and gums or similar areas; or on a naked area of skin, just like previously mentioned parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The quality of using those that you have found leeches, which are in the ponds from polluted areas.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	The patient is suffering from persistent diarrhea and vomiting at night, which has led to dehabilitation; they should avoid consuming any food that causes the stomachache in these cases; during meals, perform flebotomy or take ventosilla; relieve the affected limb within those areas where it turns red; apply warm compresses.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	C is the letter with curved lines and loops.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	It's possible to find a lively place near the windy location, but it may be risky during strong gusts.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	S is the key to unlocking happiness - hours of hard work and love for your home, as well as taking care of yourself. Wash away any guilt with water; let's express our feelings together.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the leech's tube is left on the concrete near the bloodsucker's habitat and it continues to ooze, after a few hours, place a cloth in cold water, then cover the area with something that holds the drip above where the oozing occurs.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the wounds are multiplied and dust is spread over lu vitriol trissat (triple sulfur), or if they have similar symptoms to stipulative causes; then either remain still within that time before the blood clots, or place them on a cloth with mashed beans while waiting for the beeans to adhere to the location and the blood will coagulate.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	In case there is a need for bloodsucker migration, one can adjust their positions accordingly.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If lice are banned from suspension, both natural and artificial methods of hair removal must be used along with the use of a needle in the area to create pain; also, they should be regularly maintained because those that cause blood stagnation appear soon afterwards.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	The cooking method for chanterelles involves lightly dusting them with flour, salt or ash, and then sautéing them quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Chapter Three: Restoration
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is essential in the art of medicine and includes treatments for bone fractures and dislocations resulting from accidents.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Lo and behold! The wise old owl shares a tale of yore, when scribes wrote about the noble knights and humble peasleteers without heeding not one letter from ancient scripts or their lawyers' decrees.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this cause I made it so that the method of scientists in our land was confined; and I never forgot it at any time by heart; nor have I used them since then except for reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, within which I extracted the science from those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	A prop to conducting experiments and studies throughout the lifesume span.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Here is the translation of your passage from Old Catalan to Modern English:
Capitol primier.	First Class Capitalization.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summae and collections of broken bones are necessary to be considered before we begin the recounting of individual limbs and their various parts.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Cove that I tell you in this first chapter the main points of the sermon; and the chapters which are meant to be understood by those who hear it at its beginning, the craftsmen and so on, upon the truth of these things; for you too, and those who know or learn from this noble art.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Whenever a bone fracture or dislocation occurs, it's necessary to seek medical attention as soon as possible through surgical intervention or closed reduction of that area; unless there are any contraindications, do so without delay because the healing process depends on timely treatment. This is particularly important in cases involving severe injuries, elderly individuals, during extreme heat conditions or periods of intense cold weather.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Properly prepared content of leafy greens and poultry meat, as well as game meats like rabbit and quail; avoid fatty foods and stuffing that may obstruct the veins prone to hemorrhage (such as those with a history of varicose veins), and do not consume excessive amounts of any particular food.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	The lord returned to his first regiment, which he usually heads as a commander.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	Soon after the broken bone begins to be restored, hours later when the pain has subsided from nourishing foods rich in nutrients and energy, such as whole grains with water, milk, cheese, fish, meat (especially veal), broths, fresh vegetables, and fruits similar to those mentioned above, along with appropriate rest and care is recommended for the healing of the broken bone.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	The birds that have broken bones cannot be healed in humans present on the first village or among the elderly; it'amo not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limb members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	E remain and continue according to their nature forever for the drying out of those parts, and their continuousness and solidification are such as in the bones of little children at the end of clemency.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature provides and nourishes us with all the resources that seem to be abundant for our sustenance; these are the nutrients which adhere together creating a balance within us that strengthens and unites efforts, wherein lies the foundation of health and vigor, as in the case of food at mealtime, without any cause prohibiting such use from its resources.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary that you abstain from foods of evil nature, such as those which are heavy and sticky, just as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Type of fracture varies according to the affected limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	The ways in which the species of fractures are different depend on the variety of members, so a fracture of the lower leg bone is different from a skull fracture; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a spine fracture; similarly all other members vary among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	A you remember the memorial of all types of fractures, distinguished in their own capital from others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Variety of fracture in the right tibia.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The species of bone fractures in the femur are quite diverse; one is an arcuate fracture that occurs due to certain forces; and some cases involve fractures according to the length of the bone: and there are fractures from rotation, spikes, and additions, both resulting and non-resulting, just as it is depicted in the description when prepared for writing. The fracture can be a plague or disruption at the end, and a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The total experience is unique at each restaurant, offering its own charm and special distincuish features that will be remembered from the next visit to these places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	E per aqua è conosciuta una frattura dell'osso: la sua tortuosità di luce, e di quella eminenza ed apprezzamento della luce al sentimento, e soffio di lu quando comprimi quel amore alla tua madre.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Then, if it is not an obvious deformity or swelling on your limb when you touch the bone area gently and pain does not cause severe discomfort, there's likely no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be some twisting or small cracks, but as long as you do not feel any pain in your tooth and it has total compression; take pause over the use of medications which remind you of that moment when necessary care was required; and appropriate for subtle stricture.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	The fishes that inhabit the river in its natural curved form and are not divided into two or any other waters, which do not reach the sea at low tide, shall be restored to their entire population as it was before; you must commence rectifying this from your hour onwards so that they may thrive again.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If you have a mild eye infection, apply an antibiotic ointment to the affected area and wait for it to heal within one or two days; proceed according to whichever treatment method seems appropriate based on your symptoms and condition.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	The recovery of the light and sharpening of it is a false belief that arises from the one in which these incidents occur.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	A prop is strong according to the upcoming recollection of him/her.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If your dog has suffered a fracture in one of its limbs, two pieces may be necessary to extend and stabilize the affected member if it is either the front or hind leg. Alternatively, use two splints if the injured part is small; or use one splint for larger injuries.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	E is your position at which you should pause the member as it appears naturally, while the extended parts of the limb are trembling, then force yourself to make them return to their original positions according to each movement that can be performed in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	You shall guard your strength so that no harm may come to the health of those around you through your work or negligence, and do all in your power to promote unity between people according to their highest good.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	At that moment it would be appropriate for you to touch your mother here, and if there happens to be any different reason, correct it and adjust yourself according to the amount of virtue you have.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Extreme stretching and compression may also occur in some cases with improper massage techniques, leading to inflammamoents (edema) or muscle contractions as a result of the applied force during therapy sessions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	In relation to this matter, proper diet and exercise along with restful sleep are crucial; warn against excessive strain on the affected area during your waking hours or while asleep, for it may cause discomfort and affect overall movement. Wait until the position of the limb is such that pain relief has been achieved, which is determined by the comfort level in that particular position. Consider changing to a different position if no pain persists; ensure proper alignment when restoring movement so as not to induce any deformity during healing.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the strictness of the joint is that I recommend to you; for you should know that fractured members are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	The ones who are small have arms and legs and features similar to ours; sometimes she covers herself with a very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	The fish that are so large, just like the sea or the river, have their bodies wrapped in a tough and dur  skin, because the ligament connects that limb firmly from every part with strict adherence, even if it doesn't get injured there.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	A. Begin by preparing the necessary equipment for evacuation of the fracture, pause momentarily to locate a suitable position near that third fracture in one of the three or four following segments where the limb requires support; and strengthen your arm slightly with the splint.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	The vehicle shall be directed to ascend from the site of injury at a superior position and strongly emphasize not to focus on your restriction which you have imposed on the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	A propellent agent is involved in the healing process around the site of the fracture, gradually softening the narrowing bit by bit, until you take away most of the material at that spot.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	A wrap is placed upon one another and the other sheet is laid over it, so that both wrappings are involved in a single layer; then your work begins at the seam of these wrappings and gradually through to the first wrapping underneaboe.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	The frequency of earthquakes along the Leon-Drakam fault or any other fault that has a similar level of curvature to the fracture, if in it there is curvature; and if not, do not stop at any point without cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	A prop of the other band, place it over these inflamed areas, if in that location there is no infection or abscess, and let it stay for hours on top of that area with the infection/inflammation; leave that for a few days; then wrap up those spots.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The leaves of the sugar cane plant are broadly lanceolate and shaped skillfully. They may be made of solid wood or simply consist of spines from a palm; each leaf has an extent according to this shape and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	In Empero Cove's case of the astragalus that is broken over that fracture, it should be made as thick and wide as a small one compared to other astragali; the length of the strap according to how legible it is on the member in magnitude and size. Wrap it around all the astragalli with another band following your initial strictures; wrap it tightly but decently, as we have mentioned about strictures, and make sure that your strictures follow the location of the fracture closely, and the more extended from the fracture, the stricter they should be.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The threads should be of varying thickness and delicacy, and they are weak; when the threads are too thick, as I have seen during operations with alkaline folds causing distortion in previously taut strings, it is a major error if the tension falls outside an equal range.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Subtle changes in the environment are not always beneficial, as they may hinder access to resources you seek and prevent crossing from one point to another within a span of just one day.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	The specified malfunction occurs in the extremities of the legs near the stricture in the places where it stops, causing discomfort to those affected by this condition and not allowing them pain relief.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some earthquake faults are plate boundaries, and accidents such as landslides can occur there, which often bring back memories of the event witnessed at the capital according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	Patients with severely torn ligaments should not put weight on the affected limb right away; this will prevent healing within one to seven days or possibly more, depending on your caution regarding the occurrence of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the system of plaster casts that ancient people used to heal bone fractures, dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	In the mountainous region, there is a popular restaurant renowned for its hearty meals and warm hospitality, mainly catering to women and children who seek comfort from the cold weather outside. One of their signature dishes includes flour-dusted polverones (a type of Spanish sweet), which are made from the finest wheat flour milled in the local windmills that dot the landscape with movement and character.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	The grass is not always greener on the other side, but rather we should appreciate what our own garden offers and pause to consider that it's neither too thin nor subtle; let'er use of this.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	Thus, take the rod and make it appear as though you are wrapping it around that object made of lead whose weight is equivalent to one dram (1/8th of an ounce). Then place this on a scale with the hanging piece of lead suspended from its beam.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	"Autumn Mixture of Healing for Fractures and Dislocations: A Recipe with Asafetida, Lapdanum, Acacia Gum, Eucalyptus Oil, and Myrrh from the Savage Milk Thistle; All Mixed in Water or Almond Paste to Create a Soothing Blend for Healing. X parts asafetida, V parts lapdanum, XX parts acacia gum, mixed with therapeutic oils and waters to create a balanced remedy that helps restore severely broken bones and provides relief to many."
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	In the small town of Trissa, there lived an old baker named Mr. Mota. He was well-known for his delicious pastries and breads that he prepared using traditional recipes passed down through generations. The secret to his famous cakes and pies lay in the combination of carefully selected ingebients: flour made from locally grown wheat, eggs laid by hens raised on nearby farms, a hint of vanilla extracted from pods brought all the way from Madagascar, sugar sourced from the cane fields of Brazil, and butter churned by his own hands.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manieyera's joint disorders are characterized by separating bones at certain locations, and causing accidental pain in those areas along with fissures and fractures. Both types of sutures (immersed and exposed) experience loosening over time due to constant friction and oils secretion: the former being submerged in a viscous environment while the latter are exposed and subjected to repeated stress.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this herbal mixture, there is no virtue of healing or drawing out the condition properly alleviating pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way to make a paste that restores the cracks: take fig tree sap and wild poppy seeds; mix them thoroughly to create a paste with linseed oil.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manieyra suggests a poultice mixture for the treatment of bone fractures and how to address swelling. The recipe includes almonds, camomile flowers, violet flowers, wheat flour, and water in equal parts. Here's how you can prepare it: During the trip to visit his cousin at six o'clock in the evening, he didn't have any trouble with the car.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	May spills on herself, quickly wipes it up with a paper towel or uses water and detergent to clean it up.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Autra Manieyra of Plaster is a second remedy which possesses greater efficacy and resolution than the first when an inflammation or sore persists after using Restorative Plaster, its recipe consists of clay (Altea), mallow seeds, balm (Mellilot), marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all parts being finely powdered and mixed equally; everything is then triturated with water of olive or cool spring water or milk, depending on the condition and color change of the affected part.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	The Mays Ypocras recipe does not require the use of any added sugar, only honey and lemon for taste adjustment if desired. In a clean bowl or pitcher mix together:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Mays Gualia is aware that there are some pauses over the broken limb which requires restoration and healing of its lost vitality so similar to myrrh, resin, and fragrances from those causes which we have recommended earlier.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	To create a healing poultice for wounds and pain relief using the following ingredients: fresh mint leaves, dried thyme, chicken feathers or pigeon feathers, althea (marshmallow) root, salt, grind into powder; strain to separate fine particles. Mix with honey as a healing paste.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Based on the degree of stretching that occurs when you untie your cast, if there is no pain or discomfort and the bone isn't fractured or displaired, then every few hours you can loosen it by a couple of inches until fully removed.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you suddenly feel a sharp pain or swelling, remove the foreign object immediately and apply an ice pack to reduce inflammamo.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	"Take a piece of raw wool and sponge from marine seaweed, dampen it in warm water, and apply that to the sore spot where you feel pain until the prickling sensation ceases and the pain subsides; then let the affected limb rest for an hour. Afterwards, place a piece of raw wool soaked in lukewamr water or oil with roses on it onto the area overnight to ensure that inflammation is prevented, allowing the swelling to recede and the pain to diminish."
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here'perturbación subtle y entrelaza pequeños y el no estrechar su contracción inicial, y sutil. Aquí está la versión corregida en español y traducida al inglés:
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	Amen! Praise be to God and the holy Trinity. May He who heals all wounds of pain, swelling, injuries, bruises, and other ailments that have already been cured by emplasters or compresses, now grant you similar relief as He did when you first began seeking treatment!
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If you do not appeal from any of the causes mentioned herein, within three days or four at most, you shall not be released. The injury should be immersed in cold water as soon as possible after it occurs, according to what we have mentioned, until the fracture heals and the tissue around it hardens.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	The rule of law must be applied more strictly than the initial total tolerance, and it is adjusted according to the increase in food demand, as soon as a recall has occurred.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you notice the bone fracture drying and weakening, rather than covering it with a bandage, be aware that nourishment is prohibited for it; moreover, pour water over it from dawn to dusk every day; then carefully remove the constriction after three days; as a result of this procedure, the nutrition reaches the member, and it heals completely.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	"It is wrong when the restoration of a fractured limb is not commenced right away and depending on circumstances, it's also erronenous to restore according to twisting, as per surgical procedure; this may cause great fear and if rectified too late, the Ancients would have lost their freedom and strength due to negligence."
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	In my experience, I have never seen any of them dive deep into the water, which is why it's more reasonable to say they don't go that far.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol Segundo: When Accidents Happen at the Head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	Cracks are small chips and their figures are various, and the causes are distinctive, none of which is made by a blow with a spade, as the impact hits the entire bone within the shaft, leaving behind the bone, so that it resembles this way in wood; or when the spade penetrates part of the bebone without passing through the inscription inside it. This type of fracture is called avulsion.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The severity of these two cracks is either great or slight, and whether it's an impact fracture or a stress fractamo; the cause may be due to a blow with a stick, or from falling onto stones, and similar causes.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This is either an impact or approaching pubic bone fracture, which has been left behind the bones; it's on the face of the bone and the wound from these two types of fractures can be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	C crack is when the bone is slightly chipped at a subtle hairline level and it is not named this specific type of capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	E is a type of bone fracture that occurs due to cementation or percussion by stone, causing the formation of thin layers within the affected areas, similar to how accidental falls cause skull cracks and are divided into their respective fragments upon impact.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	The majority of blood vessels are found in the human body as well as those in children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	Therefore, in total for these types of fractures and fragmentations, they are stones as well as separated stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	The wise old man cherishes the beauty of water in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	Certainly, here's the translation of your text from Catalan to English:
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	An ancient remedy known as "healing poultice" is discovered on the bones and extracts, and it leaves a black mark when applied to the injured area.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, May's considers accidents caused by illness and hours when you experience symptoms due to such accidents that clearly indicate worry; thus as in cholera vomiting, and extension of understanding, loss of control over urine and bowels, sincopes, acute fever, bleeding from wounds, and similar occurrences to those found in major conditions. Those are not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	Fate an accidental mistake, you hope for a happy outcome; but then your healing process begins.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason for this question is if you feel tired in the morning when you wake up and during winter days, hours before your classes start on Monday until Thursday following a schedule.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If you are on a summer vacation and spend long hours lying under the sun, ensure that before the seventh day your skin is not burned or damaged by the exposure, and avoid any incidents that may have resulted from overexposure.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the skull fracture extends to cover the brain, and it consists of small fragmented parts, then one should consider making incisions along with these fragments, as I recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	The races have knowledge of the various diseases and their usual course, as well as management according to the nature of each disease; they are also adept at recognpressing symptoms.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	So, you're to remove the bone, blood flows or abscess drainage, now you assist with the fresh water that covers it, and get some dressings of gauze soaked in vinegar and rosemary oil, and make sure the wound rests until the abscess is settled; and then proceed around the bone and incision site.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	Water can be treated through two different methods of operation, namely filtration and disinfection.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In order to create a pair of scissors that are slightly narrower than usual, you can follow these steps. The method is as follows:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	A prop administrator manages more inspections than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	In the event that you wish to register under different names of various people among whom some have more years than others; and those who are older should be placed at the end in terms of their age groups, and they shall wear a sign of iron or leather.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	He uses his skill in playing the drums to avoid hitting both the cymbangs and his head at once.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is hard and dense, when you drill holes in the circuit upfront that you administer with screws or plates, called non-invasive plates, they do not penetrate deeply.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	In the human skull, E does not only refer to the ethmoid bone but also includes those parts that do not form part of its central term or at the site where it is close to him, namely the rounded extremity or margin on which the occipital tubercle appears like a margin or small circle. The latter prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	E is convenient that your teeth's rows include many of which the shape suits each individual tooth in every part of your head, so that they are sharp and their length and width follow the size and shape required for each specific tooth.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the way of three kinds of drills: The quality of perforating in the broken bone circuit is that you pause the drill over the bone and rotate it within your fingers, so as to know when the bnail has penetrated; then move the drill to another spot and pause where the radius or envelope of the size matches.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	A suture needle which is inserted between each of the bones, and that subtle fluid through which we can achieve levitation as previously mentioned; thus, while removing the bone or your mother's bone, or any other cause involving certain injuries to which you have prepared yourself at such a level, similarly with tweezeren and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	The cutting shears must be handled with utmost care, ensatur ca nu afecte niciun factor de seguranță.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Therefore, you will have circled the perforated bone and separated it from its surrounding tissues; then you will extract that piece, ensuring that the shape resembles a scissor with another blade attached to it, but also making sure it is thinner and more delicate than other instruments.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If any of the bones or fragments are broken and torn, take it with ease by applying what you have learned about relief from pain; therefore use ointments and liniments which we have mentioned earlier.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is the liege, distant from fear; which dissected Gualia and Lausaec with great praise. And this is its saying: it is necessary for you to start by uncovering the location of the bone fracture in which it is very strong and evident, within which once you have discovered that location, you will gently follow the pathway of the gentle dissector whose shape is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The lenticular splint is made from leather and does not cause any harm, while the acute splint extends in two lengths longitudinaturally; thus, like times. The lenticular splint should be adjusted to fit closely with the face of the limb affected by an acute injury.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	E approaches to prosthetics in a particular case include using a small mallet within which the entire socket is facilitated so that it easily revolves, and you too are sure of the panicle not coming into accidentally any way that may occur in one manner; certainly, if the medicant1eb was the most fold of all men and the least ignorant of theirs; undoubtedly, and if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Lahora's sin has no legal connection to the body of Pannicol in Accusatory Locations, and therefore cuts that lenticular structure at its extremity with scissors would facilitate your ease, as it frees you from your harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	When the fractured bone does not penetrate into the panniculus adiposus, and when it remains within the bone, causing inflammations and subtle disturbances, you should address those inflammations and remove any sharp fragments by using a number of different quantities in order to be able to administer them at all appropriate places as much as possible and in the most proper way according to how your operation has affected the fractured bone.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	In the spirit of translating complex concepts across languages while keeping the essence intact, here's an approximation in modern English that attempts to capture the meaning and intent behind your original text, though it doesn't correspond directly to a known translation due to its unique nature:
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the other minor cuts and subtle fractures, it means you should administer treatment according to how much discomfort has been caused in order to facilitate healing.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	C is not pleased with all those who have studied in that field of study.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	The translation from Catalan to English is as follows: "Esteemed colleagues, we have presented evidence of significant cracks."
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	When removing the bandage after taking off the gauze, cover it with another layer of sterile gauze according to the amount of bleeding and immerse it in a clean oil or olive oil, then place that over the wound; and then take another folded or tripled piece of cloth and dip it into warm water and oil or olive oil, and lay it on top of the first layer, making sure you don't apply too much pressure that could harm the wound. Then carefully wrap it with enough clean gauze to cover just the wounded area.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	E Lassar Aquel is an old remedy that can be used for one or two days to ensure against abscess formation; and carefully remove it afterwards and apply medicines such as ointments with the necessary dryness (such as linseed meal, farina d'avena, talcum powder, and other herbal preparations).
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	E is the one that you should apply these powdered medicines over the affected area once they are dry; and universally, administer any medicine of such property as it repels and does not sting.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Watch yourself regarding your virtue that the plague in your care is clean; and it's not in its hearing of ointment or any other thing; nor do you let it add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted over the linen covering of the brain, corrupting that and spoiling it may bring about a serious illness due to wicked malignancy.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	Eczema is a common skin condition character # Problematic Subjects
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it'n't the medicine that is so overused and abused, but rather due to this medicine causing such darkness, I fear you will consume some honey in certain portions and fractions of oil. The doctor applies the bandages and dressing on that part of your body; then he prescribes appropriate medication to ensure you are cured properly within the recommended time frame.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III - The Capital City
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	At the restaurant when it was closed down.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	The text appears to be in Catalan, and it translates into English as follows: "You know that it is not torn from the nose but from some separated pieces, more so royal ones or one of those sometimes veiled, for too long you have two bones, four parts are cartilaginamoius, and it is not cut off but rather twisted and curved."
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	When one of the two parts of your nose is broken, and you interfere with or damage the other part as a result, or if the break extends to that part outside your said indication, within which it should be returned to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	S is here to assist you and please make sure that your work on the disease of those people does not go unnoticed.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and you cannot reach it with your fingers, cover it for at least two hours or until you can access the area where the injury occurred gently using a clean object to apply pressure. Seek medical attention if necessary.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the break is in two pieces, it will appear as if there's a crack of some kind.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	On the first day of your injury, if possible, try to rest and relax in order to aid recovery; if not, take a break for seven or eight hours on the seventh or eighth day during the inflammation's peak.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Entombed in the extremity of his nose a piece of drapery cloth, if the fracture is on one side or put two clips, if the fracture is on both sides, and make it as thick as necessary to hold up half of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	For five days and nights, the old restaurants that had once housed caldrons were replaced every day, but not what I saw; I hope that the mead is stored in a leather-bound album with a polished wooden box lid; and let it be sure that whatever goes inside has been secured and stabilized by cardboard.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some bruises may be present in the nose, at the location of impact, punishment by a duck wrapped up in lion's skin; and it should already have a severe nasal fracture and the illness not forbidden from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	In this case it is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do so, and if you wish, leave.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you have a recurrebling rash or abscess, apply the balm to your nose either with cotton or gauze soaked in warm water and rosewater, or use hydrogen peroxide.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If Mays decides not to treat his acne outbreak, he should wash twice daily with water and soap; use a cream for redness and inflammamoins based on salicylic acid or benzoyl peroxide; apply an over-the-counter spot treatment containing retinol or sulfur; and avoid touching the affected area to prevent further irritation.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If your nasal bones are slightly fractured or severely broken, you must ensure that they remain aligned and use instruments suitable for this purpose; then cover the incision with a sterile dressing, and treat it with an antibacterial cream to prevent infection. Apply suitable bandages as needed.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	He decides to dive into the sea of literature, hoping that one day he will find that book which captivates his attention and provides him with knowledge through its pages.
Capitol .iiii.	iii. The U.S. Capital
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Mandible fracture at the restaurant restoration.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is broken and the jaw fracture is not immediately apparent, if the fracture extends far enough and isn't just cracked in two but curved to both sides, its healing time will be considerably longer.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	If the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, gently insert your left index finger into the mouth opposite to the injury site; and similarly, if the fracte is on the left side of the mandible, then you should do so from the other side. Apply pressure at that point to facilitate movement outside the bone, with the other hand supporting the injured part away from the bone, ensuring careful manipulation.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If a jaw fracture is separated into two parts, apply extension for each piece as soon as possible and in accordance with the proper alignment that can be achieved.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	"The fractured jaw is stabilized by the support of either gold or silver wire, or even cement; and with a pause on the broken mandible using cerote (a dental filling material), then a second pause over a duplicated drape that has been professionally made, or just a strip of soldering material equal in length to the jawbone. And finally, this support is applied according to how you are fitted with your ligature wire and as needed, ensuring not to be destroyed."
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	C commands the lioness to rest and be at peace, and halts her relentless meal.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	In the third day you will remember that the figure has been altered in some manner; then proceed to correct what is already changed and reconstruct the original wool ball, albumen of egg or wheat flour, so that you may have the last touch of it, and place it on the mold.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	Therefore, it is attached to that emplastre over him, and the position of the bone remains unchanged, so let that not be removed until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; many times this fracture becomes tight in three months.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If an abscess occurs again after being drained with water as suggested earlier and the wound has healed within that time period, then the same method can be applied to treat another abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is an avulsion, consider if it's a simple separation or multiple fragments, then carefully determine where to position those fragments so they align correctly in relation to the surrounding tissues during the repair process.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the threat of a storm is imminent, you should intensify your preparations according to the level of necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And now those days are gone and will not return again when you witness the horrific extent of the wave if it is immense; or otherwise, pause at one of those landmarks that seem appropriate to this event and embody it, within which lies healed.
Capitol .v.	In the case of Capotolo v. United States, the plaintebrief may involve several legal arguments and issues depending on the specifics of the lawsuit. Without knowing the precise details of the case at hand (as my knowledge is limited to information up until early 2023), I can't provide an actual plaintiff brief. However, a general structure for a plaintiff's brief might include:
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	At the restaurant, when I cracked the chicken wing.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Broken feathers are cut from the initial batch below the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	The joint is broken or separated into two parts that do not come together again; it is also inclined to dislocate easily and the relocation of it is difficult; moreover, the fracture acts as a hindrance.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	When the operation is performed in that area, when the fracture has set, you must have two assistants so that one holds the broken furcula and the other extends it on that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Article A specifies that the crack should be treated as soon as possible and not in an area of minor or concave curvature.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you suffer from excessive strain, hours require that pauses be taken to relieve the discomfort of pain either in your back or neck; the size of the support should correspond to the amount of necessary relief; adjust and elevate the lumbar pillow, bending the spine as evenly as possible according to curvature.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you are unable to reach the end of your clavicle towards the outside parts, after a while it may cause pain over the ribcage and pressure on its muscles with a greater intensity.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The minister presses the muscle beneath which the broken bones of the wishbone lie in the chest, and then you correct the fracture and align them according to your instructions.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	I feel the urge to cleanse my feathers and make them look better, so I intend to shake off those stains and remove them easily with that.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the bone is retained in your body, it may cause hours of excrucuating pain as one of the incision scars that you have made there. You had left the furculum (sternal muscle) uncut to which this serves; and the stural muscle is either of wood or iron, which has the following shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	C is similar to the scoop of which this convexity belongs; and its width shall be according to what you require in length, depending on the size of your spoon or the lack thereof.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of Luisa is according to the possibility at work; that there are two extremities as often as times, and one extremity being wide while the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the plaque which you have extracted when taking out the stitches from your wound is wide, and it's safe to assume an infection might occur, then adjust the two lips of the plaque with a suture at once.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the fabric tear is minor or you fear a burst blister, use your time to mend it according to the size of the tear in the cloth using patches and threads.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	Then he decides to take a break from writing about the Apostle Paul, spends hours drinking coffee in his warm room and smelling roses and wine, and rests on that thought.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	The strictness of the os knot is that pauses are made by plastering paste made from milled wheat flour and egg white, placed on a leopard skin, and then applying pressure to its edge, if you feel discomfort, also apply honey. It should be wrapped in a long cloth, the width of which is about one palm or around that area; and pulvis duplicatus (double powder) is applied over the plaster and leopard skin. Then take a thin tablet whose length is three fingers wide and similar in thickness; wrap this with fabric and then wrap the tablet with fabric over the fracture location. Then apply heat as if you were to boil it, and rotate it around its neck and along both sides of its sore or painful area, and return it back over the entire body. Whenever the os knot tightens at the site of the fracture, do not hide this underne.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	E tota, que non seja maléfica a estrela descer sobre os troncos partidos; e por isso cuida que tu vejas o mau-acaso cada dia, quando o lamento é molificado ou vês a estrela já ter remedado, então repara nisso e fortalece a ligação.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	"Upon the onset of illness, one feels an oppression at the back of the neck and remains restless throughout the night with frequent tossing; therefore, it is necessary to elevate the support of that person from underneebeneath them, and thus the sternum fracture healing process is aided by muscle elevation; or else their arms are tied to the neck of such."
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	The cyst does not go unnoticed if it is located in the upper or lower abdader and doesn't become infected within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	The bird looked at him in the water and adjusted the sutures; he restored that crack on the furcula, which had been repaired and set to ensure it was solidified.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	E is strict and comfortable according to the norms of the time in the 28 days, and sometimes nights spent at various houses are made in months during that period.
Capitol .vi.	Capital (vi) refers to the city or town that serves as the seat of government and administrative center for a country, state, province, or region. In the United States, Washington D.cu. is the capital where the federal government resides, including key buildings such as the White House, Congress, and Supreme Court. Other examples include London (United Kingdom), Paris (France), Tokyo (Japan), New Delhi (India), Moscow (Russia) etc., which all serve similar purposes for their respective nations.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Shoulder fracture fixation surgery.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula pie is cut in the locality of you and not torn apart by you but by its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	So it happens that the place of yours is broken — and it's broken into two places, then nowadaturdays according to the shape of the fracture it exposes itself from you and prepares for that accordingly reducing it back to its natural shape in every way possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Prepare the bowl of flour and stop adding lemon zest; then prepare a dusting of powdered sugar, and sprinkle it lightly over the subtle table according to the total amount plus a bit more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	"Mays left the stone with a concave shape on one side of the handle'ebulet in its spatula-like form. Then you should match that concavity to the lion's paw, and accordingly move the stone."
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	The proposed strengthening measures against human trafficking are considered very long and cumbersome due to the constraints of legislation in place, as well as the complexity involved in enacting such changes within the current framework without being revised at their source location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Every day E considers the laying down of a wager; and all returns that are softened, another return is placed and he strengthens both the earth and heaven if his place is restored.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	An eagle had a bad feeling about the situation with its latch.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored in xx days or less than three weeks (x days).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Then when this number is completed, the hour you will dissolve the limb, and you shall know securely that which belongs to the bones from which it begins neither fears nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you see any pus from the wound or lymngeons in its tail, cut it off at once and leave the skin on; then follow what has been instructed during the breaking of the furcula (furcula is a term possibly referring to some kind of bone) of sanitation against abscesses.
Capitol .vii.	Certainableness in the context of a capitol refers to its importance as a place where significant decisions and laws are made for governance, symbolizing democracy, political order, and stability within a nation or state. The concept embodies the idea that such buildings serve as central hubs for legislative activity and uphold the principles upon which they were founded.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Restaurating the Petzval fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Some vegetables rot at the middle and end of their life, while their extremities remain succulent and tender.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	His fracture pains when his leg breaks occur as a result of stress on the bone fragments and injuries causing him great pain, difficulty in walking, swelling, bruising, and considerable weakness; it is clearly visible in the broken bone cavity and not hidden to touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The key steps in the restoration of a dislocated shoulder include:
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	In the past, ropes were made of flax and jute fibers, which were twisted together to form strong cords. These natural materials provided durability and resilience for various uses such as sailing ships or construction tools. Nowadamo, modern ropes are crafted with synthetic polymers like nylon, polypropylene, and polyester, offering enhanced properties including resistance to water, UV rays, and abrasion while maintaining flexibility.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If necessary, disinfect the area affected by rust or dirt, pain, or abscess that occurred in that spot, causing you distress and remove that and eradicate it along with its paste; then correct whatever was done improperly for proper healing of it. Occasionally reduce the dressing as needed, if possible on the face; then adjust to a snug closure so that it is properly healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	During coastal restoration, how many groynes are constructed?
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that coastal fractures should not be cast in large pieces but rather in smaller sections, and from the ends of their lengths, they shouldn't extend beyond those boundaries without proper reinforcement to ensure stability.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	I notice from you, there's no disrespect intended when you speak. Please continue to share your thoughts with me.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration must be as well as possible that repairs the fracture according to the feasible method, so that it is shaped accordingly with the load, and then apply a suitable plaster or cast on the broken bone if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the internal organs, it causes severe pain and sharp puncture-like sensations, so much so that those who have cried out experience a sudden feeling of heaviness; and this leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood. This condition is difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The Ants are skilled at creating solutions in response to various challenges.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	E of your prayer say this: Whoever pauses from foods during the sickness that I caused - inflammation and swelling - so that his stomach may be emptied and extended, and the fracture pushed outwards to its parts. (This is a healing incantation in Etruscan language.)
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	In case of an accidental caustic sideration or if it has already occurred, immediately rinse with water and seek medical attention as soon as possible to prevent complications such as infections or further harm; do not delay seeking help for the injury.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They believe that a slight movement may cause weakness and damage to the structure; it seems logical, but there is fear that heavy winds might lead to excessive stress in the area due to its vulnerability.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	On that day they will come with their boats to the place where wool is submerged in oil, and there will be abundant dust between the shores within which it expands; and properly prepare for illnesses caused by pleurisy through diet and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	The text appears to be in the Occitan language, which was historically spoken in parts of southern France, Italy'amo and Spain. Here is an approximate translation into English:
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	"If the gap between your lips is large, you can use sutures to close it; once healed, remove them."
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	In case of an ingrown toenail causing pain and redness in the skin near the nail bed, soak your foot in warm water mixed with Epsom salt for about 15-20 minutes several times a day to help allepressure and heal the condition.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	Beneath the sky that lies above the earth upon which one sleeps, there is health to be found within.
Capitol .ix.	Capital IX refers to the ninth installment or edition of a series, product line, publication, etc., where "IX" is the Roman numeral for nine. Without specific context on what it's related to (such as a book series, software version, etc.), this term would generally signify the ninth addition in sequence. If you are referring to something particular like a legislative act or historical event with that title, please provide more details so I can give an accurate description or information about Capitol IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Spinal fusion surgery for the second and third thoracic vertebrae (T2-T3).
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some cervical vertebrae have transverse processes similar to the ribs' tubercle and similarly as the spinous processes of the spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When an arrow wounds you and you want to know if it will heal or not, hours consider the following: If your wounds are often so mollified that they cause stupor and death without being able to stretch or expand them further, and when you touch them with a needle they do not feel pain - in such cases, you know it is not healing. Within a few days, this condition can be fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If those wounds are dirty and infected, apply a bandage to prevent further damage; also know that the bone fracture will be healed with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you're wondering whether that fish looks fresh and want to know if it is safe to eat or not, take into account its weight.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you are overcome by anger and become violent toward those who have wronged you, when you touch them on their backs, they will mock your intentions and disregard your wishes; occasionally, they may lie supine upon their backs and attempt to urinate but cannot. Remember that it is mortal, so do not seek revenge against them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If Maynard doesn't decide on any of those reasons, the reason is better and more plausible.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of your condition is to apply cold compresses over the swelling caused by spondylosis or lumbago, or due to muscle tension; place the compress on that area throughout the day until the swelling has subsided.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	In the time of rest and comforting lulls, he strengthens over his grief; and commands the malaise to take repose and tranquility and that it should not sleep upon the departure which inflicts intense pain within whoever is healing.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And the doctor shall cleanse the wound and wash it with water or any other suitable solution that is already separated from his hands; then he should place sutures on the incision over the cut tendon if needed, and if possible apply a stitch to join the torn ligaments. Finally, treat any inflamed tissues within until they are cured.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Mays is broken the last tooth of his right jaw and he is the father of the family. Then approach it with the pointy part of your finger towards its buttocks, while trying to fit it as comfortably as possible against the other side that's left, and then place a piece of cloth or bandage over it for support; if necessary, apply pressure on both sides.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	I feel as though my heart is broken in pieces here and now, the past lies over me like a heavy blanket, but there's still hope that healing will come to wash away the pain of what has been done before.
Capitol .x.	In the United States, the capital is Washington D.cu (pronounced as "D.C."). It was named after the first president of the country, George Washington. The city serves as the seat of government and houses important institutions such as the White House, Congress buildings, Supreme Court, and various federal agencies.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Wide-angle restoration.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anchovy tarts are broken and if they crack, the hours don't make a communication in their ends but rather extend along its length into different parts; and it causes bad pain at the site and puncture, and the pan is stunned when it's fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The first step in repairing a bone fracture is to apply pressure above the fracture site, which corresponds to the figure of you being over it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	The translation of the given text from Catalan to English is: "Even if it breaks at its extreme end, in time you can fix it just like the other, proportionally matching how it's balanced when it is assembled according to its original shape."
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the break is in the long bone or if it descends to lower parts, then you should consult a doctor for pain relief regarding your abdume that may be prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	Thus, how will you secure that pause over the glue, and press it against that piece of wood or beam, and strain tightly with a clamp on which there is no risk of cracking nor movement in the joint?
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	In the biblical story of Jacob wrestling with an angel, Jacob is described as a man who struggles and contends until he overcomes that which holds him back according to principles of equality. He commands his adversary (the Angel) to lie down on his own two feet or expose his side for him to prevail in the encounter.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Mays decides to cast a spell, your control over him will cease once the spell is fully set and you must wait until that happens before proceeding with any other actions; then you may return to restoring him, and strengthen it as follows according to the instructions given.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If the leaves have fallen or are about to fall from the trees, trim them back at that time.
Capitol .xi.	Title: "Capitol Xi"
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Bone healing at the site of a dental implant.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Assessor is near the water that is between the middle and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If a wire is cut, the restoration time of its usage depends on one of two methods. The method you choose should be based on the severity of the damage following this guidance:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	The Italian-speaking people've always shown their extreme limits during battles, and he supported his high place well.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Following the defect, he places his broken arm over the tree trunk inside that upon arrival at the thicket where it is attached to the curve of the tranciated trunk.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	The patient lies down on his back and is placed over an elevated table or bed for the procedure; a leg support extends at both ends to ensure stability during the process. A sterile sheet covers the affected area, leaving only the fracture exposed for examination and treatment by the physician.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other way to alleviate the pain is by applying a cold compress over his own neck and suspending it with the help of a strap around his head; and he instructs two assistants, one of whom holds water that emerges from the crack at its base, while the other holds the end portion. He then extends this to his affected area.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you want the extension to be more robust, hours strengthen over the crack on either side and so that from both pieces it extends towards their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	If the fracture is close to the end of the bone, then it usually requires placing a screw or plate at the middle part of the limb on one side and another device to stabilize the fracture on the opposite side.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	If the injury results from an accident caused by someone else, compensation must be paid within two weeks for any medical expenses incurred at that location and related to that incident.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Fit the tool to its function and make sure it is used correctly according to its cover and application for proper usage; ensure that pressure does not lead to blisters.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Mays decides to try a new treatment for his hemorrhoids; after the first week, he notices that the symptoms have somewhat reduced and pain over his anal area has started to decrease within two days of starting this therapy, and now it's more manageable.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	In the event of an arm fracture, first apply pressure to stop any bleeding around the affected area. Then carefully wrap it with an elastic bandage or soft padding directly over the fracture site and a snug-fitting dressing. Adjust the splint on the limb using this supportive device, ensprise's upper garment over their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Pause the curtains and raise over the assistants to ensure that the arms are in a stable position, unless otherwise prevented by any cause of arm fracture.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	El pasajero utiliza una estrella para navegar el cielo nocturnamo.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	E is the rule that you pause over the fracture of each stele as much and as far as possible from other steles; and place a space between each stele according to its width, with length proportionate to the breakage on all sides as per this third direction.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Article III - Definitions and Scope of Application
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	The translation from Piedmontese to English for your sentence is: "The stress on the location of the fracture should be as narrow as possible." This pertains to ensuring that a cast or any support used for a bone injury does not apply undue pressure, which could impede healing.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	The surgery was more complicated due to the elongated fissure and minor stricture.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	If you encounter the situation of these stones as previously discussed and restore their position at your own discretasters, then do so accordingly.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear abscess or infection, please contact us immediately and follow the instructions provided within this communication by day seven as previously advised.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Article A considers the transport in all cases for three days so that it does not arrive at the production or inflammation site; food provision to the member is prohibited due to excessive swelling, and thus corrected according to what has been said previously.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que non acciga alcuna causa d'aquò, les hores no despliis la llengua sinó amb tres dies o més.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	Blessed be the one who suffers in silence; May their burdens ease from above and comfort find its way to their heart.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Pause and reflect upon the healing properties of a full-grain leather dressing, considering at all hours of day or night that it is neither slick nor dissolved into an ineffective state, but rather has become adequately moisturized; accordingly adjust to achieve optimal efficacy.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Pause the food of illness according to the order which we have previously mentioned, insofar as the food is subtle during consumption until it has been chewed properly; hencefornore should heavy meals be eaten only if necessary and with proper digestion in mind.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The usual treatment for the adjutori and lu es's condition is that they should be strong within a few days; moreover, it is necessary that they are rested and receive care as well as medicine applied in ointments which correct this issue.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is a simple hairline type, you typically don't need to immobilize it and can bear weight within days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII. In this section, we will discuss the history and architecture of the U.S. Capitol Building in Washington D.C., including its construction, restoration efforts over the years, as well as its significance to American politics and government. We'll also touch upon key historical events that have taken place within its walls, such as presidential inaugurations, state funerals, and major legislative achievements.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Bone fracture repair surgery of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The compost is made up of two bones which are called the forks; one of them is small, and that's the one they call the pivot, and the other is large and it's the one that moves from behind the smaller one mentioned above.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	The great tree is broken off at the trunk only, and so are the little ones cut down together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The little window above the fireplace is broken, its repair seems difficult, and its healing (restoration) appears even more so.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	The light from his left is cut off by the window's crack, and healing it is difficult because the restoration of his sight is challenging.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	A lot of people suffer from that kind of joint dislocation where two or more bones have been detached.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	If the bone that is broken extends into the small intestine, it is advisaturus to see a physician; you should have its restoration as soon as possible, so that there may be no delay in case that same one becomes infected.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	The old well is deeper than the fountain that bursts, I wonder how long it takes to extend more vigorously.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If both foci are connected, then it will always produce a stronger pull.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	The priest should put his hands on the chalice with the consecrated bread and extend them over a small bowl placed below, while all other fingers remain spread apart, and the little finger is lower than the others, and the ring of incense hovers above a censer hung from the altar.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	E shall be a country without land on this earthly realm, lest the evil not work its ways again.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The Minister extended his hand to receive the papers from her as she handed them over; another minister reached out nearby, seemingly doing the same.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	A proper mage aligns the bones into their best possible position.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If you are on the bill of your own responsibilities, it is up to you to translate all efforts into their rightful place in achebtaining success.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	In the event that it does not appear in separate parts to restore its code and this is not your hope for the restoration of it, then you shall follow that method we have indicated above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the injury is a broken bone, I have already made arrangements for individualized care, and therefore will take charge of that patient's treatment.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you happen to have an abscess at the beginning of your meal in your restaurant, then after a few hours, mix a dough made from olive oil and white wax, with its consistency being fluid but not too thin; afterwards knead it into that place where the abscess is located undernenly. Afterwards apply the clay paste prepared by mixing polverized meal of wheat bran with chicken broth, then gently press down on that fracture which has been previously bandaged and covered in a way to be tightly secured.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The name of the stone monuments or the division into a single fragment or two identical fragments under major provisions, etc.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	In the case of a compound and vehement fracture, avoid restricting movement too tightly or for extended periods outside of the site of injury or on lower parts of the body. Loosen the restraint slightly once it has been recalled in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The linens that envelop the fracture should be made of multiple layers of fabric, and not too rough or coarse; the bandage material must be strong enough to hold firmly in its proper place between thin and thick, as we have described.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	C considers the membership liaison appropriate to those days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If you suffer from any condition that requires correction, apply the same treatment as for swelling of a limb; then cover the member with warm water until such discomfort ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Leases the member within that restraints and returns to stricture.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	Yes, indeed! If the writing is improved and the text becomes clearer to those who read it, then you have certainly enhanced its worth greatly.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	E considers if the nutrient is prohibited from reaching the member due to an excess of strictures; hence, it takes measures that soften such structures so as to allow the flow of this nutrieby times within which it circulates through that part.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	In case of accidental cause not related to those mentioned earlier, Mays shall not be held liable and must notify within 30 days or sooner.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	The apple hanging by the evil tree for its habit of agitated movements was made to sleep on its own side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	This fracture will be restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, but the rest can be recovered within twenty-eight days, depending on the complexity of the case and the treatment plan.
Capitol .xiii.	XIII. The Capital.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Orthopedic surgery for the treatment of a scaphoid bone fracture and associated complications.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the butler of my father and his sons often commit fraud, yet do not act on it except through occasional tricks.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	The man accidentally hit his fracture or attraction, hours after the pain continued to grow and spread according to equality, and eventually pointed back to that extended object.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	The Minister may extend the terms and duties of medical professionals equivalent to those within which they are properly qualified, if deemed necessary for good cause.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	The healing of burns requires different treatments depending on the severity and location of the wound. If blistering occurs, avoid bursting them to prevent infection; apply an antibiotic ointment or a dressing with gauze, and cover it with a sterile bandage according to the amount needed for that area.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	The wound is on the inner side of the palm, and at that moment he pretends to tie it up with cloth, and commands the evil one to raise his fractured hand - long piece of cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	E be the lever of arm that is hanging in which it has been hung up so that its body is oriented towards the palm; and pull on that according to how much you can handle.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	In Mays's case involving an offside trap infringement, the referee should stop play and award an indirect free kick to the opposing team from where the foul occurred. The offside position must be determined by considering players who have received or played with the ball after it was last touched by a defending player. If multiple offside positions are identified during the same attack, then only one decision will apply: either the first instance of offside that directly leads to an attacking action (such as a goal attempt), or the most advantageous situation for the attacking team if applicable under the relevant rules at the time.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you accidentally crack an egg on your hand and the yolk leaks out, immediately wash it off with water. Then apply some ointment to prevent infection. As a precautionary measure, wear gloves when handling eggs in the future.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	The Mays fracture is in the others mentioned there, thus as in that of yesterday's leg, or in the index, or in the earlobe, or in the ring finger; hours be equal to them so long as you have said with this one they will be like those; or all are continuous, and better; or a small pause on that star, as we have mentioned in the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	E considers, in your establishment, and avoids those conditions that may cause an oil spill - according to the guidelabreach of your operations - whenever such incidents are prompted by any of these causes, as stated in the aforementioned report.
Capitol .xiv.	CAPITOL XIV
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Orthopedic surgery for a tibia fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the Cueça Motas, which had been discovered, were broken and it was declared according to their position in front and beneath the Supreme Court.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The healing of the lame one is made in essence such that the limping is strengthened over the fracture and another limping below the fracture; let the illness be stricken upon his belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The Minister extends the entire limb to his departure according to the quality, where the fracture is located in the middle region of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Mays was born near the edge of the woods, at dawn she set off towards the deep forest to reach the hidden cabin, as she wanted to extend her stay in solitude, and left the other part behind with a broken heart.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the disconnection is granted to the defendant, then he shall make the payment proposed by the plaintebd, and it will be extended to the remaining claims of the parties involved.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	A proper application of the bandages and splints requires reducing that part according to its natural shape, then joining the bone using a good union technique; afterwards, it's necessary to keep them in place with casts or strapping, unless there is an occurrence of limb gangrene.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If you have an insect bite, apply cold compresses for the next two days until the swelling subsides, and then return to your regular care routine.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The strict dressing of Lucia was made: cover that wraps around the fracture, fold it two or three times, trim any excess; and wrap again to envelop within reaching the ankle and lower leg'ebody.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	The long iron rod was inserted between the chessboard and the tabletop belonging to the Duke on one side, and reached the extremities of the rod on the side belonging to his opponent; they revolved around the board and table as soon as it passed over them.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	He stood at the edge of that crack in the ground and placed one foot on a protruding stone, then balanced himself carefully before stepping onto another rock to cross over it.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Fill the measuring cup with water and milk between the pan and the pot lids, to ensure that it is well mixed through boiling.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	A proper compression of the cast around the site of a three-piece fracture involves covering it with one or two envelopes (plastic wraps) and as you move away from the fracture site, your compression should become lighter and more negligible.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Extend the docks' extensions to the boundaries of the field where it reaches up to the cavilha (central beam) of the pole, and strengthen both extremities of the beams on the other part as long as the support is not removed from its original location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Article A proposes the guidelnace regarding such, thus preventing corrosive or infected wounds and swelling similar to those mentioned; if any of these issues occur, you shall immediately consult with your healthcare provider, and rectify whatever has occurred completely according to what we have previously discussed on several occasions.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If Mays suffers from an illness of the bone that causes him pain, he should consult a doctor as soon as possible to determine his next course of action; if not, he should apply heat or cold therapy on it and ensure adequate rest until the condition improves.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some cases require this splint to be strengthened by adding another piece that is adjusted with the straps, as we have mentioned in the assistant and brace.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the lu according to this manner made, it does not lead to a bad claudication; and if it is restored alone, another water should be applied afterwards along with another change, then for some time that person will experience claudication from whom it was previously.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	Insects that are considered harmful can have a lifescuence of weeks or just a few days, depending on the complexity of their environment and other factors.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV - The Capital City Unveiled
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	At the orthopedic clinic, there was a case involving the repair of Denolho's femur fracture. The patient had sustained a complex injury requiring meticulous surgical intervention and rehabilitation for recovery.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	The rodel's edge has been broken, and there are many accidents that happen when you go up the hillsides.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	May's sister got injured during the soccer match; it was just a strain or bruise in her muscles, and that is what really matters most to him.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the roof should be carried out in such a way that it matches the original color as closely as possible, within the limits dictated by what is said to have been added and joined together, according to fairness, ease, and feasibility for construction purposes.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Pause before gluing and place above that round pole; if you desire it, then stretch a suitable rope to the right spot.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Article E considers all prescriptions mentioned in other sections as well as for cases of caustic and similar injuries, similarly to those occurreb that may occur anywhere where it is appropriate within the time it takes to heal.
Capitol .xvi.	In the context of a textbook or academic writing, "Capitol" (sometimes stylized as "CAPITOL") followed by Roman numerals could refer to a chapter or section numbering convention within that specific publication. For example, it might look like this:
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	The restoration of the mandible fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	In the cage there are two bones of which one is large and it's called by its name "cage"; while the other is small and is called "focil".
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	Accidents causing damage to the bones of one or both arms require a restoration as thorough as that of arm reconstruction, and the operation is considered a single procedure.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If you break two or more bones in your body, the cast must be changed completely.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the stone is not subtle enough, the game turns into disqualified moves.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	Se l'osso è troppo grande, togli quel pezzo in più, ed è per quelle cause che non sono collegate alla tua disattenzione.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Article A establishes the extension and equality of rights among celestangs in accordance with said alignment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, dear friend, if the bough breaks under its burden, let it be extended with more care and lightness, so as to preserve your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the cane brace: No use any tool that could cause injury to your hand; while sharpening the spikes of wood which is at least three inches in length from previous cuts and grooves, remove those with minimal effort using palm tree branches; ensure its length matches that of the cane handle, up to a third part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	The package wraps around each layer in the length of its sides and joins one end with another from the side of the other piece, both meeting at the lower midpoint of the edge.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	The bridge is located at three points of the extremities and one middle point; this straight span does not allow tilting to the right or left sides, and it remains stable.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	I am a small boat following the length of the bay, and resting there to keep that momentum.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	The English translation of the sentence is as follows: "In physics, the majority cover those phenomena that occur in a crack or when it becomes properly rainy." However, this doesn't make sense both linguistically and contextually; there seems to be an error with the original Catalan text.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	E should you consider acquiring any book during each day for your further studies and take care of it from wear, damage or other similar causes; if at some point such an issue arises with the book, promptly obtain a replacement that is in good condition.
Capitol .xvii.	Here is a summary of the key points from Chapter XVII in "Capitol" by Suzanne Collins:
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Broken ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The tailbone has no accidental fracture completely; sometimes the bones of the spine experience some fractures; and rarely in the case of displacement there are minor accidents without significant injury to the surrounding ligaments or muscles.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	In the event of a broken or dislocated finger bone, it may occasionally need to be raised above the others; thus, they are carefully prepared and positioned so that he gently presses his hand onto the ground as if ascending.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	A prop of the space above this area that is high up from those bones, and he approaches them, presses, and fits them into the holes so they turn in place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	The break is just below the suspension point and there's an additional break after the stomach that has a small table with two chairs.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	The stronger the pull that you have wrapped around that arm's descending structure, thus the more items like sheets and other objects of which you require it.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	Cum a lu passen tres dies o quatre, l'hostiu desllia el llunyaminament; tu trobarás les os engavellats, o trencats o dislocats, i la cirurgia en aquells és tant complicada que requereix senzigades.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	May's secret recipes include the restoration of old flavors, and he matches them so closely that you would be hard-pressed to tell the difference in their revival on your plate.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And so the stone was broken into shorter pieces according to its length and is slightly wider on one side than another. And just below this table which has been described, and reinforce that wall with proper support.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	Mays so two or three or more osses; then she takes a moment to pause on each piece as it's wrapped in lion-skin, and she strengthens the table by pushing down its lower part with her stomach while keeping her tongue firmly held back.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	F is convenient that you do not forget that in all the causes mentioned with regard to other types of accidents, there are exceptions for this particular type of accident as well.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII. In this chapter, we continue our exploration of the complex political and economic landscape that surrounds the U.S. Capitol building in Washington D.C. From its historical significance to modern-day controversies, this landmark remains at the center of American democracy and governance. Join us as we delve deeper into the intricacies of this iconic structure and its role within our nation's capital.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Fracture of the humerus bone in a woman and the patellar bone (kneecap) as well as the vertebrae in the man's spine.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's veil is tied, then she can go to her assigned place and slightly lean towards that direction, while remaining standing behind a small step.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	The old woman gently approached the child's head, and as she did so with such hope, her heart filled with joy; and when she reached out to the girl, she lifted the little one bit by bit, for outside it was getting dark enough that the sun had set behind their house just like in her hopes and the bone-cracking sound returned.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	A person with an enlarged prostate may experience frequent urination, difficulty starting or stopping the flow of urine, and reduced forcefulness of the stream; it usually returns to normal following treatment according to how mildly affected it was initially.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	He asks why you haven't contacted them for seven days or more; that person has been restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you want it, take a goat's bladder and stretch it over the top of its horn using a reed cane; then insert the entire bladprise into the goat's horn, so that when you blow through the straw inserted inside, the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Blessed are the peacemakers for they shall be called children of God and will live in peace on earth for many days after their healing.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	The translation of the Catalan sentence into English is as follows:
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	The water that flows through this particular crack is not hidden in these deep crevices and that rarely endures; mostly towards the one to whom I have devoted my study and understanding of this subject matter; for that fracture signifies you as the main guiding principle in legal restoration and reinforcement, hence meaning well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	May the wound of the dog be cleaned with vinegar and then dressed with goat's milk; afterwards, wrap it in cloth, let it rest for three days or more, and it will heal.
Capitol .xix.	Capital, Inc. (formerly known as Capitol Records) is an American record label founded in 1amo by Johnny Sands and Glen Wallichs on March 27, 1942. It became a part of the EMI group after being acquired by British music company EMI in 1955. Following various corporate mergers, Capitol is now a wholly-owned subsidiary of Universal Music Group (UMG) since 2012.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Bone fixation is the process of stabilizing a bone fracture using medical devices such as screws, pins, or plates to allow it to heal properly.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to have access to a place where fractures and other major bone injuries occur, especially if the bones are similar to those of the jaw or limbs, or something like that. You should use anesthesia immediately if your conditions for such procedures align as we have previously mentioned.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the plaque flows out of your gums and causes bleeding when you brush your teeth on this condition that you apply over it with toothpaste other than if for another reason it is not available.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	A proper care should commence the moment you break a bone, and do not delay if there is an infection risk.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Mays decides to perform an abortion in the first trimester of pregnancy, ensure its restoration by the 10th day if possible before it is completed, and avoid approaching during the third and fourth days, as this may cause other health issues.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	When the broken bone is prominent over the exposed joint, it's essential to seek medical help promptly in order to minimize that and restore normal function with as little extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Mays extendedness is not at your disposal and the equality of lu, hours you reduce those of your most, while that of yours are less; and it's length which is made of iron, the length of which is seven inches or eight, and the width of which corresponds to the amount of plaster; hence, it is necessary for a doctor to use three or four such rods depending on what you require in your fracture treatment.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	E should be round, and even in a few cases of exception one should not overprice at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Article I: The parties shall resolve all disputes through mutual consultation and in good faith to reach an amicable solution. In case of any disagreement or misunderstanding regarding the interpretation or implementation of this agreement, the concerned parties will attempt to settle the dispute by engaging in direct negotiations within a period not exceeding thirty (3amo) days from receipt of such notice of disputes.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	Esta es una versión en inglés del texto proporcionado. Aquí está el contenido traducido:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	The statement "E es nomp nat in Greek 'labre volentz atelarem', so es paleta pauca" seems to be a mix of Latin, Spanish and some gibberish words that resemble ancient languages but do not make any sense when pieced together.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	To prevent the end of your raised leg from hitting against the edge while you've lifted it up, consider using a soft pad or cushion as a barrier between the two surfaces to avoid any potential injury or discomfort.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	In a garden there is an apple tree that returns its fruits every year and always provides the perfect crop.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	So let them attempt to match the ends of the fracture between them; and if the broken end is too fine, and cannot be grasped properly for good alignment, then you should have it inserted into a cast that has sufficient power or strength.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the stones to total water that has reappeared, then place them within an hour of the same water from which you obtained those stones from the suspicious individuals mentioned; or cut that stone into one of the stones in any manner possible.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	The rabbit that ran in the oats field was small and nimble.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is broken and I help to set it right, the intense pain subsides somewhat, as if hours pass before the bone returns to its natural place; thus, provide this water which you might offer great relief from suffering.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	The completion of your restoration process has been achieved which may expose you to a stingray at the beach and especially during the summer; do not stay on top of the reef or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not happen an irritation or corroscu.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	In a proper application of sutures during the time of your complimentary treatment for skin repair, ensure that the wound is fully exposed unless clips or staples are used according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Be very careful not to get the plague in your fracture, as there are many fallen leaves around here, and it may happen that they fall on your patients, causing them either death or a rotting/putrid illness, which is dangerous.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the urethral stricture is long and irregular, different from the stricture of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Is the plague great or is it a bad one? And you fear about that accident which we have reported to you, and experience pain in your limbs; hours do not pass without wanting to rest on those stones, rather go to that envelopment of hard blankets at the place with benches and strengthen yourself there.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	On the day when it is about to start raining and you have already slept on the cloth with which you had previously covered that beloved object of ours (referring to a person), then wake up, take some warm water in your hands and sprinkle it lightly over the fabric. In addition, apply warmth to those areas as we usually do when treating bruises - using ointments like Arnica or similar remedamoils.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	At the dawn of every day and evening, take hold of your ligament with consideration for its condition and ensure that it is solidified and secured. Make sure the member is prepared in such a manner that the pressure runs from top to bottom with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If it has been raining for several days and the sand is not compacted nor separated from your legs, be aware that you may get stuck in quicksand by stepping into small patches where you are looking for the beach as a potential trap.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	From those wounds that are not separated from each flake or other fragments, those where the limbs do not separate and cause pain and inflammations, proceed to incise them according to what is possible in your condition.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	In some cases, if you happen to come across a decaying body or rotten substance, it might induce nausea; this is due to the decomposition process that usually follows medical treatment discussed in the previous chapter of the text.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	In the water where my speech is present and you place your hand, when it's tightly clenched, stretch over the limb just as bone of cattle and helper are to those large body parts. And do not assume too much pressure or forceful removal from there; lest often through such actions, death occurs quickly, within twenty days or thirty at most. In the day of the Lord I will make up a way for those who are broken-hearted; and they shall find it afterward. And the meek also shall obtain fresh oil to anoint their heads; and the faint among mankind shall recover strength in that day, even at sunset.
Capitol .xx.	"Capitol XX" can be translated to French as "Capitole XX". However, the term 'XX' needs clarification for a more precise translation. If it represents a specific location or building numbering, then translating its name would require knowledge of that context. Here are some general translations for Capitol with numbers:
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The Curacao of the radiation that occurs in the remains of any bone fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Frequent displacements occur in this injury site during the healing process of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it is often accompanied by distortion of the limb's shape; moreover, strongly discourages the affected limb from performing its natural movements.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Adonc examines if the nodules are recent and irrigates with those medicines that have stipulated as well as onions, garlic, parsley, acrasia, and similar substances to those; although even if you take some or all of them together, they do not completely heal it. Instead, mix the above-mentioned remedcuents with honey or vinegar, and apply this mixture over the nodules in a cloth, then tightly bind the affected area.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Elyssa's concoction that does not slip away within a few days; and she applies another one as long as the nodules are cured; or strengthens it over the plate of lead, for lead has the property to remain fixed in all the body parts.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays shall not erect a boundary stone until it is necessary to separate that estate excessively, and then only if the surplus and predominance belong entirely to his lordship, or within boundaries already recognized as his own; and provided that he who claims them has been sanctioned.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI - The Capital Ambition
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	In the bone healing process, how is blood and lymamoil restored to normal function according to its original nature?
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the corresponding member becomes weak and fragile, it does not happen solecuously due to various reasons: among which one is excessive tearing of ligaments and improper healing as described above; or because of an overabundance of stricture within the sutures that prevents nutrition from reaching the limb; or due to superfluous bruising; or owing to excessive movement at inappropriate times; or due to a scarcity of blood supply in the body affected and weakness as a result.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The healing of water is to soothe the pain and make the heart tender within which the wound may multiply, becoming stronger; and brings calmness and joy upon it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	The essence of the passage is about how water enters in small amounts through pores to deliver necessary nutrients throughout an organism's body and then returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxii.	Title: "Capitol XXII"
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The curing of broken bones involves carefully restoring them and forbiddeboning the operation by water that covers it.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	A cast performs a surgical procedure to correct the curvature and prominence of your fractured bone, ensebut it is done in such a way that maintains the natural functioning of the limb; however, this does not guarantee that you will regain full functionality, as one cannot expect an injured limb to become completely new.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Mays also has set up numerous hotels and restaurants in our country, which is an action that shamefully diminishes the significant landmark with great concern over its potential fatal impact.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Mays' crutches and splints are recently broken; then cover them with water in the bath where they have soaked herbs such as mallows, just like oat husks and rye straws, and meadowsweet, etc.; and apply a poultice to it that is as mollifying as glycerin properly made; or that its price be mucilage of rye bran and its dressing with alum or oil from cypress leaves, and the ointment likewise; or that they are fat figs fried in colza oil, etc., similar to the medicines mentioned above for consoling.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	In some cases, the veins are dissolved by continuous and persistent rubbing; this is done in the most moist places, ensuring that all parts of the limb receive movement at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Mays' tortuousness and its anatomical position require the careful removal of his fractured bone, which leads to the necessity for surgery on his leg, ensuring that it is properly aligned and preventing further dissolution or erosion caused by excessive stress in that area. Additionally, this should be carried out with ease and dedication on behamo's part, ensuring a successful recovery process.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter Twenty-Three: The Heart of the Nation
De sermo en dislocacio.	In conversation and displacement.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	A dislocation is a displacement of one of the joints in the body, preventing movement and causing painful symptoms and significant injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When you decide to perform a reduction for a dislocation, it should be done as soon as possible and not delayed, because if it's too late, the joint becomes swolamoeboid and very fluidly difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	The patient reports that during episodes of acute infection or stressful situations, they experience involuntary muscle contractions and associated pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove che tu t'es convainquit del maledict de la flabotomia al malade, e apros lè membre qua embrochà amb aigua caduda e oli, e apros lè reducìt amb facilitat.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	C et al agree to the terms regarding water use from which the reminder will arise in its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	In case of an earthquake, buildings are to be classified according to the following damage distribution as previously described in the report; from the most severely damaged to those least affected.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter Twenty-Four (24)
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Left temporomandibular joint dislocation.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the lower jaws are dislocated and not set properly, there are two ways to treat their dislocation: either they have been slightly displaired from their original position through minimal movement and are somewhat relaxed; or they are completely dislocated with a full dislocation and need to be relaxed at the joint where saliva flows due to pain and cannot keep it closed nor open its mouth, and its tongue is wrapped in its speech organ.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When a minor shoulder dislocation occurs occasionally, it may require lesser interventions and often heals on its own with minimal cause for concern.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the injury is serious and complete, it must be treated as soon as possible with slight delay, without any hesitation.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The minister must have knowledge of the malady, and interpose his two fingers into the mouth on the affected side to determine whether the dislocation is unilateral or bilateral; if it's unilateral, he should use one finger, and for a bilateral dislocation, both fingers should be employed. Then, he commands the malady to cease, allowing the jawbones to return to their original position. Afterward, the physician aligns the mandible and pushes it back into place until it returns to its own location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	Reduction of lymnh is difficult, especially if both mandibles are severely dislocated; therefore, first administer fluids and pain relief medication before attempting to reduce both simultaneously, as we have already mentioned.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	Then let them return together, and the mouth of evil is closed and not soothed, as they pause upon those powders of red cloth, and be made from wax and scented oil; and may it be pleasing to listen easily with sweet words. (Translation inspired by medieval Spanish)
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	S is lying on his sickbed with the head resting between two pillows; and he does not make any effort to turn right or left. He has not been forced into anything; while having their meal, their food should be a lion'nosed forcemeat, within which when the pains are exacerbated and the jaws feel numb, it is then that one should take refuge from such affliction.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	The water supply is made easy for you; do not attempt to eat or drink and speak while the jaw has been injured and needs healing.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	It is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at any time and not convert them back to their original position, often resulting in recurring fevers and persistent sores, and the abdomen becomes greatly affected by this ailment; severe vomiting of pure colic occurs.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	Every time the moon rises, a little more daylight disappears until it is completely dark at night; and many stars become visible in that which was lit by sunlight only a few days ago.
Capitol .xxv.	Title: Capitol XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	In the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula (wishbone) is not dislocated from the left shoulder due to its continuous attachment to the muscles; however, occasionally some fractures may be displaced towards the front and this is noted in observations.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of Lu involves the bad humidity that covers his back and extends its wings.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	The artful craft of the lute brings back memories to your hand as you play with skill and passion.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	He placed the paste, powder and strengthening agent onto it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The limb of the one who suffered and lives on continues with that person, it is not dislocated in any day; hours must be reduced and aligned according to what we have said and according to your specific situation.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	On the occasion of that paste (ointment), and powders, and extracts, I command you to attach tranquility and rest within which one may heal.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this situation, the healing process is reduced when the tip of the tendon is separated from its original site.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Regarding the reduction of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	The muscle is not displaced in three ways; one of which involves the tendon being partially torn away from its attachment at the top and partly at the bottom.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second is that it may be displaced outside the muscle, and in this case it has been made taut; and it'ebn't displaced to the positions behind the shoulder; and it isn't displaced towards the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	The majority of people with dislocated and displaced joints should avoid exercises, especially in those cases where there are few bones or severely deformed, as it is often improperly executed; however, in cases where there are many muscles, it can be done but with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	The broken glass at the entrance caused injuries to the residents of the apartment building, and the impact on the concrete wall resulted in bruises. Additionally, there was a swelling due to an abscess that had formed an abscess, and one of his friends suffered from dehydration after being displacuated by water.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	I pray that you may be granted the grace to drink from this water while being protected above, and at times pursue its healing properties.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	E is the dislocation of the ear when it moves away from its original position; hence you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, for which you must recognize their clear differences; and touching on the concave tip as well as the displacement, you should not be able to reduce it back to its natural position, nor move that perpendicularly like an owl's head.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the stone is displawed from its place and you hear a rumbling sound, but it's not an illusion.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	The displacement of this location is made with a slight reduction when it's fresh and the illness worsens as a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The lifting of the lid is that she elevates your portion above; and he raises his own shares afterwards to the topmost height of it, and she elevates the joining in his place as a fortress; and then he elevates her share too and extends it outwards; and after this, she returns it greedily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Mays, as soon as you've mentioned that the retoric returns and after the meal when the dislocation occurs, cover several days/hours until the pain is relieved with water; so administer a drinking mixture to moisturize and soothe as if it were taken from the fountain, consisting of fenugreek, melilot in water, and high-quality linen.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	The disease spreads over his body and causes distress in the cells of his hope for healing, as it becomes engulfed between levity and tension. He then places his hand on the area and lifts up the head of muscle power while casting away the evil from the surrounding areas, and administering care to ensure that nothing remains harmful therein, because it can return to its original place so quickly.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to do so, here's how you can present yourself as a man who is much larger than the evil one, and on the side of goodness. Insert your muscular arm underneath the ticklish point of the evil, raising it slightly above where the evil entity hangs in the air, allowing another individual to then pull its tail downwards from behind your stomach.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the illness is a lie, then often it's due to another cause being overlooked, because this one can be quite serious as it leads to frequent recurrence of the dislocation.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	E is reduc in sguàter secondo l'altra maniera: si è un tronco lungo con il capo rotondo come una pallottola di mortaio, non troppo grosso né sottile e ben legato al malacoda; poi fa passare le corde su capo del tronco, le funi sono lunghe quanto il tronco stesso, estendendole da entrambe le parti oltre l'altra parte; ed estendi i chiodi dall'altra parte a fortezza in modo che la giunzione torni al proprio luogo con velocità.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	It is difficult to reduce the amount of this issue for all the reasons mentioned earlier. Here's what you can do in such a case: take a stick whose length equals two spans, breadth four fingers wide, and thickness slightly thicker than a pencil lead as per the following method:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Era uma vez, na cidade de Redonda, havia um lobo famoso conhecido como Lobo Leão por sua força imensa e pelas histórias aterrorizantes sobre o mal da vila que ele supostamente espalhava. Embora ninguém tenha visto realmente esse mal se manifestar, os moradores do vilarejo tinham medo de que poderia acontecer à qualquer momento e assim permaneceram vigilantes contra quaisquer suspeitas de mau comportamento ou intenções sinistras.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	A proper palpation of the tender area involves extending your hands over the patient's body with fingers relaxed and together. Gently place both hands on either side of the affected region, enscribing a smooth circular motion to feel for any abnormalities or tenderness. Gradually apply slightly increased pressure while maintaining contact with the skin, feeling for changes in consistency, temperature, texture, and tension.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	The crane is positioned horizontally over the ladder rung according to latitude, and its arm is extended towards the lower parts, while the other one is suspended from the opposite side, so that the junction occurs almost immediately.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	Clean the piercing thoroughly according to each possible way you can, and then cover it with a tiny piece of gauze for protection against any potential infection; also prepare an emollient paste from olive oil and aloe vera gel over all the muscle area so that it is well covered, thus avoiding direct contact. Wrap the piercing back around the emollient paste, connect the jewelwart to its original position, securely fasten it without causing harm or discomfort for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	The food for the ill person should be paused until he is comfortably able to eat, as it's more beneficial to his health.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	The food that was served at the party earlier has been consumed already and hence it should be left as is without softening it anymore. By now, it's safe to eat.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the skin joint is dislocated due to moisture or any other cause, it should be treated with caution by administering three courses of cauterization as described in the book on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If the sutures and joint are not fixed within approximately seven days after dislocation of the ligaments, and if the embalming and stitching have shrunk slightly over time, and thus cannot be elevated to their original positions anymore, it is known that the nerves, which originate from those muscles at their heads, may become numb or stretched or relaxed; therefore, there will never be a chance of the joint being fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	When a dislocation occurs in the joint that has been made, you should perform first aid and then extend it as much as possible within its limits until it returns to normal positioning.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	E shall be administeruted in that other restriction, and heal within which it is to be cured.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	When the body is affected by gravity in an unnatural way and movement becomes delayed, it experiences pain; eventually, this discomfort compels one to use bed rest until the effect of gravity returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter Twenty-Seven (Capitol)
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	The treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	The joint is dislocated in a way that makes it difficult and seems similarly retracted; the joint is dislocated from all sides, mainly towards the front part of the back side, and its dislocation cannot be ignored when you approach or touch it after any movement or figure has been dislocated. And when you try to adjust this dislocated joint, it becomes clear that the joint's connection is concave and unable to bend your arm or touch its muscle at all.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	The cove that catches the coypu experiences displacement shortly after which leads to an abscess at its tail; if one notices an abscess there, it is difficult to reduce it and often cannot be fully healed; especially when located on the rear parts, as this type of dislocation is worse than all other forms, causing more pain and frequently resulting in death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The reduction of the fracture occurs when it is possible to extend and expand the metaphyseal arm and the epiphyseal end, with the surgeon'cupping the joint over both ends; then by pushing at the junction with his fingers or turning in the hollow of his palm where it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If May's dislocation is on the backside of pages, it returns as if doubled by my hand before hitting the edge with the force of its palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If the dislocation does not abide by the rules, hours bring forth vigorous extensions and strong movements.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	Article 48 of the Spanish Constitution states that the King summons and chairs the Council of Ministers at a time he determpress, and extends their term of office as long as it is not revoked by parliamentary decree.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	A proper revolution of the wheel involves all parts and is covered with long-wrapped cloth around the frame.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	E quant the midwife touches the junction at the woman's vagina, apply some oil there so that it is less painful due to those reasons which help in lubrication of the junction; and firmly pushes the junction until it enters forcefully.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	The priest shall bring forth the consecrated bread that is encased within a vessel wherein there is solidity and purity; it should be placed on an altar cloth, its cover removed; the braided cord suspended from the collar of the priest shall be untied; and after being exposed for three days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	In order to properly detach the stitches and therefore at their junction they are formed in your location, then remove that thread with those two fingers.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If the joint is not torn, repeat the procedure as follows: plaster and bandage it again, leaving that for several days until fully healed; then remove that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Mays decides to put the bandage near the joint, and its position is in motion, then it provides moist warmth and subtle friction, while being gently pulled; alternatively, it rests above the joint lightly, as if moving sluggishly; and afterward, it's laid over the bone both day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	The translation of the text from Asturian to English is as follows:
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	It seems like you're referring to the classic recipe for Absinthe, a highly alcoholcuh distilled spirit derived from botanicals, including Anise, Wormwood (Artemisia Absinthium), and Mugwort, among others. Here is a general idea of how it might be made:
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish, rest on that wet and scratched cow's edge at the border and stretch out there; then lie down for a while, as it is damp and bring yourself to your comfort level.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The Malassez's disease cure involves the joint located between the arm and the shoulder.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The displacement of Malassezia vets is minor and the reduction in its dislocation seems insignableness; however, it indicates some speed in reducing it at the time when it is displaced, before it becomes inflamed or ulcerated again.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation involves stopping the affected limb over a table and then extending its length, while the physician places their hand or palm on the joint's edge, gently pushing until it returns to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it should be noted that the palm has already been removed from his stomach; at this point, place your hands on the table and extend and reduce them; if you move its position before doing so, then the mother's position will intrinscuely be over the table, so that the doctor can see it clearly.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	Then if it returns soon enough, good luck; otherwise, let the hardened embolism and abscess be released from that area, and do not stay on this one for too long - unless you are able to tolerate its growth in days passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However the Roman joint after its twistiness; and not at all bad cause, but rather it is softened and cannot raise any cause; hence you should know that nerves are pinched or crushed, and then they do not work anymore but only when they are stimulated with heat and strong water applied there can raise some causes.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Upon his return, the hours of rest fell upon him like an overwhelming weight. He had recounted it again and again, reliving those days filled with strain and stress. Now, he released himself from its grip, allowing himself to finally find peace. The exercise that once exhausted him now brought a sense of rejuvenation and strength.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	May's law states that the force of gravity on an object depends soletly on its mass and acceleration, leading to certain effects such as water flowing downhill and some vegetation experiencing increased friction with slopes. This occurs when the terrain is uneven or inclined.
Capitol .xxix.	Title: "Capitol XXIX"
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	The treatment of cerebr cuisine misalignments.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some verbs are conjugated in the past tense throughout this whole text.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	It's located on both the back of the hand and the belly side; after hearing it, you should move your own joints to replicate the movement until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	A prop supports the head of the sick person and suspends him/her from their hips for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Article L123 - Suspension and extension of the statute of limitations regarding rightful claims that arise in their respective day, shall be applicable under certain conditions stipulated herein.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	In the evening after sunset, let him follow that narration, and do not cease to exercise in the daytime and stay active, and perform this for about a week or so.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	If an injury is accidentally inflicted on the stomach region of the patient and it reaches a certain depth without causing major damage or bleeding, one can simply wash out the wound with clean water and then proceed to perform the initial first aid measures until recovery ensues.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	False appearance can often seem more attractive than the actual truth in relation to other options.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital X-Treme
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The cure of the scoliotic curvature in the dorsal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	If a person suffers from any displacement of the disc or vertebrae in either the thoracic or cervical column, and they resort to surgery involving those joints, that condition will not heal properly, as the injury ultimately leads to death due to complications.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Signs of water intake are that the discharge of illness is involuntary and cannot be retained; often providing some relief to aching limbs, drinking one or two cups of water, or using an ice pack on the affected area; in many cases it has helped and in many cases it has alleviated the symptoms.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	That one is now updated in the records and has been renamed to "yellowed".
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Mays' concern is that the hours considered as sick leave may actually be vacation time, and those same hours are not counted towards either sick leave or being unwell for an entire period of time.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that which you perceive through excavation or percussion or by means of a drill, the Ancient peoples' methods of healing by speech are lengthy; however, I find myself more accustome to the one from which little is spared due to my close proximity to its meaning and exposure thereof. For this reason, I have prepared and created various instruments other than those you showed me previously.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	In the old ballad "Jaufres Rudiez," it is said that in the gelatinous dessert (cake), which consists of two layers, one over another, there is no strength or energy from such fare; similarly to that made with two pints.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	F of those which are not cured but occur specifically in the two waters that I mentioned before.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The illness should spread over his face like plaster against a wall, and be as thick as the earth after heavy rain, so that its pieces are not crumbled by hand.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	A prop up two straight sticks in the ground on each end of the pole near its top and bottom ends respectively with another stick balancing the weights.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The lord minister took the staff (symbolizing authority), and it was not buried in a grave (indicating eternal leadership). Another minister held the second scepter, following that form of tradition.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The rope goes around the head of the mallet and then touches the tip of the handle which is attached to its end, and you attach that to it; and stretch one lien over the shoulders of it on both sides with their ends, and tie them up; and adjust all the straps and tie those to the other staff, which has its pegs.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Article I - The minister shall extend the term of office of his deputies and assistants, as well as those holding positions at locations where he is stationed, except that they cannot be appointed for such terms as we have stated herein.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Place your hands together firmly on the back of the person standing in front of you. Hold that position until they return to their place and rest them gently upon the table, then adjust so they are aligned with the table's edges when they come back to their original spot.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If Mayes does not return in this manner, three hours later a table will appear whose width or length corresponds to the distance from there; and dig a hole on the wall where we have said that placing it is unlucky - at one of its ends.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	The patient lies down on the table with their arms at their sides. The physician places his hands over one of the extremities and gently bends it so that the vertebra is compressed, then gradually returns it to its original position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to do it rightly, take the rod which is revolving in front of you and place your foot at its end; then make sure that the length of both rods equals one arm's length, with their ends placed together; ensure each rod has a hole through which the other fits snugly.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	Let S be a solid ring composed of two concentric cylindrical rods whose axes intersect at right angles, and let it rotate around the intersection point.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	E at the end of his arm is a tool with which he forms the wood, the length of which is a half-inch wheel that rotates; and in the other two pieces it resembles that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	I confess unto thee all the transgressions that I have committed against thy laws and commands which thou hast prescribed to me by right of my office, as well as those actions in which I have been involved during the time wherein they occurred for which thou ought to hold accountable.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Close to each other stands a minister who teaches the word according to their faith and compares the scripture as they have spoken it.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	Este no es el "torn" en inglés, sino que parece ser una estructura incompleta. ¿Podría aclararme qué quiere decir con esto? Si busca traducir o explicar un concepto especíamoente llamado 'torn' en alguna lengua extranjera, estaría encantado de ayudarlo.
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	A saddle that was previously removed is now returned, and the location is identical; hence, it is assumed to have breaks in its hoovebone, as well as the apex stopa (joint). The saddle rests on the tabletop of which its length is three inches or less and width corresponds with the extent of the depression, and over the spondylus' departure.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	A suitable diet which has been advised should be followed and use the medicine of subtle nutrients within that ensures healing.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any indication at the site by the end of the healing process that medications need to be administerired topically and/or in conjunction with dressing changes for a long period, which we have recommended; it has already been applied as a plaster.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	In some cases, displacement occurs at the end of one or both discs, and it is often caused by that dislocation; this is the bone which already protrudes to such an extent that there'n needs no further surgical intervention, for doing so would greatly increase the risk of mortality.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital, the city that serves as the seat of government for a country or state. The term can also refer to financial capital, which is resources such as money and assets used to create wealth through investment and production. Additionally, in music, "capitol" may be used metapesteemingly to evoke grandiosity or power within a composition.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Treatment for a dislocated hip joint.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	The joining of the wide and the joining of the muscles does not only result in dislocation but also doesn't lead to those issues that affect other small joints with minor movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	At the joint where the broad object is dislocated, there are four possible ways it can be displaced - towards the inside, outwards, forwards or backwards.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	The majority of the population is concentrated in urban areas and few are in rural areas or to the sides.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	Sign of the dislocation from Lu to the parts of the body is four; when you adjust the wrong limb for the healthy one, it becomes more difficult and the pain is greater than that of the healthy, and the illness cannot double its steps, so it languishes on its tongue. The place where this has occurred is now reached by the ailment, therefore causing an inflamamoius swelling or abscess as a result.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The label of the cause to which an event occurs is that its effects are opposite to this cause.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	Signal of the person to whom an accident occurred causing dislocation of the parts beyond his usual range according to the description but not doubling that pain which is in the groin, and if it continues to go and cannot reach those parts behind; and the urine of him is retained, and the inflammamoins are swollen. One must walk over a board on top of him.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The signal of the thing which causes dislocation in the parts behind is that it does not extend to the same extent as the front part, nor can you bend that front piece so much that it doubles upon itself; and the handle of it is shorter than the other one, and the neck is flexible, and the head of the instrument is towards that side.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of spices from this displacement is that you consider, at times, if the dislocation is old and ancient, so it's outdated in terms of what you administer to your patient according to its disposition, therefore, it isn't required in every case.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where there is recent dislocation and it belongs to one of the four types of dislocations, you should keep the joint at its current angle for a while before moving it again to both inner (intra-articular) and outer (extra-articular) directions. Gradually return it to the left and right sides, so that it gently rotates without requiring further intervention.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If Mays does not return in this manner, the hours require that you prepare and extend the edge of light from the departure side downwards or on his own it lies upon the edge below the knoll; another minister extends the edge above with its own deposits of light; and yet another holds firmly an anchor over the base of the object, while another minister secures the other end of the anchor.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	Article E is an extension of line c to the opposite side in relation to the fork, or behind section b from section d.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	Let S be the extension of all those in a countryside where evil is raised and its spirit revolts against the ground.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is common to all four species.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	If the displacement returns the same water we mentioned earlier, it's fine; otherwise, we need all the specific details about the type of injury and the corresponding remedy.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the process of self-reduction, it becomes dislocated and the displacement occurs inwardly, causing pain to its own side; moreover, pressure is felt on the ribs at the site where between the head of the clavicle and the location from which it was detached lies. Furthermore, the extension of this process towards the anterior part of the scapula reaches as far back as the first part of the wing bone (furcula).
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	A prominent minister took the lead in addressing the issue and emphasized the need for strong action to tackle this serious problem; he extended his assistance beyond boundaries, determined to bring about a positive change within his own domain.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This species is less likely to cause irritation, in which the affected member is reduced compared to other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	Mayes prays for your forgiveness as you do not follow this entire treatment of healing all the time; there are times when both souls must bear the burden of illness together in faith, courage, and truth through thick and thin.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Let S be the length of each segment and let C be the total amount (in units) equal to four times that length, i.e., C = 4S. The difference between them is extended twice more than the other in quantity, meaning |C - S| = 2(S + D), where D represents some additional value or measure.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	The cargo shall be properly secured on top of the deck and should not fall overboard; its length along the ground must measure two fathoms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	A man commands a young strong boy to lower the cap of the cup, and he is suspended by the malaise of another young boy, while the other young boy raises the cup with great strength, as the joint returns to its original place at high speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the case of proper reduction, when a dislocation is moved back outside, it causes pain to resume as soon as you have relocated in the joint again; and it's strong on both the affected limb itself and the related muscles.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Near the pile of stones, one should place their hand on each stone and adjust them to fit over which fabric is wrapped around it so that the evil may not be invoked by its presence among his belongangs, in order for you to extend your influence over left-over areas where it shall not become attached.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Article XLVI - Shared Respnsiibilities Among Ministers and Doctors According to Their Capacity: Each minister shall contribute according to their ability, and each doctor within his sphere of influence shall make equivalent efforts as stipulated by the law.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If you reverse it, I'll give you great importance; otherwise, just pause on that attentively and do as we have said in our warning for the same reason.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Mayes Cove has the unfortunate task of covering his letters with a black marker.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	In this narrative about the dislocation is moved to the lower parts, and it extends quite significantly, as mentioned in the following excerpt from an ancient text; and the surgeon places his right hand palm on the affected limb, and then with a sharp motion he corrects its twisted position back to normal alignment.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is towards the posterior parts, it cannot be assumed that the pain will spread to the posterior parts as well, and it is elevated above ground; people should expect it to feel dull due to hard cause, just like when we said about its widening on both sides; and it is over its surface with extensions, as we have mentioned, without harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	The correct translation of the text "E cove que sia administrata compressión a mesa sobre el lloc al què ens trobem la conjunció" from Català to English is:
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	When the reduction is completed as described by you - and the sign of the reduction is not hinted at to you, and you extend the bad luck into both cases, and when you come across those matches and the ill luck extends beyond your case, and you expand that excuse, then know that the member according to which it was reduced will return — then you adjust both matters and pause completely so that neither side is too wide; and adhere the misfortune for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	A prop of the two texts lies in their central theme - the comparison between simplicity and complexity, or ease versus hardship. However, they differ greatly in language style, structure, tone, and context due to being from different cultures (Spanish vs. Romansh). The Spanish version portrays a direct and straightforward contrast while the Romansnch text takes on a more metaphorical approach with a poetic touch.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those people behaving badly in their behavior, let them know that the disturbance has ceased and so the trouble should not continue.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If there is any sign of improvement, you should return and apply that plaster again according to your original instructions, leaving it on for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	A possible translation for this phrase would be: "Do not strain yourself, and allow it to take its time in walking on these slopes for a few days, during which you will feel comfortable." However, the original text seems to be written with some intentional misspellangs or errors. Here is a clearer version without those mistakes:
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 23 in the United States House of Representatives is referred to as "CAPITOL, CXXXII." This indicates that it'eby the Roman numeral system (which was commonly used for such purposes), chapter 23 would be rendered as CXXXII. It should be noted that this reference seems more historical or stylistic in nature and isn't typically how modern chapters are referred to in current Congressional documentation or proceedings, but rather a way to evoke an old-style formality or tradition.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	The treatment of acetabular dislocation involves a combination of immediate medical care, surgical intervention if necessary, and post-operative rehabilitation to ensure the best possible outcome for the patient. Here is an outline of the typical steps involved in treating this condition:
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	It is displaced according to three ways: if it is displaced outside, inside, or leftward in relation to the parts behind, and it is not displaed forward with respect to those parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The signal of Lu's displacement is that you command the evil to apply its force at the crossrocks; then you shall know that the dwarf is displaced.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The complete healing of all your limbs is done by making the evil right; even if it has extended its sway, you can overcome that with God's help; join your two hands to His face and place Your feet between them. Then strongly clasp His navel with both palms, and wrap those around His navel tightly on both sides. Further, extend the entire length of His body inside until His navel returns to its original position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	Sign of a redirection to the left is that its handle will stick and it will not rotate effortlessly.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. Now the earth was formless and empty, darkness was over the surface of the deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering above the waters. Then God said, "Let there be light," and there was light. So God saw that the light was good, and he separated the light from the darkness. God called the light "day" and the darkness he called "night." And there was evening, and there was morning - the first day.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	The patient is advised to use the wheelchair for mobility during recovery and rest periods, ensamoothing their comfort throughout this process.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	My apologies for the delay in getting this to you; however, I have now provided an extensive overview of the treatment methods used for the condition described earlier regarding hip dysplasia.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital City Limited Edition X3 III (often abbreviamo come Capitol .xxxiii.) is a hypothetical product or concept in the following context. The ".xxxiii" could suggest a unique version, such as the third limited edition release of a certain item related to Capitol City – perhaps a collector's item, a piece of memorabilia, an exclusive merchand
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Osteochondritis dissecans of the ankle is a joint condition in which cracks and loose fragments develop on the articular surface, usually due to repetitive stress or trauma. The treatment typically involves conservative measures like rest, immobilization with a cast or brace, physiotherapy for muscle strengthening and improved range of motion, and pain management with medications such as NSAIDs. In more severe cases, surgical intervention may be necessary to remove loose fragments or repair damaged areas. The exact treatment plan depends on the patient's age, activity level, severity of symptoms, and progression of the condition.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Some of the land areas have been enlarged by small extensions, and some areas are relocated according to agreement, with the displacement being made within adjacent or nearby sections.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of the shoulder dislocation is that the flattened contour originating from the point where it was dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May's cure for the removal of his illness is to be extended and made more accessible so that it may return as soon as possible.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the case of Lu Quan'e dislocation following a compliment, it is said that you should make the right amends, and have him an ardent and strong minister from his party on the other side by your side at this place.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Turn to your left and then move forward past the most superior point (head), and place your left hand on the ground in front of you at about waist height, with fingers spread out as if holding a balloon string.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Come close to your friend the blacksmith, then move two steps to the left and extend your left hand. Pick up a piece of metal from his right side; now turn around three times before throwing it away.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	In water districts, the flow of water is determined based on whether there has been a declaration or not.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	C appliances from the past are making their way into today's kitchen, and you are part of it.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If a value returns in one or two steps according to this method, and if times appears equal, it's good; otherwise, the function repeats the operation for that time step, which returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	"If you have repeatedly called upon the Holy Water, now it is forbidden to reduce your anger towards them on earth; and instead, make an amends in a peaceful manner within their realm, for already you have wrapped yourself around it so that it may not bring any harm."
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Article I - The Minister of the Interior shall oversee his matters and extend to another minister the aid in their affairs as they may require; and each minister, according to extent, against extension beyond his own scope shall defend those issues within his jurisdiction that are retained by him so that such conduct is not transferred to departments previously assigned.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	A physiotherapist applies manual therapy to the displacements in their joints, and other methods maintain overall health in previously injured areas because the displacement returns more easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Hence, return the dislocation and declare it to you as an act of humility from my part; hours pause I shall grant and extend that very much esteemed rest, and link together once again with your cherished companion.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	I fear the nerves that protect you beneath the sole of your foot, to ensure the limb above does not become overly sensitive or agitated by them.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	An appropriate method for dissolving that object within two or three days is to immerse it in water and gently agitate it. If the substance softens adequaturally, remove it from the solution.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	A decree of that date or in the following quarter, and forbids any further encroachment for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May's getting lost in that space; he can't ensure the displacement isn't overlaid and corrupted, or if it avoids causing harm to others.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you decide to give the castor oil a try, here are some hours' worth of information on how to administer it in the area where our narrative began, at another location for treatment and relief, so that it may be effective.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capital Letter I (or Roman numeral for the number four, 'IV').
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The treatment of displacement injuries in the shoulder joints.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The one who is lazy makes little progress in his work; and the one for whom nothing is difficult becomes more arrogant.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in your shoulder blade on either side of the body, you should immediately stop any movement that causes pain as if it's more severe than before.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	He to your feet, and pause at the spot you believe is most suitable for taking off. Then carefully step onto that point of takeoff ensuring it's not too high or conspicuous in location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	A propped up from the belly of his stomach was a table which he took entirely in its entirety; it had two tops and this support structure was made decent and firm for three days. Then, after dismantling that, one would let him rest through ambulation for several days, during which time he would be nourished and restored.
Capitol .xxxv.	I'm afraid there might be some confusion, but "Capitol" is not typically associated with the context of a song or an album title within popular culture knowledge up to early 2amo. However, if you are referring to something specific such as a lesser-known band named Capitol that released an EP titled "XXXV," which translates to Roman numerals for 35, I would need more information to provide accurate details about the release date or track listings.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	There are several types of displacements that may occur in the case of a fall, fracture or any other injury. These include:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	The accidental cause of that particular disease is present in you; and thus you seek treatment for it as well as its restoration. Many times the outcome results in death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	"Turn not to a healer who is inexperienced, hasty, arrogant or pretentious, but seek out one who is learned and skilled in the arts of long-standing, merciful and compassioned; who emplops medicines that only dissolve swellings such as abscesses, and leads to God's judgment not with harmful intentions, but rather towards those whom you hope for salvation from ruin, alleviation from illness, and where there is some glimmer of hope."
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Therefore, in the beginning of the lawsuit, make an effort to reduce it yourself before you encounter a legal obstacle.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	Thus, if we want the member to return at all times, the doctor shall administer a regimen that includes applying ointment and curing the wound with water as appropriate for it according to its dryness or other condition of the dressing.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	The displacement of a bone fracture may result in separated fragments, hence the patient's symptoms will be based on what has been said earlier regarding simple diseases that were mentioned before in those locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	He watches and evades according to your virtue as you listen within the pathways of fear following my sermon; for it is better for you to devote yourself to Your Creator, and more conducive to your eternal glory, and more aligned with your true values in this time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayy shines so brightly like the stars above from which God blessed us all.
Amen.	Amén, which is a Hebrew word meaning "so be it" or "truly," is commonly used at the end of prayers in Judaism and Christianity to express agreement or affirmation with what was just said. In English, we also use similar words like "Amen" or phrases such as "So be it," "Indeed," or "That'cuh."
